


















































May 2, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 2, 1988 
 

1003 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, when 
we ended off this afternoon, we were in much the same position 
we were when we started out talking production loan because we 
didn’t have adequate answers to the questions that we asked. And 
that’s the problem a lot of the farmers are facing these days, that 
they really don’t know what the government’s plans are. They 
don’t know the plans because the programs keep changing, 
whether it be production loan or whether it be community 
pastures, or whatever the case may be. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve seen this production loan program develop 
over the last couple of years, and as much as the money was 
necessary and needed, we see that the program developed by the 
government was not adequate to meet the needs. And we found 
ourselves in a situation now that the government has become a 
problem — a problem in the fact that they now hold about 
one-sixth of the total debt for Saskatchewan through the 
production loan. And that is a problem because they appear to 
feel that it is not necessary to do anything about that debt, other 
than try to jigger around the policy to some degree in order that 
some farmers may be able to pay it back, but a lot of them won’t 
be able to pay it back. 
 
And what it is, basically, was a program — we’ve found out— 
brought out by government for government, in the long run, and 
that’s not what we need in this province. It was for the 
self-preservation of the Tory government. And, as I said, the 
problem is that this government has now got farmers into more 
debt and offering no solutions on the restructuring of that debt, 
and that indeed is sad. We see the economy has gotten worse; the 
prices for grain products have gone down — a slight 
improvement but not enough now to compensate. 
 
The Premier keeps talking about high interest rates and they’re 
doing something about it, but ironically, in this case, as in the 
case of Farm Credit Corporation, the federal government, we’ve 
seen the interest rates increase. When they have full control of 
how to restructure the debt, they refuse to do so. 
 
We have a promise of hassle-free cash that’s turned into a 
nightmare for many farmers. We have a situation where the 
government has two rules — you know, one rule for everybody 
except there are some occasions where other people can have 
special assistance or special treatment. And that’s not acceptable 
to this side of the House. We have to have a government program 
that is accessible to everyone and everyone have the same 
knowledge. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, we have a production loan program for 
farmers that started out at 6 per cent interest. It’s now gone up to 
an average of 8 per cent and nine and three quarters

over the last seven years of the agreement when hopefully things 
would be better. But who knows? 
 
We have a multinational corporation by the name of 
Weyerhaeuser getting preferential treatment in that they don’t 
have to pay back their loan unless they make a certain amount of 
profit. On the other hand, Saskatchewan farmers are hit with a 
case that they have to make their repayment no matter what. And 
we all know what the income is for farmers these days, but they 
still have to pay — but Weyerhaeuser doesn’t have to pay. That’s 
a tragic double standard. 
 
We’ve seen a situation where farmers were lured into this and 
now they’re saying, look, I wish I had never would have taken it. 
Now I have to pay it back, but if I would have known I had to 
play by these security rules and by higher interest rate, I never 
would have taken this. And now the government is not doing 
anything to alleviate those concerns. 
 
A 6 billion debt for Saskatchewan and this is one chance where 
the government would have to restructure some of that debt. But 
no, they say you have two options: option one or option two. And 
today we found that there actually is another option, and who 
knows what other options are available. I mean if the government 
so decides, they may be tinkering with the policy some more. 
 
But the problem is all farmers don’t know that, and how could 
any person, farmer in rural Saskatchewan trust a government that 
doesn’t lay all its cards on the table? It won’t lay all the cards out, 
and you never know from one day to the next what’s going to 
happen. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, the banks now have their deal, the government 
has their deal, and the farmers have no deal because they’re stuck 
with paying that loan back. If you have the money, it’s not a 
problem; but if you don’t have the money, it’s a severe problem. 
And that’s the situation we’re in right now. 
 
And all I’m asking is that the Premier of this province give the 
farmers a fair deal despite the fact that he maintains that you’ve 
got to be open — open and fair. I think that the argument I would 
put forward I just look at the actions: it’s not open, it’s not honest, 
and he’s not being fair with the farmers in respect to other 
members of Saskatchewan society. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just have one further question, I believe, on 
the production loan program, and that is to the minister: will you, 
at this point in time, consider taking back some of the interest 
rate hike, all of it back to 6 per cent, and dropping the security 
clause on the agreement? That are the two things that the farmers 
of this province, the only two things they’re asking you to do. 
Leave the interest at 6 per cent over 10 years and drop the security 
agreement. Will you consider doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve described the situation 
to the hon. member now for a couple of days, and the farm 
organizations and others asked us to provide a longer term and 
complete flexibility on the 6 per cent money, which they have on 
either the three-year or the 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1004 
 

10-year. We will continue to do that. As you go over a longer 
period at any financial institutions . . . You know yourself, if you 
go to a home mortgage for one year, you can get it at a low rate; 
as you go for five years, it’s a higher rate; as you go for more and 
more years, a longer period of time, it’s a higher rate. That is just 
normal. 
 
So when we came in with the new longer term, it was new, it was 
longer, it included security, and it was at a higher interest rate. 
That’s perfectly normal and it’s perfectly consistent with what 
the kinds of things that you did in the NDP administration with 
respect to farmstart and other programs. It’s reasonable, it’s fair, 
and they have the complete flexibility to have the exact program 
that they had when they started. So if they opt for that one, they 
can have it; if they opt for another one, they can have it. So we 
have provided all those alternatives and the response has been 
very, very good, and I can only say to the hon. member, we wish 
we had 6 or $7 wheat and $12 canola and high grain prices so 
that it would be better. 
 
Right now you will see, in 1988-89, that about 150 per cent of 
the net farm income equivalent is going to come out of 
government, and that’s a great deal of money. Most of it does not 
have to be paid back. For the first time in Canadian history it’s 
out there in terms of deficiency payments and zero per cent 
interest rates — zero! — and particularly as we point out to the 
livestock sector that was never there. So we’re not talking 6 per 
cent or 8 per cent. We’re talking zero per cent ongoing operating 
capital for all kinds of people in the livestock sector that wasn’t 
there. So you take the combination of deficiency payments which 
. . . or no repayment at all, zero per cent, and combination of cash 
advance is zero per cent interest. I mean, you don’t pay any 
interest at all and you apply that any way you like. You’ve got 
the lowest, longest term interest rates in the history of this 
country for agriculture, compared to others in society at any 
particular point in time, and we’re happy to do that. 
 
And, obviously, as you lend money well into the future, you 
know as well as anybody else that some security is necessary. 
This is fair. The farmers have as much flexibility as we can put 
forward, and we’re just only too happy to help them out under 
these circumstances. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, as you say, we’ve heard that 
many times before. I’m disappointed that you won’t consider 
some of your other options. You seem to be pretty flexible with 
you own description of the problem, but unfortunately your 
so-called flexibility for the farmers is not working to their best 
advantage right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go now . . . ask you a question on the farm 
purchase program that your government had implemented. And 
my question is; why was the program terminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Because of lower interest rates, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So you felt that because the interest rates were 
low . . . you felt the interest rates were low enough that there was 
no need for a land transfer policy that would be assisted by 
government?

Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, I didn’t say that. I said that particular 
program was in place when we had 18, 20 per cent interest rates 
and we had very high land values. And you will find that as 
interest rates come down and land values came down, that the 
young people, when they were looking a application, could 
access that money to make the transactions and at much more 
reasonable interest rates than when we initiated it — the same as 
you’d look at interest rates for home owners. They obviously 
change from 18 per cent down to something much less. 
 
And so even our expenditures . . . I mean, you argued or made 
the point, or somebody did, that the budget in Agriculture was $8 
million less than it was a year ago, outside the production loan 
and the deficiency payments. This is just a reflection of the 
interest rates costs. So the interest rate burden, as a result of that 
fluctuation, was down and that’s just a natural response. 
 
We have used the money in other areas. Obviously we now have 
offered more and more money out to farmers, particularly those 
in the livestock industry, at zero per cent interest rate. That 
wasn’t being done before. So we’ve replaced that at a time when 
you’ve got . . . land values have dropped in half, or very large 
amounts, interest rates have dropped significantly, and you’ve 
got deficiency payments, and you’ve go — as I pointed out — 
FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) is obviously not prefect and 
we’ve told them to do more in terms o longer and lower interest 
rates, but they have now $450 million out at 6 per cent money. 
So it’s not everything to satisfy every single situation, but the 
interest rate change was as a result of just declining interest rates 
and declining land values. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, you obviously felt that there 
is a need for some type of a program because it was shortly after 
that, or during that time, that you began talking about your equity 
financing corporation for Saskatchewan. Did you feel that the 
equity financing corporation, in your vision of it, would replace 
— and be adequate to replace — the farm purchase program and 
to help those farmers who either wanted to buy land, were in 
trouble and had to get some cash and so someone else could buy 
their land? Would that be sufficient? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, I don’t believe that it would and I’ve 
never said that it would. For some they’re interested in looking 
at the application of new forms of financing so that they could 
have father-to-son transfer. I could point out to the hon. member, 
families are getting pretty tired of just going to the bank, 
generation after generation, refinancing the farm. When you pass 
it on to the next father-son relationship, and they’ve got to go the 
bank and borrow the money again, and on and on and on. And 
those interest rates fluctuate up and down, and for ever the young 
person is paying off the bank. 
 
If there was another way to do it so that you could have 
relationships between father-son or relatives in the community so 
they can say, I’ll pay you and pay you the interest because you’re 
in the community, as opposed to the financial institution, you 
take your lumps with me so that we can share in some of the risk 
and we’ll both have a 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1005 
 

lower interest rate — boy, they’re interested in looking at that. 
And they would be more than happy to explore various situations 
where . . . and I know you’re concerned. I don’t mean to inflame 
this, but some outside money would be used locally. Take local 
money. Take the local money in Humboldt. If people around 
Humboldt wanted to provide an investment in agriculture and 
that could be used for intergenerational transfer, they would be 
guaranteed a return that would be 6 or 8 per cent on their money 
plus share in some of the risk so that eventually when the farmer 
wants to buy it, that some appreciation is there. You may find a 
lot of people who would be much more interested in that than 
they would be going to the bank again and refinancing it 
generation after generation. So it’s an alternative that some may 
look at. 
 
As you know now, there are many equity relationships in 
agriculture because many people in your riding and mine and 
others rent land; they don’t farm it, they rent it from somebody 
else. And obviously that somebody else has a full equity position. 
You have some equity agreements where you’ll say, I’ll buy it 
from you as a neighbour or you as a father, and you pay that over 
time. And you don’t pay any middleman, you just go directly to 
the individual. 
 
(1915) 
 
So various forms of equity between families, relatives, friends, 
neighbours, and others are there now. They work out their own 
arrangements. But the key is, and the key point: the interest and 
the risk are associated between the buyers and the sellers, not the 
middle person — not that bank. And for many, they’re starting to 
think, well, that’s not a bad idea. I’d like to see this trading 
relationship . . . transfer relationship occur that way as opposed 
to any other way that might mean I have to refinance it from the 
bank, generation after generation. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, what was the cost of getting your 
study done in equity financing, your symposium, and then the 
road show? Would you give that to me please? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pardon me? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The cost of the equity financing proposals that 
were put forward, the studies that were done, the road show, and 
the two-day seminar. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — $341,000 for both. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And, Mr. Minister, what was the time frame that 
. . . What was the length of time from the beginning of the idea 
of the equity financing until the study was tabled in this 
legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Approximately eight to 12 months, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Martin: — I beg leave of the Chair and the Assembly to 
introduce our guests in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Well thank you very much. It is indeed a great 
pleasure to introduce to the Chairman and to the House, and to 
everyone assembled here today, Regina Pat Canadians, the 
national midget hockey champions of Canada, winners of the Air 
Canada Cup. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, this is the second win, the second national 
championship in five years. They finished . . . They were in the 
finals once during those five years. Two out of five is pretty darn 
good. But you know, it is consistent with the success of the 
Regina Pats over the years, one of the finest hockey organizations 
in North America. 
 
With the hockey team, with the players, we have the manager, 
Graham Tuer; coach, Roland Duplessis; assistant coach, Dale 
Fossen; and equipment trainer, Rob Harrison. And, Mr. 
Chairman, defenceman Terry Hollinger, was named the 
tournament’s outstanding defenceman, and I’m sure that as we 
look upon these fine young men that some day many of them, 
I’m sure, will be playing in the National Hockey League. Perhaps 
some of them will be playing for Team Canada, representing us 
in national world championships. 
 
So congratulations to all of you. And would the members of the 
House please join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to also 
join the member from Wascana, on behalf of the official 
opposition, in extending our congratulations to the Regina Pat 
Canadians. They are a team that are building on a fine and great 
hockey tradition in Regina. We are proud of them, as I know 
everyone in Regina and Saskatchewan is. They represented us 
well. Congratulations and may your future in hockey be a great 
one. 
 
I know that you all are anxious to do what’s happening on 
television right now, at this particular time, with a play-off game. 
And I’m not talking about the debate in here; I’m talking about 
the hockey play-offs that are taking place right now. 
Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: — — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, could 
you give me a breakdown of the costs as it related to the equity 
financing proposal, costs of the study . . . of all the studies done, 
how many studies and their costs, costs of the symposium, and 
the cost of the country meetings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1006 
 

wants the breakdown of the two-day conference and that portion 
of it versus the other meetings and symposiums that we have 
across the province, we’ll get that to him. We don’t have the 
breakdown separating the Regina meeting and the conference 
with the other meetings that went on, but we’ll work it out for 
him. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I’ll appreciate that as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, the equity financing study, was it your intention to 
have this proposal structured so that it would suit the needs of 
land transfer solely, or what was the original intent of the equity 
financing proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, there were two reasons for 
looking a new method of financing farms: one was that farmers 
wanted debt restructuring and a new way to make payments as 
opposed to just paying the bank interest; and the second was that 
Farm Credit Corporation, credit union, and others were exploring 
ways that they could handle the debt situation that they had on 
their books that wasn’t being paid for. So, as you know, the credit 
union made one of the major presentations at the symposium, 
saying; here are some alternatives; if we could share in the equity 
of the farm, we’ll take a lower interest rate and a lower payment 
and maybe we can all ride this out together over a 20-25-year 
period. 
 
And a lot of farmers would like the sounds of that — lower 
interest rate, longer pay-back period, and we’ll both share in the 
some of the benefit down the road. But I can’t pay you right now. 
So it’s a combination of the two. They . . . a lot or pressure, for 
example, on the credit union. 
 
And they did a great deal of research, shared it with us — Farm 
Credit did the same — and farmers themselves saying, is there 
an alternative? I’m just tired of paying the bank generation after 
generation; couldn’t we share in this some different way, lower 
interest rate, longer period of time, and we’ll both take some of 
the risk? And that is the basis premise for looking at all forms of 
equity financing as opposed to just borrowing it from, you know, 
some bank in Toronto who says that this is the interest rate today, 
and this is it tomorrow, and it can go up between 10 and 20 per 
cent, which is extremely difficult for people. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, do you see this program as 
alleviating some of the pressures on the banks and credit union 
with regards to the loans that they have now that aren’t being paid 
back? Do you see the equity financing corporation taking off 
some of that pressure from these lending institutions such that if 
we have investment in land, that that money could be used to pay 
off the banks or the financial institutions so that they would sort 
of be out of the picture now, and most of the debt would be held 
by the equity financing corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No. I think it’s quite the contrary. What 
would happen is, the financial institutions would obviously be in 
a situation where they would choose to eat some of that debt for 
some long-run benefit, because right now they’re not getting 
some payments on it. So they’re looking at it and saying, all right, 
I’ll write her down a little bit, but I want to be in this game in the 
long

haul. 
 
Right now, legally, they can’t have an equity position. The law 
says that the bank can’t own it. They hold the title until you make 
the payment, but they don’t have an equity position and they 
can’t take any satisfaction in those land values changing. That’s 
the way it is. 
 
They come back and said to us, maybe we can help out in the 
longer run. We can reduce the payments, reduce the interest rates, 
but we’ll both share in the risk. and farmers said, look, that’s 
maybe the only alternative we have right now. We canvassed 
other places in the world where they’re trying it, because they ran 
into problems. So it’s an alternative that was being suggested to 
help farmers and to, frankly, look at the Farm Credit and credit 
unions and financial institutions and say, look, you back off some 
of these payments, you know, give us a break. We’ll be there in 
the long run with you, and we can share in some of the risks, but 
we’ll have lower interest rates and lower payments and obviously 
our cash flow is improved. 
 
Now that looks, you know, like a positive thing for many farmers 
who can’t make their payments, and that’s why they’re interested 
in it and why you have father-son relationships where dad will 
say, look son, you pay me some low interest rate over time, and 
obviously we’ll share in the value of it. And they do, and they’re 
not paying interest rates to a middle guy, they’re paying it to the 
family. 
 
In other words . . . We did it, for example, in Power bonds; rather 
than the power corporation going to New York bankers and 
borrowing the money and paying interest rates to Americans or 
other people, we can offer a Power bond. People in Saskatchewan 
buy the bond and the interest goes to us here in Saskatchewan, so 
we both benefit, so that there’s no middleman. We didn’t go to 
the bank, we went to the people, and the people get the interest. 
And they like that; then they can turn around and invest it and 
build and do all kinds of things. 
 
The same is true in agriculture. So if we can provide an 
instrument that would allow people to facilitate this 
intergovernmental transfer, or intergenerational transfer, from 
one father to a son and down through the line without the banks 
in the middle, many people would like to at least have a chance 
to look at that before they are forced just to got to the bank. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think what you’re looking 
at there is a situation where the banks will continue to hold all 
the good loans, but they will be quickly encouraging their people 
that they’re holding poor loans with to go into this equity 
financing corporation. And what you’re going to have is the 
equity corporation holding all the poor loans. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister: how do you expect people to invest 
in something like that when that’s the type of loan that’s going to 
be in this organization? And I also ask you: who will be holding 
the lease, who will be holding the lease in the equity financing 
corporation? will it be the farmer, will it be the corporation, or 
will it be individual investors through shares? 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1007 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well let’s . . . Let me try to work an 
example out for you so that you could . . . If we had a local 
association, a local group of people in Humboldt, and they 
decided they want to have a land equity association, we’ll call it, 
and they had people who were prepared to invest . . . Or let’s 
assume that there weren’t even people who wanted to invest. 
They just went to the local credit union and said, do you have 
any, do you have half a dozen or 12 or 15 farmers that are in some 
trouble, and you in the credit union don’t know if you’re going 
to get your payments; the farmer doesn’t know what to do? They 
said, how about we set up an association here? You give your 
land to this association, and you’ll have whatever it is that you 
have a share in it, and the farmer will have whatever share that 
they do, and we’ll value it as today’s value. And obviously 
they’re going to have to write it down. 
 
The payments are dropped considerably. We’ll charge you very 
nominal interest rate so that the cash flow was improved to a 
large extent. The lease is held by the association, and the farmer 
can then make his low payments, he can operate the farm, he 
makes all the farming decisions. And as he improves his 
operation, he can buy more of the land back. And he has the first 
right of refusal; he is the person that has the hammer and could 
always control the land. 
 
Now if local associations are prepared to do that, you’d say, who 
would invest? Well, if you price the land right, anybody will 
invest. If they bought it at 700 and it’s gone down to $300 an 
acre, people said, at 300 I’m prepared to put some money in this 
— I am, if I get a return on my money and a chance that over the 
next 15 or 20 years land values will appreciate and my interest in 
that, my equity, would also appreciate. Now that’s precisely what 
farmers are saying to us. 
 
Right now credit unions and banks can’t do that because they 
can’t take an equity position. They can only charge the interest. 
So if associations could or local people could, you could call it 
an Agribond. If people wanted to, in the Humboldt area, invest 
in an Agribond, and it was on land on that basis, then it could pay 
6 or 7 or 8 per cent, and the value of the bond could increase over 
time — they’d say, well that sounds pretty good to me. I buy 
Power bonds; if I can buy agriculture bonds or anything else that 
can give me a guaranteed rate of return, plus have the option to 
convert it to an equity position or have that in there automatically 
. . . People are describing and offering various alternatives that 
will allow us to do this. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, the irony of this is that your 
government and the federal government, between the two of you, 
hold about one-half of the $6 billion debt, the farm debt in 
Saskatchewan. And you could be doing something right now 
about it; instead, you’ve taken eight to 12 months to develop an 
equity financing corporation that has been rejected by farmers. 
And you’ve put out your little scenario about local money going 
in there — that sounds good. But, Mr. Minister, the reality of it 
is, is that’s really not what you’re aiming at. Are you going to 
allow outside capital, out-of-province capital to come in to 
finance the equity financing corporation? 
 
(1930)

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the key is, whatever the 
capital comes from, to have it controlled locally. So if you had a 
land association in Humboldt and they wanted access to money 
and the money came from the moon, okay, they say: I have 
control of the money; I have the laws; I have the rules; and I will 
deal with it. We do that all the time. when money comes in here, 
we dictate what is going to be done with it; how we charge 
interest; how we pay taxes — all those things. 
 
We spend half of our time in government encouraging others — 
Canadians, Europeans, Americans, Japanese, and others — to 
invest here and to build. They’ll invest in Ipsco; they’ll invest in 
paper mills; they’ll invest in packing plants; they’ll invest in 
processing. They Japanese are here now building turbines in 
Saskatoon, for example — manufacturing turbines that are going 
to be used in power plants across Canada and across the North 
America. We like to see that money come in here because it 
creates jobs. That’s what you like to see. 
 
We’re building the second upgrader. Do you know where that 
money is coming from? That money comes from all across 
Canada. Some of it, obviously, will come from Hong Kong and 
Japan because the Husky people have investors from the Pacific 
Rim. We encourage them to come here to build. The key is, do 
you control it. Exactly! That’s what we do. We set the rules; we 
use the money. 
 
Now if you’re telling me that people, local people in your riding 
of Humboldt, would not like to see outsiders invest in Humboldt, 
to build — of course they do. I mean maybe you wouldn’t, but 
the public does. They like to see the new jobs, the economic 
activity. If we can replace the debt with cash, and we control the 
rules, I don’t know anybody who wouldn’t . . . You know, it’s 
pretty hard to have too much money. I mean it’s nice to have a 
lot of money, and if you could bring more money in, more money 
in like they have . . . And if I could use the example, Mr. 
Chairman, in Ontario where there is full employment, full 
employment . . . Mr. Chairman, in Ontario where there is full 
employment, there is a tremendous amount of American money 
being invested. GM (General Motors) has invested $8 billion in 
southern Ontario — $8 billion, U.S. money, multinational money 
in southern Ontario since 1980, and full employment. There is 
100,000 people now involved and employed in the automobile 
business as a result of outside money. 
 
Now I know that it’s not a socialist idea, that the outsiders can 
invest, but I’ll tell you, other Canadians find it very attractive to 
have that kind of money come into the country. You set the rules; 
you tell them what they’re they going to do with it, but to have 
surplus money, it’s clear . . . well the hon. member knows. 
 
I took mayors with me when I looked at this outside money in 
Oshawa — the mayor of Regina and the mayor of North 
Battleford, the mayor of Melville was along with me, plus some 
young people. And we found out that the city of Oshawa has so 
much money, it lends money — I think a $25 million surplus it 
lends to provinces. It has all this multinational money, this 
socialist evil money come into the community, create all these 
jobs, new cars, new homes, new furniture, all kinds of new jobs, 
and 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1008 
 

high-paying jobs — with multinational money — very 
high-paying jobs, creating full employment. And 80 per cent of 
the half-ton trucks that were made in Oshawa are going into the 
United States, made by Canadians — Canadians. 
 
Now I know your argument, I mean, we’ve been through this 
before: don’t ever let others invest in Canada; don’t let them 
invest in Humboldt. Well I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you that I spend 
half of my time when I’m outside the country encouraging people 
to invest here — invest — because I’m clearly . . . 
 
I have to remind the member opposite: the NDP never built one 
potash mine, not one, right? All that millions and hundreds of 
millions of dollars invested in potash mines, not one was built by 
the NDP. The NDP never, never built a packing plant — never 
built it. They never built the upgraders, Mr. Chairman. The 
outside money attracted in here, invested, has created all those 
jobs. 
 
Now all I’m saying to the hon. member, all I’m saying to him is 
that I would like to be able to use surplus cash where I can find 
it. I’ll set the rules, or we can jointly. Let me put it this way: 
would there be rules that you would agree to if somebody walked 
in here with billions of dollars that we could use to help refinance 
agriculture? Would you sit with me and design rules so we could 
effectively use that to remove the debt? That’s a very good 
question. 
 
A lot of farmers would say, boy, if you could cut my interest rates 
in half, and I knew that I had control of the land and I had the 
management decisions and I was the only guy that could buy the 
land, it would be well worth the while to take some time to figure 
out how we could use some of that surplus money that is now 
floating around the world, use some of it for Saskatchewan 
agriculture. 
 
Now if you deny them that — lets just make it be fairly . . . You 
deny them access to that cash. I am not denying them because we 
know if you deny them that — let’s just make it be fairly . . . 
really clear in here — you deny them access to that cash. I am 
not denying them because we can set the rules so people in 
Humboldt, people in Craik, people in Moosomin, or people in 
Moose Jaw can set the rules and control and help each other with 
that cash as opposed to debt, where we pay anywhere from 10 to 
20 per cent interest rates, depending on international bankers. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, your scenario just doesn’t work 
because the problem is that we entice outside money into this 
province for investment and they’re looking for something in 
return . . . In return, for example, from the upgrader or from 
something else where they’re going to get a profit, that’s no 
problem. But when you’re talking about agriculture, they’re 
investing . . . their investment purpose in agriculture will be for 
one reason only and that’s return. And that return, I say to you, 
should stay — if there is any return — should stay in the hands 
of Saskatchewan farmers. But under your scenario, it won’t 
because they’ll be investing in land at rock-bottom prices, and if 
you tell me that somebody who isn’t the major shareholder of the 
corporation doesn’t have control, then

you’re kidding yourself. And that’s the problem. But you’re 
going to have somebody investing in here, and when that land 
starts to appreciate in value, those outside investors are going to 
expect that they’re going to get their fair share of that. 
 
And so what happens to the Saskatchewan farmer though? He’s 
sitting there and he’s seeing land prices go up and he’s going to 
say, well look it, you know, I’m going to be taken to the cleaners 
on this one unless I get out right now. And they’re going to say, 
well just a minute; we’re in here for a purpose; we want to get as 
much out of that land as we can. So they’re going to want that 
land to appreciate, and this is the way the markets work, as land 
is up and down. And they’re going to hang on . . . hang tough 
until they get right to the peak of the market. And that farmer is 
going to be in the same position he is in the first place when . . . 
by the time that the land prices have gone up. 
 
So all you are doing now is attacking the symptoms of the 
disease, trying to get yourself and the banks off the hook here. 
But I’ll tell you, it won’t work. Just let me give you an example. 
If I’m a young farmer who bought 4 quarters of land a few years 
back and paid about $100,000 a quarter, which was not unusual, 
and now I have $400,000 debt plus probably whatever interest 
rates accumulated, because the times were such that you couldn’t 
pay that down, and, if you did, it was very little. And now I come 
and I’m in a position where I am basically insolvent and my cash 
flow problems are such that I have to get out, and you’re going 
to give me the opportunity to go into equity financing. so I’m 
going to have a $400,000 plus debt and I’m going to sell that land 
at today’s prices at about half that or $50,000. You said yourself 
— let’s use your number — $50,000 a quarter. I’m going to put 
those four quarters into the corporation; I’m still going to have 
$200,000-plus debt. 
 
And how long do you think it’s going to take me to pay that other 
$200,000 off on a return from the land, forgetting about the land 
we have in the corporation? And then a few years down the road 
the value of the land starts to come back up again, and if I’m not 
out from under this other debt, I will not be able to purchase the 
land back, probably until it’s at its peak value. So I’m back into 
the same position I was before. 
 
And the problem is, you said yourself that the government . . . 
you used your examples of bonds. Well the simple solution 
would be for the government to get that money under 
international markets — there’s no problem with control when 
the government’s borrowing it — at 9 per cent interest or 
whatever, which is not unreasonable, give it out to the farmers 
through the government at low, long-term interest rates and a 
long-term repayment period. And there’s no fear of anyone trying 
to manipulate the market. But this situation is such that anybody 
that’s investing, particularly those people who are outside 
investing for the purpose of making money, are going to try to 
manipulate the markets to the utmost so that they get the most 
return out of that land. 
 
So you’re saying that you want the private sector, and I’m saying 
that’s where it’s most manipulated. You couldn’t get that, as a 
government can get the money at a 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1009 
 

reasonable interest rate and give it back out at 2 or 3 per cent 
below and costing the taxpayers very little. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Minister, this scenario — and this is why the 
farmers rejected it — in the long term, all it’s doing is bailing out 
those financial institutions who want to get rid of that debt. Is that 
not true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll try the hon. 
member’s example. If, as you pointed out, you had borrowed 
$100,000 a quarter for 4 quarters, you had $400,000 in debt, and 
you couldn’t make your payments, and the financial institution 
realized that and you realized that, if you just changed the law for 
an example — just as an illustration — and you said to the credit 
union, you can take an equity position, what the credit union may 
say is, look, let’s forget the $400,000. You’re not going to repay 
it; let’s take it at today’s value, assume it’s half that — $50,000 
a quarter. Okay, so you’re down to $200,000; let’s start from 
there. You’ve put a little money in; I’ve got a fair amount in; let’s 
start from there. Now start making your payments on the 50,000, 
at today’s commodity prices. We’ll work out a schedule on 
today’s commodity prices and we’ll call the rest of it square. 
Okay? We’ll call the rest of it square, as long as they can share 
in the value of that as it goes over time. So if the farmer does 
better, and he starts to purchase it, he can buy it for himself. 
Okay? So he’s down to $50,000 a quarter, not 100. The credit 
union’s written it off. And they’ll say, I’ll charge you an interest 
rate that is on the basis today of, say, commodity prices which 
might only be 6, 7, 8 per cent money. The cash flow has improved 
for the farmer. The credit union says, well now I’ll go over 20 
years to help you. And as commodity prices go up, the man can 
make more payments, and yes, you may see the land values rise 
and he’s happy about that because his farm is worth more; and 
the more that he purchases, the more he owns for himself. 
 
Well you’re telling me that you wouldn’t write off half of it under 
a scenario like that. Now that’s precisely what’s happened in 
other places around the world. Equity corporations have come in 
and they’ve said, look, we’ll write off half or two-thirds of the 
debt — it’s gone, forget it, let’s cut a new deal. And they start at 
the bottom. You’re right. And he pays at the bottom, and he 
doesn’t have to make the big payments. He’s got cash flow. And 
they do it together. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I say to the hon. member, please don’t deny 
the opportunity for farmers to have access to low interest rates 
and writing off a good part of their debt in a situation which 
would allow both the investor and the farmer to make money. I 
mean, he is confined to land bank — I know that — and he’s 
confined to the situation where the government has to go in and 
buy the land. When we have a production loan which is $1 billion 
out, he’s obviously not happy with that either. 
 
He’s talking about the fact that we’ve got to have more 
flexibility. Well we’ve got money; lend it to them. His answer is 
to just lend the money, We’ve got a billion-two out there. His 
answer is, give them money. We’ve got $2 billion out in 
deficiency payments. now I’m not sure what his answer is, but 
we’ve got long-term money out. Farm Credit has got $450 
million at 6 per cent. We’ve got

flexibility. Now we’re asking if other want to try something else 
in terms of an equity position, locally controlled — the farmer 
controls it, the local people control it. He doesn’t want that, 
either. I know that he’s got a fixation with land bank, but I can 
honestly say to the member, we’re not doing land bank. Okay? 
We’re just not going to do it. 
 
If he wants interest rate money, low interest rate money, you’ve 
got the production loan program and you’ve got cash advances 
and we’ve got counselling assistance which backs up farmers. 
We’ll go in there with long-term loans, backed up by the 
government. We’re going that every day. We’re restructuring 
loans every single day. We’ve got the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation working on it. We’ve got 6 per cent money in Farm 
Credit that they’ve restructured on commodity base loans, so as 
commodities are lower, you have low payments; as they go up, 
you have higher payments. It’s shared on a commodity basis. 
You’ve got all those alternatives and more. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I would just say to the hon. member that he 
may not like the concept for sharing in the equity. It goes on 
every day in the province. But I don’t know why he would deny 
the opportunity for local people to try it if they wanted. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not as important that I 
don’t like this proposal. The main important factor is that most 
farmers in this province have rejected it and they don’t like the 
proposal. And yet you continue, through your consultation, 
through your new ideas and innovative programs, to bull straight 
headlong into an equity financing corporation that the farmers of 
this province have rejected. And it’s simply because you have no 
other alternatives other than your ideological, other than your 
ideology, to plunge ahead into something that’s going to put 
farmers in a position of, if they get into this thing, of being tenants 
on their own farm. 
 
And you can talk abut writing off $200,000 in the case that we 
put forward, and much more than that, probably, in other cases. 
Well I say to you, the problem isn’t . . . You’re assuming quite a 
lot, I should say, that the credit unions, first of all, will be able to 
write that off; and secondly, they’re in a little different situation 
than the banks, where the banks can lend out many times more 
on their assets than the credit union can. So I think you’re 
assuming something that you shouldn’t be assuming right there. 
 
You’re looking at a situation where the farmers are going to be 
put into a tenant position, and in that tenant position, if there’s 
any profits, the people who are investing in those profits are 
going to be getting their share. So if I make some money . . . Let’s 
say this goes ahead, and somebody puts their land into it and I 
make any profit off that. I’m only going to get a certain portion 
of that profit. Instead, you could, through a government agency, 
look at low interest rates with no hooks on the farmers that are in 
the program other than the fact that they will, over along period 
of time — you’re talking about restructuring debt over a long 
period of time — they 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1010 
 

would be able to pay back that land. The bank would have their 
share of the money back; the farmer would still have his land. 
 
But the situation with equity financing is not that. You’re going 
to have farmer putting money in, getting shares back. I would ask 
you, Mr. Minister: how is the sharing of profits going to be 
structured under your equity financing corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — well, Mr. Chairman, we are talking with 
farm groups and others about different ways to structure it. And 
the key is, they want local control. And so I would provide the 
hon. member with the information that as long as it’s local 
control and farmers have the hammer and they can control the 
land, then they’ll look at several scenarios. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, that’s the problem. The farmers 
aren’t going to have the hammer, and you know they’re not 
because they’re not going to be able to control with outside 
investment what’s going to happen to that farm, because the 
investor is going to get . . . want maximum return on that 
investment. And maximum return on the investment means when 
land prices are high as they can be before he will sell or get rid 
of his shares. 
 
And who’s going to buy it back? You’re looking at a situation 
where you’re going to have permanent holdings from these 
investment corporations — outside investment mainly, I would 
guess — controlling Saskatchewan farm land. And they’re going 
to be tenants. I mean, you got yourself into the rotten deal of the 
production loan where you’re backed into a corner now and 
making it hard for all the farmers. You’re starting to create 
another nightmare for them where you say over a period of time, 
as things get better, you’ll be able to, you know, buy back your 
land. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, that doesn’t work because the investments are 
going to have the control. You talk about local control — well 
that’s not going to happen because the guy with his money in 
there is going to have the final say and you know it. As a farmer 
you may have decision making as to what you grow. I say you 
may, because I think under this scheme it could come to the point 
where the farmer would be told what to grow if the outside 
investment was powerful enough. 
 
You know, that’s the situation. You’re getting into another box 
here that’s going to . . . that the farmers are going to be cornered 
in instead of restructuring the debt. And you talk . . . This is not 
restructuring the debt; this is simply shuffling the deck. The 
farmers themselves, the people that we are interested in here, are 
going to be in the same situation. 
 
And I’ll ask you again: when I, as a farmer in the equity financing 
corporation, make a profit on my land, on my produce, will that 
be broken down so that a portion of that is mine and a porting of 
that goes to the corporation? And how will that portion that goes 
to the corporation be paid out to the investors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it might take a whole 
term at a university to provide you with enough

information to show you how it might help you on your farm — 
you on your farm. I’m not sure whether you want the price of 
land to go up or do you want it to go down. do you want it to go 
up or do you want it to go down? Do you want farm prices to go 
up or do you want them to go down? 
 
I’m saying if somebody came along to you and said, if I rewrote 
all your debt — rewrote it — and we value your land low, at 
today’s prices — rewrite it — and you only have to pay at today’s 
prices, and over time you can buy that and you control the farm, 
you control the profits, and you just pay the interest rate based on 
commodity prices. If prices are low, you pay a low interest rate; 
if they’re higher, then you pay a higher interest rate based on a 
formula. And you can continue to buy land based on an index of 
what land I worth because if profits go up, the land might go up 
a little bit; if profits go down, the land might go down a little bit. 
 
Now if you’re telling me you wouldn’t buy that, if you wouldn’t 
go into a situation that allows you to cut your payments in over 
half and have an opportunity over 20, 25 years to buy that farm 
back, based on the fact that you could make some money, then I 
. . . well, let me read you . . . This is from a farmer, okay, from 
Herbert. He says: 
 

Dear Sir: (This is written to the Premier.) My discussions 
with our MLA for the Morse constituency in Swift Current 
this past week, one such topic was equity financing 
programs. Although there was opposition, I still think it will 
do a lot of good to many farmers where they can help 
themselves. 

 
I hope this will gain support so it will become a reality. You 
can count on my support all the way. 

 
Sincerely, Emil Wutzke. 

 
Now people like Emil are interested because they say, if I can get 
some of my debt written down, somebody is going to get in the 
ball game with me and I get to control it, and I’ll pay for it as my 
profits improve. And obviously when profits in agriculture 
improve, land values will probably improve. I mean, when profits 
improve, prices do, and you know how it goes. 
 
All we’re asking for is an opportunity to let farmers try this with 
local control; we’ll set the rules. You and I can sit in committee 
and carve out the rules for people so that this is how it’s going to 
work in Saskatchewan — it’s a made in Saskatchewan program. 
All I’m saying is that we can get access to a whole bunch of cash, 
hundreds of millions of dollars we could bring in here and use it, 
and you said, oh no, can’t use it; it would be immoral for us to 
use some money that’s outside. 
 
What if we use it together? Okay, we’ll design a program to allow 
farmers to restructure their debt, and they can control it — they 
control it. I mean, it’s . . . It would seem to me to be perfectly 
sane and sensible to allow people, allow people to restructure 
their debt at the local level by using surplus money that you may 
find any place in the world just so we could use it. The farmer is 
in control. He pays a low payment when the prices are low, a 
higher 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1011 
 

payment as they go up — the land values will reflect that — and 
they both are better off. Do you understand that? They share in 
equity. 
 
Assume it was your dad that was doing it. Assume it was just 
anybody, you share in it on the down side, and you share in it on 
the up side. Nothing could be simpler. But the bank isn’t getting 
it — that’s the key — the bank is not getting it. And that, right 
now, it’s generation after generation after generation that the 
bank gets all the money. Why not have somebody share in the 
equity with you? You can have lower payments, better cash flow, 
and together, over time, obviously you’re both going to be better 
off. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I really didn’t want another 
one of your fairy tales. I’ll just be blunt and then ask the question 
again: how will the profits be shared? Will the farmer get a 
salary? Will part of his profits be . . . will there be a formula to 
say . . . Will he have to submit a financial statement? Will part of 
his profits be put into the corporation? And how will that profit 
be paid out to the shareholders? Is it on the basis of shares? 
 
Do you understand the question I asked last time before you gave 
me your little fairy tale? I want to know what the system is going 
to be for the sharing of profits. How will I know how much I will 
keep? How will I know how much I’ll have to put into the 
corporation? And of that money that’s going to the corporation, 
how will it be paid out to the shareholders? Could you please 
answer that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Of course, Mr. Chairman, I would 
delighted to give the hon. member another example. If . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hold a seminar. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m not sure a seminar would help because 
there’s so many people, so many people understand it so clearly, 
and obviously the member opposite, it goes right over your head, 
but let me try it again. Let me try it again. 
 
You base . . . you want to know what the farmer receives in his 
pocket. Let me just give you this simple example, and I’ll use 
your example. 
 
He borrowed money at $100,000 a quarter for 4 quarters, is 
$400,000. He can’t make his payments and so he decided that 
that’s over, okay? And you’re going to write and say, all right, 
forget half of it. We’re down to $50,000. Let’s assume that he 
will make his payments. Now this is how it’ll work. 
 
He’ll make his payments today based on an interest rate, let’s say 
a return of six and a half or 7 per cent that he pays to whoever’s 
holding the equity — that’s it. He gets to keep all the rest. I mean, 
he keeps that himself. And the price of land in there is half of 
what it was, okay. So if he bought at 100,000 a quarter, it’s now 
down to 50,000 a quarter, okay. That’s what it’s valued at. He’s 
making money. 
 
So the next year he’s making some money — all he paid was his 
6 or 7 per cent — and decides, I want to buy some of this back 
— okay? — because he made some money — 

land values maybe improved — he pays 55,000 a quarter because 
profits in the industry are up, and he buys as much as he can. And 
his interest payments go up a little bit because it’s based on 
commodity prices. 
 
Now he gets to keep all the rest of it. All he pays — all he pays 
— is that interest to that person who has the equity. What did the 
equity person get? The equity person made six and a half to 7 per 
cent, plus some appreciation in the land value because you’re 
buying it at 55,000 a quarter and it started at 50. The farmer’s 
happy to do it because he’s made a profit. 
 
Let me give you another example. Land in 1975 was worth — 
what? — let’s say $25,000 a quarter in Humboldt. What did it go 
to? It went to 100,000 a quarter. Why did it go up? Why? Farmers 
made money. They made a lot of money; they’re prepared to pay 
more for . . . Who benefitted by that? The people who held the 
land over time have had some appreciation; the people who 
bought it, paid for it over time, they did it jointly. Now the farmer 
in this situation can have an opportunity to buy it at the low and 
earn it over time. He has a fixed payment that he makes based on 
commodity prices. He gets to keep the rest. 
 
And you’re saying, well what if the land value goes up, he’d have 
to pay more. Well if the whole industry’s more profitable, 
obviously it’s going to be reflected in land values. What other 
way is there? The only way you’re talking is: go to the bank, pay 
the bank, or else the government will buy the land and you pay 
the government. 
 
Well now we’ve been through both the bank and land bank. Both 
the bank and the land bank are not popular, I’ll tell you that. Now 
if you want to go sell those two . . . I mean, good luck. I can’t do 
that. I’m not going to do land bank. Farmers absolutely and 
categorically rejected in your community, your constituency and 
mine, and every place else. They’re sick and tired of paying high 
interest to banks that are run out of Toronto, that tell them, here’s 
what you have to pay in terms of interest. 
 
Now you haven’t come up with anything else. You said, loan 
them some long-term money. Well, we’ve just been talking for 
two days about the production loan is a billion-two out there, and 
long-run money. And we’ve got hundreds of millions out, and 
billions, in deficiency payments and low interest loans — some 
at zero — and cash advances — some at 6 per cent — in FCC. 
So you haven’t rewritten that book at all. 
 
So in terms of equity financing, all we’re talking about is: people 
can share in that burden, write some of it off, start again, and base 
your payments on the profit in the industry. And the profit can be 
based on a basket of commodity prices or other tings that you 
would suggest as a formula for paying. But all the farmer pays is 
that interest — pick a number: 6, 7, 8 per cent low. And he knows 
as he purchases over time, that valuation goes to the person who 
shared the equity. That’s what it is; it’s clear and simple. 
 
If you didn’t do that, if you didn’t give them equity, they have to 
charge as the bank does, 14 per cent or 15 per 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1012 
 

cent, because he can’t share in the equity. Am I making myself 
clear? If you don’t let them share in the equity, they’re going to 
charge high interest rates. If you let them share in the equity, 
they’ll charge half the interest rates. Now the farmer would like 
that alternative. 
 
Now you’re saying, well, either the banks or land bank . . . Oh 
but don’t ever do this because the guy may share in the equity. 
I’ll tell you, a lot of people would like to have their loans 
rewritten, half the cash flow problem, lower interest rates, and all 
he’d have to do with the investors is share with them some of the 
equity as land goes up because they’re making money. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well the problem, Mr. Minister, is that the same 
people who are making the money now off the farmers are going 
to continue to make the money off the farmers, and that’s those 
people who have money to invest, like the bank. 
 
What you’re missing here is this is not going to put the farmer 
who’s in trouble in any better financial state. That’s what you’re 
missing here. And you talk about land bank and government 
buying the land. Well that’s not necessary. As I said before, you 
and the federal Farm Credit Corporation hold half of the $6 
billion debt in Saskatchewan. You could restructure that debt on 
a long-term basis without the equity financing proposal, and the 
farmers could have full benefit of any profit they make on that 
land by eventually getting that land clear and free. 
 
But under this situation, they’re going to have to now use their 
money, any profit that they make, pay it to the corporation, and I 
tell you, Mr. Minister, its going to a long, many week of Sundays 
before they get that land back, and that’s the problem. They’re 
going to be tied into this corporation for a good long time, if they 
ever get out of it. 
 
(2000) 
 
And that is not correcting the problem of the debt that we have 
in Saskatchewan today. That debt, that debt right now could be 
restructured through your and the federal government’s 
corporations, but you choose not to do that. And all you can talk 
about is land bank, buying the land. Well, I mean, that is totally 
off the topic when we’re talking about this scenario. You could 
be the facilitator of the long-term, low interest loans; you choose 
not to do it. The equity financing corporation will be the 
corporation. And you talk about local money. Well I will wait 
and see; I will wait and see. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Local control. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, local control you say now; before you said 
local . . . started off talking about local money. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, the problem is that those people 
with the money are going to invest in this farm land. You’re 
going to have to change the farm ownership Act to allow people 
to come in, and that’s going to throw this province wide open to 
anybody who wants to come in and buy up farm land when it’s 
down at rock-bottom prices.

The farmer who puts his money into this corporation, you say is 
going to be sharing in the profit; the investor’s going to be 
sharing in the profit. Well, Mr. Minister, why should we have to 
have someone outside come in and share in the profit from farm 
land when the objective is to get that farmer out from under his 
debt as quickly as possible. And you choose this route because 
of your ideology. And that’s the only reason you’re going this 
way, especially in light of the fact that the farmers have rejected 
it. 
 
Now you said that the farmer would pay a certain percentage to 
the corporation. Would I as a farmer, who paid let’s say 7 per 
cent back, get any asset from that money or would that strictly be 
a payment for shares into the corporation, or would I get equity 
out of that money? Every dollar I put in, would I get a certain 
amount of equity back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, anything beyond your 
interest rate you’d have to pay would be equity that you’re 
buying — it’s precisely the point. I think I’ve finally figured out 
what your — well, I’ll just say it out — your dilemma is. You 
would rather have . . . Your example: a man borrowed $100,000 
a quarter — $400,000. What you’re telling me is that if they 
borrowed it from the government, FCC, $100,000 a quarter, the 
answer should be, we’ll redo that and we’ll charge you, say 6 per 
cent over 25 years, but leave it at 100,000 a quarter. That’s what 
you’re saying. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I didn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, that’s all you’ve said. You said, now 
just redo it on a low interest rate over a long period of time. 
Right? That’s what you’re saying. 
 
Now you tell me, which is better — to do that, leave it at 
$100,000, take 6 per cent fixed over 25 years, or knock it down 
to $50,000 a quarter at 6 per cent with a chance to buy it back? 
Now there isn’t a farmer out there that would knock for the latter. 
 
So you’re saying, if government holds the debt, we hold the debt, 
if you would just give them low interest loans on all that money, 
okay? I say to you, there’s an awful lot of people who would like 
to start over again at half the price. Do you get my point? Half 
the price. Not just to have government come in and say, here’s 6 
per cent on that $100,000, when wheat was seven bucks a bushel 
and canola was $12 a bushel — that’s when I borrowed that at 
$100,000 a quarter; I don’t want that. And at any interest rate I 
don’t want it; it’s too much. 
 
So what this is, is cut it in half, or cut it in two-thirds and start 
over again. And I’d be glad of my chances to start over again. 
But you’re saying, no, government you’ve got that; you just 
lower the interest rate and run it over a long period of time and 
you’re going to make everybody happy. Balderdash! They don’t 
want that. 
 
You give them a chance to write it down to a fraction and start 
over again, they wouldn’t care who shared in it. Do you 
understand that? They don’t care if their dad shares in it or the 
neighbour or somebody else. The bank is going to share in it all, 
right now, because they’re going to own it. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1013 
 

They don’t want the bank to own it. They say, let’s start anew 
here. In fact, we’ll start at a very low interest rate and you can 
ride this through with me for 25 years and it’ll be a partnership. 
And if I do well, I’ll buy more of it. The better I do, the faster I’ll 
buy it. And, of course, if things get better the price may go up 
some. And the person that is in there in an equity position will 
probably benefit. 
 
Let me take you through an example in the stock market. If you 
buy a preferred share on a market, two things happen. You get a 
dividend, hopefully, and some of the blue chip stock it is a 
dividend that’s guaranteed. You buy something, you get 6, 7, 8 
per cent. That’s the first rate of return. What is the second? You 
hope the stock goes up, then you have two of them. It’s the same 
principle here and you deny the farmers to have access to the 
equity markets of the world . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 
you deny it. There’s my point. There’s my point. People invest 
all the time at low interest rates because they’re locked in on blue 
chip stock. You set the rules. This, you say, this is blue chip and 
it’s locked in low interest. And the only other benefit you’re 
going to get, if it improves over time, then you can share in that. 
And you deny farmers access to the equity markets of the world 
because you haven’t figured them out. Everybody in the world 
has figured them out — everybody. And you won’t let our people 
cut their debt in half — cut their debt in half. 
 
Well, I don’t know how many times we’d have to go through this 
illustration, but you . . . I mean, am I making the point that people 
do invest in blue chips? Okay? And they get a low rate of return, 
but it’s fixed. Okay? It’s fixed. And then they’ll say, that’s all I 
get and maybe the stock will improve over time. If you could take 
this farm debt that you were talking about and cut it in half, write 
it off and start again and pay very low interest rates, and that’s 
all the investor would get, plus any appreciation that might take 
place because the farmer got profitable. And it has to come from 
profit because he gets to keep everything but the low interest rate. 
Anything above that he can either, you know, buy a new car or 
he can buy equity in it; he can expand. He could buy it all the 
first year if he makes enough money. Do you understand that? 
Maybe the price of land wouldn’t move at all. He would buy it. 
Maybe it’ll move a little bit. Obviously, the farmer, as he buys 
more and he sees his equity position improve, he’s going to feel 
good about the fact that his land values are appreciating, not 
depreciating. Farmers have lost a fortune because land values 
have gone from here to here. Now you must acknowledge that, 
right? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Those that sold, my friend. 
 
And that’s where you have the problem with land bank, once the 
government gets into buying the land, as you guys did. You went 
around, and you said, I’ll buy your land if you are in trouble. 
They did that. They bought the land, and then they said, well, for 
the son here it will be 2 or $300 an acre more. That was terrible 
unfair and cynical, frankly. That isn’t the way to do it. They don’t 
do it that way. 
 
And they don’t do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Circumstances 
— you know that it wasn’t circumstances. It’s a philosophy — 
the government should own the farms. socialism in agriculture 
— everybody’s heard about it, all across North America. 
Saskatchewan NDP

are known from here to Texas on their land policy. Everybody 
talked about the NDP land bank. We’re not going to let the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, from here to Cuba, then, if it 
wasn’t from here to Texas. It went for a long ways down there. 
Maybe that’s where you got the idea, and it might work in Cuba. 
It might, but it’s not the plan that people want here. 
 
So I would just share to the hon. member that if you can allow 
farmers to cut their debt in half in opposed to . . . And I come 
back to you. If you could tell me that your idea is to take the 
100,000 a quarter and just give the low interest loans, at even 3 
per cent — let’s say at nothing — you’d still keep it at $100,000 
over 25 years. You couldn’t make your payments if interest rates 
were zero, and you know that. 
 
The key is to write them down. And you haven’t given the farmer 
the chance to do that. That’s what’s going out there in the real 
world. It’s going on every day. We’re doing it every day, and 
you’ve denied them that opportunity. You said, well the 
government just go borrow money at 5 per cent then lend them 
all the money he wants. At those values at the peak, he’d never 
make it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, I think, Mr. Minister, you explained to me 
in one brief sentence how this whole thing is going to work, and 
you said, it’s going to be the same principle as the stock market. 
And that’s what scares the farmers out of this proposal, and that’s 
why they turned it down, because they know that’s what you’re 
looking at. And we don’t want Saskatchewan farm land working 
under the same principles as the stock market, because we know 
who makes money in the stock market and who loses it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you continue to say about . . . talked about 
institutions writing down the debt to half. Could you tell me or 
table in this House, any written indication from any of the 
financial institutions that say — which presumably you got your 
assumption from — which say that they will be writing, or give 
us what indications they have given you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
attended the symposium when the credit union went through their 
whole scenario. And he also listened to the example that is used 
in Australia. That’s precisely what they did at some length. And 
he was there; I saw him there. I saw you there, sir, watching the 
whole illustration that the Farm Credit went through and said, 
this is what you could value the land at — the lower the value, 
the lower the payments. 
 
I mean he’s been through it in detail over and over and over 
again. I mean it just goes like this — right by. Maybe get your 
local credit union manager to sit down with you and have him go 
through the illustration. They had various scenarios that you 
could write it down to. Charge the farmer half the expense, his 
cash flow is greatly improved, and they’ll share in the equity 
growth over time if it does. If there’s no equity growth, the farmer 
can just flat buy it at the same price, but it’s been cut in half. I 
mean that scenario is there — profits go up; land values don’t 
change; he gets to buy it at half the price — and you’re denying 
him that chance. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1014 
 

The credit unions would be prepared to do it. And you’d say, oh 
no, gosh, the credit union might get in equity position. What if 
just the credit union did it? Would you be against it? What if the 
Farm Credit Corporation did it and the credit unions did it? 
Would you be against it? Oh yes, it’s not the same as land bank, 
therefore I can’t do it. 
 
Give them a chance. Just even give your blessing to the local 
credit union and say: look, write here down; give me the chance 
to take an equity position; we’ll charge him a fraction of the 
interest rate and we’ll share in any growth in equity over 20 
years. Just give them the blessing to do that and you’d save 
thousands of farmer and you know it. 
 
But you would deny them that right and that possibility because 
you’ve got it locked in your mind, oh, I couldn’t let anybody 
share in it. You’d let the banks in Toronto share in the misery and 
own half the land out here. 
 
And they’ve got shareholders all over the country and you know 
that, shareholders all over the country, the head office in Toronto, 
that own all this farm land. And you wouldn’t change for 10 
cents. I mean you’ve . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Look. Look. 
You had a chance to help people at 20 per cent interest rates and 
you denied them that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You did. And you, you had a chance. You 
had a chance to really give them a break when there were tough 
times at 20 per cent. When was the rewrite then? Where was it? 
Where was all your big ideas at 20 per cent interest rates and 
rewriting all this stuff? There was Mr. Trudeau in Ottawa and 
there was the NDP here and 20 per cent interest rates, and where 
was your plan? Where were you? Where was the member from 
Humboldt then? Where was he? Where was your big plan and 
your big ideas . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the hon. 
member, just for the record, said he was in Cuba designing his 
policy. Now he’s laughing, he’s laughing about the farmers. 
 
You know, you can laugh about the farm problem. That’s why 
you have no support in the farming community because you 
didn’t help when you had a chance, and you stand in here and 
prevent them from getting some help. You know that; you know 
that. And then to have your leader involved in the stuff that he’s 
involved in with his law firm, you know . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give her snoose, Bruce. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’ll give it to them. You had the 
opportunity. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think you hit a nerve, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well of course I hit a nerve, and they don’t 
like to hear it. They didn’t do anything when they had a chance. 
The man from Riversdale has a law firm that forecloses on 
farmers, and they sit over there laughing, saying they’re getting 
ideas from Cuba.

Look at this; you see this? That’s the latest, the latest. What does 
it say? “Secret research done for the NDP by the Bank of Nova 
Scotia.” Secret. Boy, you guys must be pretty deep into the rural 
pockets of people in this province when you can even put in your 
campaign material, secret deal with the Bank of Nova Scotia. 
 
Now you tell me about helping farmers. You had every 
opportunity when you were in government to prevent half of the 
problem today, and you didn’t lift a finger except for land bank. 
And that will be your legacy for as long as you live, and you 
know that. 
 
And the Trudeau administration wouldn’t sell the wheat, and 
between the two of you, you just . . . Well you laughed at farmers 
in rural communities, and you won’t elect anybody in the rural. 
That’s why . . . You don’t listen. You say, the government will 
own it or somebody else will own it, and then when you get 
kicked out, you make a living foreclosing on them. That’s 
pathetic. I mean, somebody up in the opposition today said, prove 
it. How many times do you want me to read the letter from 
farmers? Man from Abernethy and says, please, Mr. Leader of 
the Opposition, don’t foreclose on me. God forbid, don’t do it 
again. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I ask the people. The people will know; they 
will know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, 
they got them alive over there. They’ve quit sleeping; they’ve 
started to chirp up a little bit when you start touching a nerve, that 
they didn’t help and when they do get kicked out of office, they 
make a living foreclosing on people. And they know that. And 
now they say in their campaign material that just goes out in 
Prince Albert, secret reports prepared for the NDP by the Bank 
of Nova Scotia. Well how do you like that combination — how 
do you like that combination? For rural people, rural people. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, they can chirp all they like. That record will 
be on the record in this legislature for a long, long time to come. 
No help for farmers, laugh at them, make money foreclosing on 
them, treating them like serfs. The land bank is the solution, 
offering their land at 2 or $300 an acre more to their children, not 
doing anything for them when they’re in difficulty, and then 
standing up here after we’ve got billions of dollars out and all 
kinds of programs — and granted, not perfect, but all kinds of 
programs to help them — and they’re coming back and deny the 
farmer even to cut a deal with the local credit union to help them 
out. 
 
(2015) 
 
No, they’d say keep the price at $100,000 a quarter, charge him 
a low interest rate, and he’ll be fine. And do you know what? At 
the back of their mind, you know what’s there. If they don’t, the 
government can own the land. See, that’s what he says all the 
time. The government can do this. See, he knows if they can’t 
make the payments at 100,000 a quarter, the government will 
own the land, and he laughs over there. He knows that he’d love 
the government to own the land. 
 
He says . . . How many times, Mr. Chairman, has he said: 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1015 
 

the government has a large percentage of the debt; if the 
government did this then the government could fix it? Well 
obviously he knows you can’t make your payments on $100,000 
a quarter. He knows that. What will happen? The land will come 
back to the government, and then they control the farmers, and 
they control the community. It’s a perfect socialist world. 
 
They’ve done it for . . . Well it goes back 100 and 200 years; 
that’s their plan. Do you know what, Mr. Chairman? They’re 
rejecting it in Poland tonight. They’re rejecting it just like they 
reject rural socialism across this country. They reject that 
government control. They reject it all over. They’re rejecting it 
in the Soviet Union; they reject it in China; they reject it in 
Africa. 
 
You saw, Mr. Chairman, this morning, on national television, our 
ambassador to Ethiopia saying there’s not a food problem over 
there, there’s a political problem. The socialists are in control, 
and they’re starving people on the land. And the ambassador says 
it’s not an agricultural problem. It’s a political problem he talks 
about. They’ve got socialism; the government wants to control 
the land and the . . . Some people are worried about voting in 
agriculture. They don’t even . . . In Africa, they don’t even let 
them eat in Ethiopia because of politics. 
 
And the man said this morning, the ambassador . . . And the 
members opposite know that he said a million or 2 million or 3 
million people could die because of socialism — Marxist 
philosophy. The government has to control it. Let them vote! 
Heaven sakes, they can’t even eat because of Marxism, because 
of socialism. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell you what, the farmers world-wide, 
farmers world-wide know that their plan, a great big plan that you 
have to control their lives, doesn’t produce food. It doesn’t make 
money on farms. It doesn’t improve your prosperity. Mr. 
Chairman, they know. They left systems like this to come here to 
own their own farm and to raise their own families, and it’ll be a 
long, long time, Mr. Chairman, before they buy land bank or 
anything close to it in this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if we wanted to revert to the old soviet socialist 
policies, or if we wanted to revert to the African policies today 
that can’t even grow their own food, or other policies linked with 
that great big socialist plan where the government owns the 
means of production, we’d be in some trouble in this province 
and in this country. We’re not going to do it, Mr. Chairman. 
we’re going to continue to help people own their own farms and 
we are going to remind the public every single day, Mr. 
Chairman, every single day we’re going to remind the public that 
only, only a socialist leader would stand in his place and have his 
law firm foreclose on poor farmers — foreclose on them. 
 
Only a socialist leader could stand up there and say, I think the 
farmers should vote for me, as he’s out there foreclosing on them 
on behalf of the bank, and then have the audacity to put it in his 
brochure, in Prince Albert today and yesterday, saying, and a 
secret report prepared for the Bank of Nova Scotia and the NDP 
point out, ta-da, ta-da, and on and on.

Well we know the deal, okay? The public will know the deal. 
People in Saskatoon know the deal. People in Regina know the 
deal. They should be ashamed of it. It’s a rotten deal. It’s a dirty 
deal. They know. They know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well they won’t forget. And the hon. member says, well it’ll 
show up in by-elections. It’ll show up. You watch. It’ll show up 
all over this country when the NDP stand up and say, well for 
Heaven’s sakes, this’ll be the new plan. This is the new plan for 
agriculture: one, we’ll either foreclose on you or we’ll take the 
money for the government and the farms for the government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I say to the hon. member, if he sys that we have 
to keep the price at $100,00 a quarter and just write lower interest 
rates loan, then he might as well forget it because farmers can’t 
make it at those prices. He knows it and he should be ashamed of 
himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s precisely why we’re 
going to be here a long time in these estimates. I don’t know what 
. . . a man who is so scared, so unable to defend his policies that 
he goes into a tirade about everything under the sun. So I’m just 
going to be quite brief and I’ll ask the question again: Mr. 
Minister, will you table in this House the documents that tell the 
farmers — a very key point here that you’re talking about — that 
the financial institutions are going to write their loans that their 
holding down to half; that farm credit corporations are going to 
write their loans down to half; and that ag credit corporation is 
going to write their loans down so that farmers can participate in 
this agricultural equity proposal? Will you table those in this 
legislature? Very important part of this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I would be glad to table the 
illustrations and the examples that were public knowledge at the 
symposium. And they went through the scenarios of all the land 
values and the prices you could put in. I’ll be glad to table those. 
And the hon. member knows that they’re public. And he’s been 
through it and he evidently . . . we thought he understood it. But 
he’s afraid to accept principle, the principle that if you wrote it 
down it’s easier to pay for. Is that true? 
 
Maybe he doesn’t understand it. Do you understand that if you 
write it down it’s easier to pay for? If you write it down, it’s easier 
to pay for. And the research says you can write it down at various 
levels — the lower you write it down, the easier it is to make your 
payments. Now that’s all the principle says. And therefore, we’ll 
share in the equity as you get it paid for and as the profits go up. 
It’s as simple as that. I’d be glad to table those studies, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That wasn’t the question, Mr. Chairman. The 
studies and all the work that’s gone out up to now were merely 
suggestions. But what we have to know — what the farmers have 
to know, what the farmers have to know . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, we only get beyond the principle here. We 
want to know what advantage it’s going be for the farmers to get 
into this corporation. We have to know and farmers have to know 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1016 
 

where the documents are that suggest or that say that the loans 
are going to be written down in half. 
 
Now this is what you’re hinging your whole argument on right 
here. Let’s say we write that down and throw that away. Well, 
fine; that’s great if we’re going to write down some of the 
principal, or if the banks are going to do that. But, Mr. Minister, 
where in writing do they say that they are going to co-operate and 
write down half the principal — Farm Credit, ag credit and the 
financial institutions? Where have they written that to you so that 
you can come into this House and say that these institutions will 
write down half that loan? Could you tell us where that document 
is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
should do his research on Saskatchewan alone. They’re doing it 
every day, depending on how much equity a farmer has left. In 
some cases they’d write it down over 50 per cent. In some cases 
they’d write it down 25 per cent, depending on the debt/equity 
ratio. That’s how they make the decisions. 
 
I want to know whether you would buy the principle that as you 
write it down it’s easier to pay for. Do you understand that? If 
they write it down 25 percent it’s that much easier to pay for ; if 
they wrote it down 48 per cent it’s even that much easier; if they 
wrote it down 60 per cent it gets easier on the way down. Now if 
he buys that, their research showed us it will depend on the 
amount of equity they have. It’s as simple as that. Then they’ll 
carve out their interest rate and away they go for 20 or 25 years. 
And that’s the credit union doing that. 
 
Now it will depend on every individual farmer. And if the farmer 
can start afresh at lower prices or a lower mortgage, I mean, 
obviously they’re going to be interested in that. You just 
shouldn’t deny them the chance, that’s what I’m suggesting to 
you. Don’t deny them a chance. What you said, no, keep it at 
100,000 a quarter, charge them a low interest rate for the long run 
and they’re going to make it. They’re not going to make it at that. 
It’s just impossible without huge deficiency payments and other 
means of support. That’s why we are involved in helping them, 
in counselling and assistance, in low interest loans, deficiency 
payments, and we’ll entertain the credit unions’ proposal of some 
sort of shared equity. Maybe we could all work our way out of 
this. It’s better for the credit union if they can work their way out 
of it and get some of it back over time than it is not to. And it’s 
better for the farmer because he’s got a chance. Don’t deny him 
that. 
 
So, in principle, would you accept the fact that it could be 
anywhere from 10 per cent to 80 per cent that they write down, 
depending on the situation? And it makes it easier the lower the 
write-down, I mean the lower the cost of that mortgage. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, that’s fine for you to stand up here 
and say that, and you use the credit unions as an example. Let’s 
just talk about the banks for a minute. first of all, the banks will 
be trying to get rid of some of their debt. Will the banks that are 
carrying high debt loads now on farm lands, will they be 
participating in the equity? Will they be allowed to participate in 
the corporation by

putting in land that they have acquired and receiving back capital 
for that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — What do you mean, capital for the land? I 
mean, you’ve gone through the example. You’ve gone through 
the example. They went through the example both in Australian 
case and in the credit union example, and it doesn’t matter 
whether they’re . . . Well in the Australian case, it’s banks; and 
in the credit union example, it was the credit union. And they 
had. And they said, well we’ll throw it in. This is how much 
equity we got in it. The farmer’s got so much equity. We put in 
there for nothing. It’s there. 
 
Assume there’s no money at all; let’s say there’s no money from 
outside. We’re just going to start afresh; only thing different is 
that we’ll share in the value of that land together over time. Do 
you understand that? No money, no transactions, lets you start 
without money. You drop the debt in half or whatever — pick a 
number you like — but you used the example 100,000 a quarter. 
Let’s assume the land value is now 50. They said I’m not going 
to get it, I’ll write it off. We start at 50. Right? That’s what they 
start with. They have some equity and the farmer has the equity. 
And as the farmer buys more and more of it from them. He has 
more equity as it’s more profitable. He’ll own it all. 
 
What will happen over time is that if he makes more profit, the 
land values will go up. They’ll make a little bit of money on the 
land value as the farmer’s equity improves. It’s as simple as that, 
and I don’t think you should . . . (inaudible) . . . The banks could 
do the same. That’s what they did in Australia. 
 
I don’t know whether the credit union will do it. They certainly 
won’t when you’re beating on them all the time, or the financial 
institutions, any place. I mean, why don’t you give the farmers a 
break? Why don’t you let them try some of these things with the 
local credit union and be helpful? You’re out there waving all 
these flags and frightening them. You haven’t done them any 
good when you’re in power and you’re not doing them any good 
when you’re out of power. I mean, you get in the way most of the 
time. Right? You’re standing on what you’re trying to lift every 
other day. 
 
All they want to do is to cut a deal with the local credit union and 
say, the credit unions says, I don’t know if I’m going to get any 
payments, or the bank says, I don’t know, let’s go do it. They’re 
doing it every day anyway. And you don’t recognize it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — All I can say is I’m glad to be able to stand in 
the way of your government on behalf of the farmers, because if 
somebody didn’t you’d run right over top of them as you’re 
attempting to do with this. 
 
I’ll ask my question again. I’ll try to simplify it for you. The 
banks now hold a substantial amount of title of land in this 
province. Will that land be allowed to be put into the equity 
financing corporation for someone to buy? and will that land that 
is put into that corporation be . . . Will the banks be fully 
compensated in monetary terms? Will they get their money from 
that land they put in? 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1017 
 

An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — You say, no. Okay, let’s go one step further. 
The banks have already written down that land, in a manner of 
speaking, because they’re not going to get their full 
compensation out of it. Have the banks indicated to you that they 
will continue a policy of write-down for land that they hold 
mortgages on that will be put into this financing corporation? 
Will they be able to get money out of that? And will they then 
tell you that they will write down to half or to some figure greater 
than half the value of that land? 
 
You’re talking about the credit unions. Have the banks indicated 
to you that they will write down, indeed write down that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve said to the hon. 
member nobody has told me they’re going to write it down either 
50 per cent or 75 per cent or 25 per cent. You go through the 
examples and they make their deals every day based on the equity 
they got. Do you understand? I can’t speak for the banks in 
saying that they’re all going to cut it in half. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You just did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I said that’s an example. I’m using your 
example. And if land values today are 50 per cent and they 
haven’t got the equity in it and they know they’re going to get it, 
they’re going to write if off at something and go get their best 
chance at it. 
 
(2030) 
 
I mean I can’t speak for the Farm Credit Corporation. I can’t 
speak for the financial institutions, credit unions or banks. I’m 
describing to you, as we did in the symposium, as example of 
how it could operate that could help everybody. And you’re 
asking me, well which banks said that they would do this, and 
how much? You know that’s impossible. It depends on every 
situation, every farmer. But the principle is there. So I mean I 
can’t add any more, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well see, Mr. Minister, that’s exactly why the 
farmers of this province can’t trust you. Half an hour ago you 
were saying they were going to write it down. Wouldn’t that be 
a great place to start — lending us to believe that that’s what was 
going to happen but then when we start questioning you 
specifically if that was going to happen you say, I can’t speak for 
the banks or the credit unions. And that’s why nobody can trust 
you because in your rhetoric you’re saying, oh I think this is 
going to be great. Everything’s going to work out fine. You’re 
going to get money out of it. You’re going to get your land back. 
You know you’re going to have local investment and 
everybody’s going to be happy. And now you turn around 180 
degrees and say, I can’t speak for the banks and the financial 
institutions. That’s why they can’t trust you. 
 
You’re assuming too many things. You’re assuming them to try 
to sell an equity financing corporation that the farmers have 
rejected, and yet because you think that’s the way it should be 
you’re going to push it forward. Mr. Minister, I think that is 
precisely why the farmers can’t

trust you, and I know they don’t trust you any more. How could 
they? 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that the banks would not be able to put 
their land that they hold into the corporation. What do you 
assume will happen, seeing you’re assuming things. What do you 
assume will happen with that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me just try it once 
more for the hon. member. I said, I can’t pick the value. But 
nobody’s going to go into an equity corporation unless they write 
it down someplace, whether it’s the credit union, or the FCC, or 
the banks, or somebody. They’ve got to put it in there at a market 
value that’s below what they lent the money on. I don’t know the 
number. You asked me what number. I can’t give you the 
number. But that’s the only way it’s going to work is they’ve got 
to write it down somewhere and go for the long haul. 
 
Okay, you got that point? The principal is: for equity financing 
to work they’ve got to write it down someplace. Some of it will 
be 10 per cent; some of it will be 50 per cent; some of it will be 
whatever. I don’t know what number it’ll be because each 
financial institution and each farmer is different. But they have 
to do that. 
 
What do they get? They get the same equity that they put in there. 
So if they wrote it down at 50,000 a quarter that’s what they’d 
have in it, and then they loan it at that. Well if they wrote it down 
to 20,000, that’s what it would be. You pick the number. What’s 
your equity in your farm? I mean, it’s different than your 
neighbour’s and different than your neighbours. That’s how they 
work it out. I mean, jeez, you don’t understand the concept of 
people now, people now. 
 
Farm credit, credit unions and others go do deals with farmers. 
Do you understand that? Do you acknowledge that? Okay, they 
do deals with farmers. Each deal is different, depending on the 
equity. Fair enough? Right. 
 
If we set up a mechanism to allow that to take place, to encourage 
financial institutions to take a hit and take the chance in the long 
run, I don’t know where they’re going to take the hit, but the 
principal is certainly right because it’s easier for the farmer to 
pay back. 
 
Now if you’d just acknowledge that, then we could get on with 
it, but you’re standing up there and you’ve got half of them 
frightened — I mean, they’re just saying, oh, for Heaven’s sake, 
some Hong Kong millionaire is going to own your farm . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We already rejected it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, no, the NDP that you had going around 
the province are saying, oh, this is going to frighten people. I 
mean, you and I know who was in front of the cameras — we 
weren’t born yesterday. I mean, politically they’d show up at the 
same meeting all the time — we know that. 
 
Don’t deny the farmers a chance to pay less and to write that off 
because you’re running around — you would rather make 
political points than help the farmer, 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1018 
 

wouldn’t you? I mean everybody knows that. Isn’t it clear? 
 
The same people, the same NDP people, showed up at the 
symposium no matter where it went; they got up at the mike and 
said, I don’t like the Premier and I don’t like agriculture under 
Progressive Conservatives, and this is a bad idea. Right? And 
then they’d stand up and say, well, they’d really like if the land 
bank and the NDP were back, and they would really treat you 
because the government could do it all at low interest rates, and 
if I didn’t make the payments the government would own the 
land. Well I know that’s what you want, and you’ve had your 
folks out there saying it. 
 
Now, all I would say: there’s an opportunity here. The principal, 
and I’m sure you must acknowledge that if you had an equity 
position — and financial institutions now can’t take one — but 
if they could under a new mechanism that we set up then, in fact, 
farmers could have much smaller payments and we could get out 
from under the debt and have the debt replaced with much equity. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Premier, if I invest in something, it’s usually done on the 
expectation that I’ll be able to share in the profits that the 
investment might help to produce and also gain from any 
appreciation in the assets. Is this generally how you see this 
equity financing project working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, people throughout society 
have access to the equity markets, that is people who have 
pension money — like in Saskatchewan, there’s billions and 
billions of dollars of excess cash, and it is invested for 
Saskatchewan people — if you were a municipal employee or a 
teacher — in the markets of the world. And those that want to 
borrow money can get it from people who have money. And you 
will put your money into, say, a blue-chip stock of some kind or 
other and say: this is very safe; it’s guaranteed 6 per cent, but the 
stock might also improve. 
 
Now the same could apply to a power bond. You say, I know it’s 
fixed at eight and a half per cent; I like that, but maybe I could 
convert that some day to a Saskoil share and that might be to my 
benefit, because the share may go up. Now if the power 
corporation can use the money and reduce its debt, it seems to 
me we could have a similar kind of instrument here where 
farmers could cut their interest rate costs by as much as 50 per 
cent, and help them remove that debt and replace it with equity 
for all. The only price is the chance to share in the value of land 
over time; boy, there’d be a lot of farmers who would grab at it. 
 
Particularly if the farmer ha the hammer, he gets to control the 
land. And you write the rules here any way you like, because it’s 
Saskatchewan. We write the rules for power bonds; we can write 
them for Agribonds; we can write them for anything. we have 
access to billions of dollars across the world of equity money. 
 
Don’t you think the two of us could figure out a way to get that 
into agriculture and control it, to help people in agriculture cut 
their costs? We could just replace that

debt, which we’re paying 13 or 15 per cent on, with equity that 
you can pay 7 or 8 per cent and reduce your cash flow 
requirements, and at the same time say, I’ll share in this over time 
as I do any other blue-chip stock. And now would be the perfect 
time to do that. 
 
The former leader, the former member from Elphinstone — the 
former leader of the NDP and former premier — and I talked 
about this. He says, look, this would be a beautiful, beautiful 
opportunity for farmers. He saw it, and he’s on record. The 
former premier, the former member from Elphinstone, said, I 
don’t know if I’d invest a lot of my own money in it, he said, but 
it’d be a great idea for farmer if that’s how it worked. 
 
Well it’s a blue-chip stock. You could set: this is what it’s going 
to be, based on commodity prices. As the land value improves, 
you get to share in it. Now maybe the farmer would buy it all 
back in the first year or two because he’s making good profits; 
the land values might not change. The more he bought obviously 
would have some impact on the price of land. 
 
That’s where the investor, like you, says it’s a pension fund, says 
I’ve got my 6 or 8 per cent guaranteed, but I’ve also got some 
capital appreciation here. That makes you feel good as an 
investor. 
 
Now the farmer feels a lot better because he’s not paying 100,000 
a quarter; he started at — well pick a number — but I’d say he 
had half that. Tremendous difference. 
 
See, the financial institution, the bank, can’t take an equity 
position so they’ve got to charge you high interest rates, right? 
You could put your money in the bank, but a lot of people don’t 
put it in the bank, they put it in blue-chip stock because they say, 
I’ll get guaranteed, plus it might appreciate. There’s an advantage 
to that, a very distinct financial advantage. Farmers to date have 
not been able to get advantage of that equity money. 
 
It seems to me you and I could design a mechanism safe for the 
farmer, and granted, I’m sure you’d want it safe for the farmer 
— safe for the farmer — but get access to it and avoid the bank. 
There’s billions out there, I mean, Heaven sakes, they invest in 
credit cards, they invest in all kinds of things. 
 
Access to equity money, cut your cost, and control in the hands 
of the farmers. You mark my words. You mark my words. It will 
take place in North America; hopefully it will take place here. 
But if you can cut the farmers costs and he still has the hammer 
and the legislature designs the rules, I would think you’ll see 
money going into it, even Saskatchewan money — and there’s 
billions here that can be invested, billions that now goes in the 
Toronto stock market. You could invest here in Saskatchewan 
and replace the debt with equity, the pension funds get a return, 
and the farmer is a lot better off, and as the appreciation occurs 
over time everybody benefits. 
 
Now if you could just buy the principle of helping farmers, we’ll 
control it; then we can take billions of dollars in debt and replace 
it with equity and we can both go down in history of making some 
contribution to agriculture. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1019 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Premier, my wallet is still in 
my pocket, and before I take any money out, I wonder if I might 
ask you a few more questions. 
 
Again, I didn’t quite get it clear. What I am trying to find out is: 
will an equity investment result in a fixed rate of return plus an 
appreciation of the capital asset, or will it result in a profit sharing 
plus, of course, the appreciation in the asset? Which of the two 
will it be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll give you an 
illustration of one that I would think that would be very workable, 
knowing how our farm operates and others do. You start with 
commodity prices today and you take a basket of commodity 
prices. And you say, at these prices you’re going to be paying 
something like 5, 6, 7 per cent. That’s your payment and you say 
that’s it for this investment. 
 
As the commodity basket of prices improves, that payment could 
go up, like the FCC does now in its commodity-based financing. 
It’s 6 per cent when the commodity prices are low, and it’ll go 
up over time — that’s it. And just link it to a basket of goods, as 
they go up. 
 
Now the only other benefit you’d get as an investor is that the 
land values may go up because farmers are making more money. 
You say, well, that’s what I’d like to see, so that index could be 
there. You and I could work out the index, take a basket of 
agriculture goods that could be used on that farm, this is the 
payment. It’ll just go as an index, and we can agree on how that 
will run. And you price the land today on an index that’s very 
low, as you know, and we’ll start from there — low payments, 
low land prices. 
 
As the farmer makes more money, all he does is make those 
payments. And if he wants to put a bunch of equity in there, he 
owns more of it. If the land goes up, obviously he’s got more 
value, and you, as an investor, have an appreciation. So you’ve 
got your fixed return, or at least minimum return, and it’s going 
up like this if the commodity basket improves, and you’ve got 
some appreciation equity. 
 
Vice versa, if the commodity prices go down, payments can go 
down, and you’ve got less equity. But you’re prepared to do that 
as you are now, and investors all over the world are when they 
buy a blue-chip stock. Then, well, it might go down, it might go 
up, but it’s a good stock. At least I’m getting my 6 per cent or my 
fixed rate. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — So as I understand you then, any return 
on an annual basis would be based on commodity prices. 
 
It seems to me that one of the other things, that if I was investing 
in something, I want some sense of what’s happening on a 
particular farm in terms of wanting to protect that investment. 
 
I might, for example, want to see that the cost of the farming 
operation more or less reflects sound business principles, that the 
return to those who are the active partners in the enterprise, shall 
I say, are getting a

reasonable return, but not an unreasonable return, which might 
then tend to reflect on potential profits and on, you know, the 
appreciation of the asset, and so on. 
 
I’m just wondering: in that context, it seems to me that farmers 
who participate are going to have to provide annual financial 
statements. There’s going to have to be some general agreement 
as to what the expenses of a farming operation should be. I’m 
wondering, just in that context: can you tell me what you have in 
mind as to an average salary for farmers that might participate in 
a project such as this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well clearly, Mr. Chairman, this is no 
salary. This isn’t a government operation. This is a farmer who 
manages his own farm. Nobody tells him a thing about the 
management of the farm. Under the rules that we would design, 
or that you and I could or this House could, he controls it. All the 
man wants to know is he’s making his interest rate payments, 
he’s making those payments. 
 
What he does with it, it’s up to him. If he wants to take a trip to 
Florida, that’s fine. If he wants to buy more of the land, that’s 
fine. He makes those payments; that’s it, like he does now at the 
bank. The bank loans him money; he makes the bank payments; 
the bank is happy. It doesn’t care what he does with his money. 
He can buy a new dress for his wife or he can buy a half ton truck. 
The bank doesn’t tell him how to operate. If he doesn’t make his 
payments, then there’s obviously some consequences. But the 
farmer manages the land. All this is is a financing arrangement 
that allows him to operate, and as he buys more and more equity, 
he’s obviously got more of the farm, as he does now. He doesn’t 
get title to the land till he pays off the whole bank loan. The bank 
owns the title now, for 20 years - the bank does — which is 
shareholders all across Canada. So there’s a little bit of water in 
our wine now when you talk about other people owning it. I 
mean, well, I don’t know what per cent of the farm land would 
be owned by banks, but it’s owned by shareholders all across the 
country because they hold the title. What I’m saying is that you 
could have that reduced, that expense and that cash flow, and 
start at a lower base and both parties would be better off. 
 
Now farmer keeps everything except his interest payment. and 
he know what that is, and he knows the formula by which he has 
to pay it. And it’s not going to be going like this, okay. It can be 
a long-run thing that flows over time, on average. And if he wants 
to buy it all next year, he can. 
 
(2045) 
 
So the individual investor is not concerned about the specific 
farm; it is just that agriculture investment, as you will in any 
market. I mean, as you will in any particular market. You don’t 
know who is on the other end of it; there’s a buyer and there’s a 
seller, and that’s the beauty of it. It’s the profit system on the 
farm because he’s making it. It’s an anonymous, so he’s not 
telling him how to run his farm. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let me just take you at your word that 
you’re looking at a fixed rate of return, and that may 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1020 
 

vary on commodity prices, some basket of commodity prices and 
the like. What happens in the case of an individual farm operation 
that cannot meet the rate of return that is determined by whatever 
formula is in place for the year? What happens to that individual 
farmer? Does he resort to additional borrowing? Does he resort 
to additional equity financing? How do you resolve that kind of 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well not unlike that they do it any time 
now. If they can’t make their payments under a particular 
situation, there is the recourses that you go through, and you go 
through, whether it’s counselling or whether it’s 
government-backed programs that we have because of 
guarantees, or various other things. Or in some cases, they would 
say that’s it; I mean, I’ve written it down to half or lower, and I 
still can’t make it at those. I mean, obviously they’re in the 
position where they may forfeit the operation, as they do now in 
some cases. But they still have access to all the kinds of 
alternatives that are before the public now. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again it seems to me that if I’m investing, 
taking out an equity position in something and recognize what 
you say — that I may not be in a position to invest in an 
individual farm but be done through an equity financing 
corporation — still it seems to me that that equity financing 
corporation . . . you know, you’ll want to maximize the return. 
 
I’m just wondering how you see a proposal such as this helping 
out farmers that are basically in a marginal situation. How will 
this system . . . It seems to me that the orientation would be far 
more towards helping those farmers that are successful and have 
shown over a period of time that they can make a good return on 
their farming operation. How is it going to help someone in a 
marginal position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if a farmer is in a very 
healthy situation, his financial institution isn’t about to write him 
off, clearly, or write it down, you know that. I mean, they’re just 
not going to do that. But if you’ve got situations where they’re 
both losing, ag credit or Farm Credit or credit unions or banks 
and the farmer are both going to lose. The farmer is going to lose 
his land and the credit institution is going to lose a whole bunch 
of money; that’s when they’ll get together and they’ll try 
something. 
 
So as the member from Humboldt said: gosh, I borrowed 
$100,000 a quarter, couldn’t make my payments; we’re in a 
difficult situation; maybe we’ll cut a deal. Well we’ll start at 
$50,000 a quarter, only you’re going to take an equity position in 
my farm along with me and away we’ll go That’s a big help to 
the farmer. And it’s some hope for the credit institution because 
they might get their money back over time — maybe not as 
much, but it’s better than the big loss that they take if they had to 
just take the hit entirely. 
 
So that’s what happens. And they will put their equity in, the 
farmer puts his equity in, then a partner, and you know, away 
they go to see if they can make it work. It’s a big help to those 
that have just been dealing in straight interest and can’t make the 
payments, because at 15 per cent you miss a payment or two and 
you’re dead. I mean

it; just financially you can’t make it. 
 
So it’s a very big help to those that are, as you point out, 
somewhat marginal or up against it or have lost most of their 
equity. That’s precisely what you want for them is, give them a 
break; start over again; start low and some sort of a formula that 
they know that they got a fixed payment that they can make if 
they make some money because prices improve. They can put it 
against the farm. People that are in the business feel better about 
it, and obviously the farmer does. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Have you had any expression of interest 
from various pools of capital in North America or, for the matter, 
outside of North America in this equity financing corporation? 
Can you generally identify what . . . who might be expressing this 
interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, some of the research we’ve done has 
been with Peat Marwick and Pemberton Houston Willoughby 
and the financial houses and chartered accountants and others, 
and they say clearly, if you design this in a fashion that 
encourages people to invest locally — and a lot of people would 
like to invest in agriculture if they know: one, they had a fixed 
return; secondly, that it would be helping local people in 
agriculture — that it would be an attractive investment. 
 
Now they speak on behalf of financial houses and chartered 
accountants that do this kind of thing everyday for people. So 
they’ve looked at it in terms of the debt structure. They’ve looked 
and talked to the credit unions and the banks, FCC and 
Australians and others, and say, I think you could put a package 
here together. It would be good for you, say, as an investor, good 
for me as a farmer. We could both come out of it a lot better off 
than we’re going in, than we’re sitting here now with 5 or $6 
billion in debt and everybody paying interest and the land values 
going down. And it’s just that, you know, we’re both losing. We 
got cash there — if I could just say it once more — a lot of 
money, billions of dollars that could be invested to replace the 
debt and frankly would be good for both parties, farmer and the 
financial institutions. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You mentioned again tonight as you did 
at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention that one of the things that you were 
looking at was potentially investing some of the pension funds 
which the government now controls — investing some of those 
pension funds in this farm equity financing corporation. 
 
You’ve talked consistently tonight about a 6 to 7 per cent rate of 
return on investment, plus, of course, an appreciation in the 
capital assets or in the assets. I’m just wondering what you know 
about the pension funds, and what kind of rate of return that 
they’re trying to achieve that makes you think that the pension 
funds, that it would be in their interests, and that is to say in the 
interests of the thousands of men and women who have funds 
committed to those funds, what makes you think that that would 
be a good investment for those pension funds given a 6 or 7 per 
cent rate of return, as you’ve talked about through an equity 
financing corporation such as this, and the rate of return that 
pension funds generally are trying to achieve? 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1021 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, when a pension fund 
manager invests for you, as a pension person, whether you’re in 
the teachers’ pension or others, they look at the guaranteed rate 
of return and they look at any market appreciation of their 
investment. Sometimes with mutual funds they will do better 
than others because they’ll have a fixed rate of return that they 
can count on, and the portfolio increases in value. This would 
have to compete with that for the pension fund managers, and 
they would look at it. 
 
But what they’re telling us today, you could design it so it could 
compete very well. So you’d have a fixed rate like a blue-chip 
stock — here’s the dividend, and over time that may appreciate 
in value and does a lot better than 6 per cent. 
 
What if it made another move with respect to the value of that 
portfolio? I mean, just look at a power bond invested at eight and 
a half per cent, guaranteed, that could be convertible to a Saskoil 
share that went from say $9 to $12; obviously they’ve picked up 
in the neighbourhood of a 25 per cent improvement in the value 
of the share, plus an eight and half per cent on their guaranteed 
return. Now that’s what pension managers look towards. 
 
Pension managers may buy and invest in power bonds or things 
like that, that have the conversion possibility and the equity in it. 
So don’t deny. There’s two parts to this — two parts — one, the 
guaranteed return, plus the portfolio itself may improve as a 
result of improvement in the equity. That’s what they look at 
every day. So it would have to compete. 
 
You ask me, would it have to be competitive? Yes, it would have 
to be competitive. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Then the question is: you’ve talked 6 to 
7 per cent and you’ve thrown that out with a fair amount of 
regularity tonight. At the same time you point to SaskPower 
bonds which bring a return of 8 to eight and one-half per cent — 
and I’ll use your figure on that. Tell me where the incentive is as 
a pension fund investment manager — and I’ve sat on a pension 
fund for some years — tell me where the incentive is to invest in 
something that will bring you a 6 to 7 per cent rate of return. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If you invested in a Power bond at 7 per 
cent, and you could convert it to a Saskoil share that went from 
$9 to $12, you’d make 25 per cent on the share and 7 per cent on 
the bond. Now that’s a lot of money. And you would be a very, 
very popular individual as a pension fund manager because your 
portfolio improved by 25 per cent on the value of the shares. And 
$3 on 9 would be 33 per cent. Do you understand? The portfolio 
values increased because the value of that stock increased. As 
well, you’re guaranteed a return. 
 
So pick a number. Let’s just take 8 across the board. Would you 
invest in, say, a 10 per cent mutual fund and that’s it, or would 
you go 8 per cent guaranteed return plus the chance that the 
portfolio may increase? Now that’s up to you. Some people say, 
I’ll only take the 10 per cent; it’s locked in; I like that; put it in 
the bank. Others will say, no, I think at these prices — at these 
agricultural

prices — there is tremendous potential on the up side, and I’ll 
take a lower return because I believe over the next 15 or 20 years 
there will be appreciation, and that will attract people as they do 
any other market. So what’s the value? You can design that so 
that in fact you can help the farmer and help you as a pension 
fund manager, and you’re both better off. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — A couple of more questions, Mr. Premier. 
Do you see any limit on the equity participation that there might 
be on an individual farm unit? Do you see any limits on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, if we could get the principle accepted 
in this legislature that we could try it, we could talk about the 
limits. I mean, perhaps you could have a limit. We have limits on 
loans, we could have limit that you could participate. That’s 
certainly up for good discussion if you’d want a limit. Maybe you 
could say that you can put in half the farm, or so many quarters, 
or whatever you might suggest. That’s a detail that I really 
haven’t given any thought or much attention to, but it’s not one 
that you couldn’t set out any way you wanted in legislation that 
allowed people to do this. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well how do you see it? Do you see an 
equity financing corporation taking out 50 per cent, 60 per cent 
equity position in a farming operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well clearly, if you’ve got farmers in 
trouble — and this is what it’s designed for, particularly young 
farmers. You might look at a situation where the, say, the local 
credit union has made the loan and the young fellow has put in 
— he’s got ten per cent equity and the credit union has got 90 per 
cent, and they both throw it in there together. That’s where they 
start. They just throw the whole farm in and away they go. And 
it’s based at whatever the interest rate is at this commodity prices, 
and he makes his payments and on he goes. They both put it in, 
say we’re in the game together but it’s at half the cost, because 
we’re both going to lose. 
 
Now some it might be half the farm, some it might be two-thirds 
of it, I don’t know — whatever would be benefit to both of them. 
I wouldn’t confine it to anything that you and I might dream up, 
but let them decide and work their way out of the situation that 
they’re in because right now it’s all debt. And they’re losing and 
the farmer is losing and it compounds. That’s why the land values 
have tumbled so far. So if you could cut her and get on with a 
new situation, I wouldn’t confine it — at least not in theory. 
 
In that situation with the young fellow that couldn’t . . . he made 
two or three payments, now he can’t make any more. He’s got 10 
per cent, credit union has got 90 per cent, they both throw that in 
and they go from there. As he makes money he buys more equity 
and they feel better — probably would rise over time if 
commodity prices went up. They make a little money; he’s 
obviously got tremendous cash flow benefit. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — As he makes more money, the value of 
the operation goes up and t becomes that much harder to buy 
equity. But let me just ask you on this pilot project that was 
announced: who, at this point, in terms 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1022 
 

of financial institutions, will be participating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we don’t have any projects yet, and 
what I would appreciate is some support from the members of 
this House to initiate some pilot projects that would involve, say, 
the credit unions or Farm Credit or financial institutions and 
allow farmers to take a crack at it and to see if we can design a 
mechanism where they can get access to equity money and cut 
their payments, and try it on a pilot basis in four or five different 
communities, or four or five regions, or four or five areas where 
we have ranchers and farmers that are looking for a break. And 
that’s what I have in mind. 
 
And people are asking me and they’re phoning me and they say, 
I’m tired of paying the interest rates and the bank’s going to have 
it all; can’t you do something else? Of course we would like to 
have the co-operation of this House to try it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Just to get back to one thing again, in 
terms of a fixed rate of return. Do you see it them as the equity 
financing corporation guaranteeing a certain rate of return to 
those who are investing in the equity financing corporation? And 
can you tell me if there is to be a fixed rate of return? And given 
the volatility of the agricultural sector, I think, as someone who 
might be wanting to invest, I would, you know, have some 
caution about doing that unless there were some guaranteed or 
fixed rate of return. Who would guarantee that rate of return. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You just put together a formula mechanism 
that says if these prices, which are low today, we’ll design a 
repayment schedule of interest that you’re going to pay to the 
financial institution, or whoever is holding this equity, and today 
starts at a rate and you pick a rate, and then it’s just based on the 
formula of the commodity prices that you can produce in that 
farm. And you could design it pretty straightforward, pretty 
simply, and it’s just based . . . We do it in supply management; 
we do it in marketing legislation; we do it all the time. And you 
have formulas that work through even on the cost of land and the 
rent that you pay. It’s based on a formula and the cost of 
production, or whatever else you might want to have in your 
basket. 
 
But if we took a basket of commodity prices at today’s value, 
land values, and you start from there and you just work through 
a formula and say your payments will be based on this 
relationship. Payment is low now because the basket is low. As 
the basket goes up, the payment goes up. As the basket goes 
down, the payment goes down. 
 
Now that’s on the interest you are going to receive as an investor, 
but don’t forget at these land values the probability of them going 
down much more is a lot lower than the probability of them 
improving over time. And that’s what investors look at, clearly 
they do. And like any other stock, I mean, it’s a better buy now 
than it was on October 19, 1987, on the stock market. You watch 
it, because the probability of it going much lower is certainly 
better than it would be — than it was then.

Mr. Van Mulligen: — It’s always a question for an investor; it 
can’t get any worse, but who know, Mr. Premier. 
 
I sense from my discussions, and it’s been limited with farmers, 
a great deal of resistance to the ideas that you’re putting forward. 
I’m not sure what accounts for that, whether it’s because you 
have been unable to explain the proposal clearly and adequately 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan, or whether there is some other 
reason for that. I just wonder, how you propose to overcome this 
resistance? Do you plan to use the leverage that you have, 
whether it’s in terms of, you know, money that you now have out 
there in the farming community; do you plan to use that as a 
leverage to encourage participation or interest in equity financing 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well there is only two ways that you could 
facilitate it: one is to get the co-operation of the members 
opposite here and say, let’s go, let’s go try it; and the second thing 
would be to just go try some experiments anyway. And even if 
you don’t agree, that we would start a couple of them on a pilot 
project basis with farmers that would like to do it, and some 
financial institutions that would be prepared to try it; let them at 
least have the chance to try. 
 
And I would prefer the former, where we could all agree that here 
is a framework to allow people to do this and allow, at a 
minimum, local investors, even people in the community, our 
local pension funds, our local whoever that might want to, or 
local financial houses at least have a look at it when they’re 
allocating their pension money and their investors’ money, as 
they do now with Power bonds and other — we could call it an 
Agribond, or you could call it whatever you like, but that . . . 
Either we do it here with some sort of co-operation, or else we 
might just say, well, I think it’s worth pursuing with local people 
just so that we can have a crack at it, and see if we can help some 
farmers that are in that situation. 
 
Particularly, and I think you would find, for the young farmer 
who got caught — good, young, and maybe graduated from 
university or very good education — got caught paying 100,000 
a quarter, got caught in the high interest rates, and the kind of 
young person you’d like to have on the land, can’t make the 
payments. And you got to start over again at a different level. 
 
And everybody knows those are the kind of people you want on 
the land. That’s where you need some help for them and you’d 
like to be able to do that. And it’s more than just the government 
giving them low interest because at hose $100,000 a quarter, 
most places, like in Humboldt or other, you can’t make it on $2 
wheat. You just can’t make it. So regardless of the interest rate 
we could give them, it’s just extremely difficult. 
 
When we give them money — to give you another example — 
give it to them in terms of deficiency payments, they tell us they 
can’t make it either. So it’s going to take some imagination to get 
access to those equity markets and all that liquid cash to replace 
much of that debt and get it out there; start again at some lower 
level and we’ll both ride it together — the financial institution 
and the farmer and the investor, I’m sure. And 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1023 
 

this would have to compete, but the financial houses tell me that 
you can design it so that it would be very competitive, given the 
nature of how things go in agriculture, and clearly they are 
cyclical. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Premier, one of the concerns that I 
have is that you’ve talked more and more in recent months about 
the possible participation of Saskatchewan pension funds in this 
equity financing proposal. If the equity financing proposal and 
the equity financing corporation is such a good deal for someone 
who has money to invest, why haven’t the other financial 
institutions in North America — those that have the pools of 
capital, whether it’s the insurance companies or trust companies 
and the like, and the banks — why haven’t they rushed in here to 
show support for your idea, and why are you now talking about, 
well this may be a good investment for Saskatchewan pension 
funds? 
 
As I look at the announcements and your statements and the very 
real lack of any interest by the trust companies and the insurance 
companies and those that have access to capital; when I see that 
lack of interest and I see you starting to talk about pension funds, 
I have a sense here that it’s perhaps not such a good deal and that 
you’re not managing to convince those pools of capital — 
whether it’s the trust companies or the finance companies or what 
have you — to come in here. In order for you to make it go, 
you’re having to go to the pension funds, the funds of the many 
thousands of people in this province who’ve contributed to them 
as a source of capital for this And I would just tell you at this 
point that I have that great concern, and that for you to ameliorate 
those concerns that are out there in the part of workers in this 
province, you’re going to have to do a lot more explaining about 
your equity financing proposal — not only why it makes sense 
to farmers who seem to by very sceptical about the idea, but also 
to the very many thousands of men and women who had their 
pension funds invested in pension funds that you now control. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the law prevents financial 
institutions from taking an equity position. The Bank Act does 
not allow the bank to own farm land. Now of course they can’t 
invest in farm land if it’s illegal; you can’t do it. Where you have 
converted the debt to equity is where they have changed the rules 
as they did in Australia, and they were talking about examples 
here — where if we facilitate it as an investment instrument, then 
you would see the money flow into it, and it has to be a 
competitive investment. 
 
And I’m not talking about pensions. And if you’re worried that 
we’re going to take your pension and put it in something that is 
very risky, don’t. Don’t even . . . don’t pretend that’s the case — 
it’s not. You design an instrument that has to compete on the 
market. And investors, those that are managers, will decide 
whether they will put money in it or not. 
 
The professionals tell me, if you design a new instrument that 
allows people to have an equity position in it, it will be of interest 
to investors. So right now you can’t do it by law; it’s illegal. 
 
Now secondly, I point out, if I changed or proposed to

change the laws of the bank that owned farm land, you’d be 
probably the first among many to stand up and say, I don’t want 
you to do that. I don’t want you to do that. You don’t want the 
banks to own the farm land. Right? so you know what I’m saying. 
If you’re going to stand up and say that . . . All I’m saying is that 
the law prevents it now. That’s why you don’t see them rushing 
in to do it; you can’t do it. 
 
If you changed it and set up new rules to allow people to do it, 
then that’s a possibility. I mean, that’s what we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Premier, you said 
that you would hope that such a proposal would go forward with 
the blessing of the entire Assembly. I can tell you that unless you 
are withholding something from us, there’s scant chance that this 
proposal will ever go forward with the consent and blessing of 
this side of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Premier, the manner in which you describe this really befits 
a snake oil salesman. I say that, not because of your wild 
gesticulation; I say that, though, because your claims are grossly 
exaggerated — grossly exaggerated, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have . . . I’m not sure quite where to begin, but 
let me begin perhaps with the notion of a blue-chip preferred 
stock. I would be hard put to think of a comparison which is less 
apt than that one. And for your benefit, since you seem to have 
no idea what it is, let me try and describe what a blue-chip 
preferred stock is — it’s a stock in a company which has stability 
of earnings, a strong balance sheet, has not had to skip dividends 
over a lengthy period of time. That scarcely, scarcely describes 
the farming industry. The farming industry is exactly the opposite 
— wildly cyclical. At the moment the balance sheet of the 
industry is atrocious; that underlies the whole problem. As for 
skipping dividends, this industry hasn’t made money in some 
time. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, to compare this proposal of yours with a 
preferred stock, which is a conservative investment in a blue-chip 
security, is a comparison that could scarcely be less apt. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have . . . You know, you say that the problem is 
that the banks now own the land and we should do something 
about that. That’s the one and only accurate statement you made, 
because the problem with the banks owning the land is that the 
individuals don’t. And that’s also a problem with your scheme, 
is that they don’t. They then have a contractual relationship, I 
guess, with this equity financing corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to say as well — I ask your officials or you 
to do a simple bit of arithmetic; it’s easy to do. Assume a value 
of $400 an acre for the land, and 8 per cent return. What’s the 
rent have to be per acre to achieve an 8 per cent of return on land 
at $400 an acre? Take an average value, perhaps in southern 
Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you what it’s got to be; it’s got to be $32 
an acre. Land never rented for that. In the heydays it did, it got 
that high, but you certainly wouldn’t get that now. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1024 
 

So if you’re going to give them an 8 per cent return — and I don’t 
think this investment will be attractive at very much less than that 
— then there’s going to have to be built into it a very healthy 
subsidy by the taxpayer. And I smell another rip-off of the 
taxpayer here. The only way you’re going to get investors to 
invest in this thing at the moment is to give them lucrative tax 
deductions. 
 
One farmer described it to me as a process by where the farmers 
get to pull all the weeds and the speculators get to make whatever 
money there is — and I think that’s probably not an inaccurate 
description of this system. 
 
Mr. Minister, I took the time to go through the Price Waterhouse 
study, and I think I have a rough understanding of how it works. 
The land is transferred, for whatever it’s value is, to the equity 
corporation; the bank get their cuts; and if there’s any equity left 
over above and beyond that, the farmer gets that back. 
 
Then it’s the next step that you seem to misunderstand. The 
Assembly is not going to fix in stone, from here on, what the 
relationship between the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m 
going to. if the member from Weyburn will be patient, all will be 
clear. I know he’s been suffering from a lot of confusion, but I’m 
about to make it all clear. 
 
It’s the next step, Mr. Premier, that you seem to confuse. 
Ultimately, over anything but the extreme short run, what the 
farmer pays to lease back the land is going to be a matter of 
negotiation between him and the corporation. Ultimately, in 
anything but the very short run, that’s going to be the case. It is 
going to be a matter for negotiation between the farmer and the 
equity corporation as to what he pays for that land. 
 
I want to point out the obvious in the beginning, and that is that 
the farmer is going to have very little negotiating power. There 
will be a great many of them and a very few people setting the 
rates, and ultimately those rates will be set, There may, on 
occasion, be protests, but ultimately the farmer will pay what is 
asked of him. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t . . . Mr. Premier, I can’t for the life of me 
see the difference between a farmer in such a situation and a 
share-cropper in the southern U.S. I cannot see the difference. 
Someone else owns the land, he leases it back, and he pays an 
economic value for the right of leasing the land back. There are 
some obvious differences in the structure of the industry — units 
which are too small, in dryland farming, are simply not workable. 
(2115) 
 
So you’re not going to have people tilling 100 acres. But 
ultimately the relationship is the same. I don’t see any difference 
between the share-cropper and the tenant in this situation. Mr. 
Premier, I say to you that your proposal is a proposal that is going 
to turn landowners into tenants. 
 
I understand, Mr. Premier, that the credit union took this 
proposal. It has some obvious attractions for the financial 
institutions because they can get the money out of the land and 
they can’t right now; there simply is no sale for much of the land 
they have. So you can see why it’s

attractive to them. They took it. I understand that they set up a 
series of promotions and meetings, as they would call them, and 
abandoned them half-way through; it was just too unpopular. Mr. 
Premier, it just seems to me that the credit union system is a bit 
more sensitive than you are. 
 
There will be, Mr. Premier, no guarantee that anyone is going to 
get 8 per cent out of this. That’s an extremely high rate of return 
from farm land. If the member from Morse, who I think has been 
a farmer for some time, had achieved 8 per cent on the value of 
his farm land, he would have done very nicely over the period of 
time he’s farmed. He hasn’t, of course, he’s got a fraction of that. 
 
Mr. Premier, you are either . . . I say that it is a minor criticism 
that this is going to have to be subsidized by the taxpayer, 
because in the current conditions it’s never going to be attractive. 
It’s a minor criticism that it’s going change the social structure 
by turning landowners into tenants. But it’s a major criticism that 
you are going to take people who are now independent 
landowners, farmers, and you’re going to turn them into tenants. 
And that’s the effect of your proposal, and that’s why they aren’t 
buying it. 
 
I will grant you, Mr. Minister, you’re going to get some people 
who are going to try and take advantage of the situation now 
because there’s some desperate people, but I’ll tell you, you are 
never going to sell in this province the notion of turning 
independent landowners into tenants, and that’s the basis of your 
proposal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I would think, with the time that your 
family has spent in agriculture, you wouldn’t deny farm people a 
new opportunity that is extremely fair. 
 
Let me just use your illustration. You said $400 an acre, and you 
charged 8 per cent, and you said it’s $32 an acre. Let’s assume 
that’s what a young guy got into. He borrowed money from the 
bank for $400 an acre, and he was paying 8 per cent, let’s say he 
was. But you know what happened. The interest rate went to 16 
per cent — it doubled — he has to pay on $400 an acre, $64 an 
acre, and he can’t make the payments. He’s in trouble. 
 
What I am suggesting to you, and that Price Waterhouse and 
others have mentioned, the bank is going to lose the money 
because it isn’t worth that any more; it’s dropped way down in 
value. The farmer is going to lose it, so they say, all right, let’s 
cut a deal: at $200 an acre, 200 bucks an acre, we’ll charge you 
8 per cent. What’s his payments? Sixteen dollars an acre. He has 
saved himself $48 an acre in cash flow. Now they both start there. 
The farmer has a little bit of equity, the bank has a little bit of 
equity, and they start, and their cash flow is tremendously 
improved. 
 
Now he is going to own it, and if you and I want to, I mean if 
you’re really serious about this, let’s say the farmer is the only 
person that could own the land. If you’re worried about financial 
institutions owning it or others, just put it in law. If you’re going 
to try equity financing in this province, only the farmer can own 
the land. The guy that 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1025 
 

is on it is the only guy that can have the opportunity to buy it, and 
that land goes to him if he’s interested, or the next farmer that is 
coming on, and it’s not going to be owned by some dude some 
place else. You can make that law. 
 
But look at the difference. You’ve cut his costs. You see, you’ve 
written it down $200 an acre, and you’ve saved him $48 an acre 
in cash flow. Now that’s operating. Now he can take . . . let’s say 
he didn’t even make that difference — say 30 bucks an acre that 
he saved; he can turn around and buy the land at $200 an acre, or 
as much as he likes, or 205 or 210 and up it goes, and as he makes 
money, he’ll own the farm. Don’t deny him that crack at it. I 
mean, people are doing it every day on the informal market out 
there, and you know that. They’re cutting deals. 
 
We could facilitate this to a very large extent. And the investor 
says at 200 bucks an acre I’m investing because I think over time 
it’s going to improve, and I’ll guarantee it 8 per cent or 6 per cent, 
or you pick a number, on the commodity basket. As the basket 
goes up, he can increase it or decrease it. Or if you want, we can 
pick a number. I mean, if you’re worried about it as an investor, 
say, all right, I have to have 5 per cent on my money at any kind 
of a basket . . . (inaudible) . . . an index there. We can design it. 
You know what I’m saying. We can design it as you and I see fit 
— the farmer always having a chance to own it, facilitate cash 
coming in, encourage people to cut a deal, write down the 
expense and start over. 
 
Now I don’t know why you would deny your brother that, or 
mine, or somebody else the chance to start at a lower cost. And 
you write the law with me, okay, so that the farmer owns the land. 
Nobody else can take it away. We know the land is going to 
move, right? I mean, it’s there. You know what I’m saying? Give 
them a chance to have access to this equity market that is out 
there under our rules. You and I will design the rules, give him a 
chance. 
 
You see, with your own numbers, if you write it down to 200 
bucks an acre 8 per cent he is saving himself 48 bucks an acre in 
operating costs, and that’s just what he wants to hear. So 
. . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, cut it whatever. You can 
drop it $100 an acre or whatever it is dropped. But you have got 
to admit that if you bought land in 1981-82 and today it’s about 
half price — that’s about where it is. You value it at half price — 
that’s about where it is. You value it at half price and say, let’s 
start today, and the guys say, I’ll go for that. 
 
But the alternative is, we just lend him money at the full value 
1982, these young people aren’t going to make it. You know that, 
I mean, even at 2 per cent interest rates they can’t make it on 
$800-an-acre land. It’s just not going to be there, and that’s the 
problem. 
 
We can even give them deficiency payments that you could call 
it, that is interest write-off, and they can’t make it. I mean just 
take the billion a year that’s out and say, that wasn’t cash, that 
was just interest write-down. For heaven’s sakes we’ve written it 
down to zero. 
 
You know, I mean, you can apply that to money any way you 
want. They can do what they want with the money. It would be 
zero rate interest and they’re still saying, no, can’t make it. What 
you need to do is cut that overall

mortgage and facilitate that. 
 
So would you entertain the possibility if we design legislation 
that said only the farmer could own the land in the final analysis? 
He has the hammer, he gets to buy it, or somebody does in the 
community. You have to be a bona fide farmer, a Saskatchewan 
resident, or whatever the rules you like. Why don’t we do that? 
Then there’s no down side, right? Nobody else can own it, but 
the cash is in there and you cut a deal and obviously you’re going 
to help an awful lot of farmers. I mean, let’s try that. You know 
what I’m saying. The farmer gets to own it; you and I will design 
how it operates; we bring in billions of dollars; we put it to work. 
Now why would you . . . Even philosophically you couldn’t be 
against it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, it isn’t that I need this $5 calculator 
which I’ve been fiddling with as you’ve been talking, Mr. 
Minister. Your economics is just voodoo economics, what you’re 
suggesting. I agree with Price Waterhouse that this can be made 
attractive for investors. They never said in the report that it can 
be made attractive for farmers. Wise people they were. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s make it attractive for farmers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But you can’t do both. You cannot. The 
Premier sits there insisting he’s going to turn water into wine. It 
cannot be done. It may have been done once, but I don’t grant 
you that sort of a power. 
 
Mr. Premier, when the farmer who spoke to me said to me that 
the farmer are going to get to pull the weeds and the speculators 
are going to get to make whatever money there is, what he was 
saying in his own inimitable fashion was that after providing a 
minimum acceptable return to investors, there isn’t going to be 
any profit left in farming. And that’s right. That is absolutely 
accurate. 
 
I picked $400 an acre because that’s what land out where you and 
I grew up happens to be selling for at the moment — this month, 
handling a sale, comes to $400 an acre. So I just happened to pick 
that value. That’s the value of the land. I assume that that’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that a foreclosure sale? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No. It’s an arm’s-length sale. I assume that 
that is why — and I assume that’s what the equity corporation’s 
going to have to pay for the land, is the market value. surely 
they’re not going to get it at less than the market value. 
 
If you want to somehow or other shovel this land into the equity 
corporation at less than the market value, you can find a ton of 
speculators or investors who’ll want to get in on that. I assume 
they’re going to have to pay the market value. If they pay the 
market value, then I think my figures are accurate. The rent 
would have to be $32 an acre, and that’s absurd. You’ll never get 
it; nobody could pay it. 
 
If the . . . I say again that if the member from Morse had achieved 
8 per cent on the value of his farm land over the time he’s farmed 
it, he would have done very, very nicely; if he had achieved 5 per 
cent on the value of his farm land over the years he’s farmed it, 
he would have done very, 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1026 
 

very nicely. There is no question that you could make more off 
Canada Savings Bonds than you can off farm land. The rate of 
return is very low. There is simply not an adequate . . . there is 
simply not a minimum acceptable rate of return for investors and 
a fair living for the farmers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why did he buy it at 12? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why did he buy it at 12? He’s asking himself 
exactly that question now. That’s exactly what he’s asking 
himself now: what in heaven’s name was I thinking of when I 
bought it at 12? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s right. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Morse acknowledges that 
I’m right. 
 
There is your proposal, and the reason why you can’t sell is 
because those farmers can add and subtract, and you people 
haven’t done your sums. Your system won’t work without . . . 
you will not be able to attract investors without a very healthy 
subsidy from the treasury. There has got to be a tax subsidy here 
before you’ll attract them. Over any lengthy period of time, if 
they’re going to get a fair rate of return on their money, then there 
isn’t going to be any profit left for the farmer. And I think they 
got that all figured out, and I think that’s why the credit union 
can’t sell it, and that’s why I understand you people didn’t have 
a whole lot more success in selling it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I got it figured out. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This terrifies me — the Premier’s got some 
more figures — this absolutely terrifies me. I know that we’ll 
have more blue chip stocks from Bell Canada giving us 8 per cent 
and you comparing that to farm land. I know what you’re going 
to be doing. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, that this proposal just simply won’t 
work as you described it. The law of gravity applies to you as 
well as it applies to me. The numbers just simply won’t work out. 
And if you . . . I know the Premier’s going to come up and give 
me a barrel of figures which will make no sense at all, no more 
so than your earlier figures do. 
 
I assume, Mr. Premier, that you’re going to . . . As I say, I assume 
the following, and if I’m wrong, then I want to hear it. I assume 
that the equity corporation is going to get the land at fair market 
value. They don’t, then your going to have any number of 
investors, and that a great deal. I assume that somewhere between 
5 and 8 per cent is the minimum the investors are going to ask 
for. Anything less than that, they just won’t buy it. Right? At that 
rate of going, there is nothing left for the farmer who leases the 
land back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just figured out an example that would be 
just . . . if you take where your family farms, let me describe to 
you the situation that we face. What happened is, young people 
in your family or in mine or other that were farming that kind of 
land, which is pretty fair farm land, they paid $800 an acre. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A thousand dollars an acre.

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Or a $1,000, but let’s just take $800 an 
acre, for an example, and they were borrowing money at 8 per 
cent. That mean they had to make payments of $64 an acre. Now 
what happened? Interest rates went to 16 per cent. At 16 per cent 
on $800 an acre, they had to pay $128 an acre. They couldn’t 
make the payments. Now what’s happened to the value of land? 
It’s gone all the way down to $400 an acre because you just cut 
a deal or, you know, you just did a thing at 400. At $400 an acre, 
if you could re-evaluate at that at 8 per cent, it’s $32 an acre. 
They’re saving themselves $96 an acre in cash flow. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s voodoo economics. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, no. You just told me that they bought 
even as high as $1,000 an acre. Right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — They paid more than that for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well sometimes even more than that, but 
it’s only worth four now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That land that they were selling at . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes well, you’ve just made my point, Mr. 
Chairman. Please. They paid $1,000 or 1,200 an acre . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’d just like to know what it takes to get a 
degree in economics from Ohio state. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 
members to make their comments from their feet. It’s very 
difficult for Hansard to record the comments back and forth 
across the floor and the question. If the members ask the 
questions from their feet and answer them from their feet, it can 
be recorded. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know the hon. 
member is interested in finding a way to help farmers, or at least 
I’ll assume that. His family has been involved in it. 
 
Now I’ll just say to the hon. member, he says today that land in 
his area north of Moose Jaw is selling for $400 an acre. Well I 
just make the point to the hon. member, that land — and he agrees 
— sold for at least $800 an acre, and in some cases probably as 
high as $1,200 an acre. 
 
If we assume a young person got into that situation, at 8 per cent 
money — let’s just say at $800 an acre at 8 per cent money they 
were paying $64 an acre in interest. That was it. and they said, I 
can handle that because we got prices of $7 wheat and some other 
things. But what happened? Interest rates went to 16 per cent and 
more, therefore his payments on $800 an acre land go up to $128 
an acre. The bank realizes, and the farmer realizes, it’s not in the 
cards, I can’t make it, so they start to foreclose on them and they 
got problems. 
 
What I’m saying to you is if it’s worth $400 today on the market 
and they can both cut a deal, he can bring his 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1027 
 

payments down from $128 an acre down to $32 an acre at 400, 
save himself $96 an acre, and both of them have an equity 
position in it. 
 
Now why would you deny us the chance to go help a young 
person? If you agree and I agree you have to throw it in at today’s 
market value, that’s it. And you’ve got to have a minimum return, 
something that’s reasonable, and then you base his payments on 
some sort of market basket that’s in there. So he’s down to paying 
$32 an acre as opposed to 128, which is tremendous saving for 
him, and he can buy it. And if he makes . . . say he made 50 bucks 
an acre as a profit, he can put that back into equity at $400, not 
at $800. He can buy back much of the land. And if that land 
improves over time, obviously the person that has an equity 
position in it improves their position as well. 
 
Now I ask the hon. member, if that scenario is possible, that we 
could get these kinds of write downs, the farmers controlling it 
— nobody can own the land but farmer, bona fide Saskatchewan 
farmers, nobody else. But the people can appreciate the value of 
it or receive the value as it moves, as well as a return on their 
investment that is minimum, why would he not allow us to 
proceed? It would help so many young farmers. I mean, so many 
would like to have another crack to see the interest rate go from 
16 down to 8; those land values go from $800 down to 4. 
 
I mean, just taking his numbers in his community, he knows the 
numbers are accurate. Why wouldn’t you want them to be able 
to do that because financial institutions will buy it. And they’ve 
told me. Our research says that investors would invest in it. Even 
if you didn’t have investors, just let them do it. Let them cut a 
deal like that and share in the equity and have local associations 
set them up. It would be an opportunity for something that is 
desperately needed. 
 
Let me put it another way. If your only solution is that the 
government has to go in there and provide low interest loans, at 
$800 an acre land in that country, or 900 or 1,000 or 1,200 that 
they paid for it, they’ll never make it. And you know that. It’s got 
to be written down and you’ve got to start over, and you know 
that as well as I do, because if you say you can’t make it at $32, 
what do you say to the guy that’s trying to make payments on 
120 acres? And that’s what they’re doing, because it’s 16 per cent 
interest rates on $800 land or more. What do you say to him? 
You’ve got to give him an alternative. 
 
It isn’t just the government. I mean, what are we going to do? If 
we give him low interest loan, he still can’t make it. You’ve got 
to replace the debt with equity. And you can do it fairly, and you 
and I can design the laws to say only bona fide farmers will ever 
own that land, but give investors a chance to help him out. All 
you want then is a return; they don’t need to own the dirt, they 
just want a return. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I sincerely asked the hon. member not to 
rule this out if it would be a possibility to have young farmers get 
out from under that debt load. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A simple

question to the minister. Mr. Premier, can you tell me which 
government department it is that is responsible for the policies 
and regulations related to aerial applications of farm chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The licensing of chemicals is done 
federally by the Departments of Health and Agriculture, and they 
are reviewing them now. In the case that’s near Moose Jaw with 
respect to Reglone, I believe, and Tuxford and what not, the latest 
information I have is that they are, I would say — I’m not quite 
sure what the right words would be — but close to licensing 
something like that for field peas and lentils and other 
commodities. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well I understand that, Mr. Minister, but my 
question was not what agency or department of the provincial 
government deals with policies having to do with the approval, 
but what I’m asking specifically is: which government 
department deals with policies and regulations regarding the 
application, the aerial application, of farm chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The Department of Agriculture licenses 
aerial applicators, so they apply to us for their licence. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that it is 
the Department of Agriculture that provides regulations and 
policies for the applications, for the aerial application of the 
chemicals? 
 
The reason I ask the question is because it seems difficult to 
determine what the regulations and policies are regarding 
application of these chemicals. And as I’ve searched, I’ve not 
been able to determine which department is responsible for this. 
 
Are you saying, then, that there are policies and regulations 
regarding the application of chemicals and that those are the 
responsibility of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well there’s a combination of things. 
Individuals apply to us for their licence, and then once they’ve 
received their licence, they’re allowed to spray chemicals. 
 
When they spray chemicals, they must follow the regulations on 
the directions of that particular chemical and are obliged to do 
that. If they don’t follow those, then we can yank their licence 
and pull it, because when we license the chemical, or the feds do, 
they say this is what you have to do. 
 
So there’s two points, I guess. One, we license the individuals, 
and then there’s specific laws with respect to the chemicals. They 
have to work in tandem. If they don’t follow them, then we can 
obviously pull their licence. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Then if I’m understanding, again this correctly, 
Mr. Minister, other than the description for application that’s on 
the chemicals themselves, the province has no regulations that 
are required to be followed by aerial applicators. I just wanted to 
clarify that point because I think that’s what you just said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we have . . .  
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1028 
 

evidently we have a training course, or program where 
applicators or potential people who would have licences can take 
the training thing, and they’re taught how to spray; they’re taught 
how to avoid particular circumstances, obviously where there’s 
population densities, and how to deal with various kinds of 
weather circumstances that would come up when they’re 
spraying — a series of things. We don’t have the training manual 
here, but if the hon. member would like more detail, I’m sure we 
could dig up what they learn at the general course. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, I would appreciate that, Mr. Minister, if you 
wouldn’t mind sending that across. I guess I come back to the 
original point here though, and if I’m understanding what you’re 
saying correctly, then there are no regulations as such, other than 
that aerial applicators are supposed to take a course —although 
it appears, from what you’re saying, they don’t have to take the 
course — and they’re supposed to make the aerial applications 
of the chemicals according to the directions on the chemicals. 
And if they don’t do that, then the only consequence is that you 
may — it would be the Department of Agriculture — may 
withdraw their licence. 
 
If I’m understanding what you’re saying correctly, in terms of 
protection then for communities in rural Saskatchewan, or 
homesteads for that matter around the area that’s being sprayed, 
is virtually negligible, and the only risk that any incorrect 
application holds for the applicator is the withdrawal of the 
licence. 
 
Is it, as a matter of fact, the practice of your department, Mr. 
Minister? Has anyone ever had their applicator’s licence 
withdrawn or rejected for improper application of aerial spray? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, they have. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And is it correct, then, as well, Mr. Minister, that 
there is no other mechanism for regulating the application of 
these sprays and no mechanism for appeal by either homesteads 
or communities that may be affected by misapplication of the 
chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, there are the normal legal 
remedies that are available to the general public, and if somebody 
has, for example, suffered some tree damage or something else, 
then I am sure that they could see the normal legal recourse, and 
many do. 
 
If there is a problem with particular people who are not following 
rules and regulations, we have pulled licences. So that there is a 
combination of things, legal recourse, and we watch it, and have 
pulled licences in the past, and will probably in the future. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, is it your view that in the interest of 
safety for rural communities and inhabitants of farmsteads that, 
as a matter of fact, it would be wise to consider the introduction 
of some regulations? Or is it your view that the safety concerns 
are really quite okay as they are now? 
 
I guess basically I’m asking if your department is planning

to look at this policy area, to formulate some regulations, because 
I’ve heard you say — when you’ve referred to regulations — 
only the directions on the can, that’s as far as the regulations go. 
Is it your view that this is an area that requires some further 
attention in policy and regulation development, or are you 
basically satisfied with it as it exists today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are constantly 
examining them, and obviously compare them to other 
jurisdictions across the country. People from time to time come 
up with better ideas and new solutions and new safety measures, 
so I would think that it is something that is an ongoing process. 
You have new chemicals that are licensed, you have new kinds 
of equipment, new kinds of airplanes, I can say, and new kinds 
of applicators. There are various kinds of things that are under 
review all the time. The restrictions on the applicators are much 
higher than they are in many other industries. And I would think, 
and we could confirm it, that ours are as tough or as tight as any 
across the country because of the vast agricultural area that we 
have here, and obviously we have to deal with hundreds, if not 
thousands. 
 
So yes, it’s monitored. Chemicals come in, the new technology 
comes in. As they change, we’re obviously looking at it and 
examining it and would receive suggestions that you or others 
might have with respect to how it might be modified in the future. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I would be happy to do that, Mr. Minister. 
 
One final question. In a letter dated September 18 of last year, 
the Minister of the Environment, in response to a concern that I 
raised directly related to the Tuxford scenario last summer, said 
to me that: 
 

Saskatchewan Agriculture is contemplating approaching 
the Saskatchewan aerial applicators association to organize 
training seminars on Reglone application for aerial 
applicators to be held this coming winter. 

 
And I gather that’s the program you referred to about 10 minutes 
ago, Mr. Minister. could you please advise me as to where and 
when those training seminars were held? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I was just given this note that our 
department has introduced mandatory training and licensing 
programs for all commercial pesticide applicators. Provincial 
pesticide regulations are being amended so that all applicators 
must take a refresher course every three years to address the 
Reglone drift problem. The manufacturer of Reglone — 
Chipman — is sponsoring a seminar, and did on March 22, 1988, 
for all prairie aerial applicators. Farmers are advised that 
applicators who have attended this course will have a stronger 
knowledge of the application procedure. 
 
I suppose if there have been other training places, and I’m not 
sure where this one was — it might have been Moose Jaw — we 
can provide that to the hon. member. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1029 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we’ve 
been talking about the problems of family farms and about the 
real problems they’re having dealing with their bank debt, with 
the exception of the last few minutes when the member for 
Moose Jaw North was talking about pesticides. But other than 
that today has been discussing the real financial matters of the 
family farm, primarily talking about land costs. 
 
But I want to switch for a little while to machinery and labour 
costs, because I think it’s a fairly significant component of the 
family farm debt problem. And I’m wondering if you are 
interested in a plan that can save the average Saskatchewan 
farmer about $18,000 a year in interest payments alone, and if 
you are, then I’m more than happy to pursue and put forward this 
idea. 
 
What I’m going to be talking about is machinery co-ops, and I 
guess before I get into the machinery and the labour and the 
livestock facilities and livestock labour co-operatives, I want to 
simply ask: do you agree? Do you think that co-operatives  offer 
some solution, Mr. Premier? Do you see them offering some 
hope at reducing costs for farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, in some cases the 
co-operatives have done really well in reducing costs. In some 
cases they have not done well. We would obviously support local 
people who wanted to establish a co-op to reduce their costs. 
 
We have found machinery companies, for example, have gone 
broke and they’re closing up. I think across North America — 
Canada and the United States, there’s a record decline in 
machinery companies. They’re amalgamating; there’s just no 
money in it, and whether that’s their fault or the market’s fault or 
whatever, obviously it’s been extremely difficult. And you’ll find 
the machinery manufacturers here locally — some have done 
really well and others have really hurt, co-op or otherwise. So in 
some cases it’s fine and some cases it isn’t. As we found out 
earlier today, some of the local co-ops are charging their 
members twenty-three and a half per cent interest just to survive. 
Now that’s pretty tough, but some have to do it. 
 
So we notice that there have been hundreds of new co-ops set up 
in Saskatchewan on an annual basis and we facilitate that. Yes, 
that’s true — on an annual basis. And I’ll get you the numbers 
specifically, but it’s the case, and so if you want co-ops to set up, 
fair enough; we’ll help them be set up to cut the costs if possible. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Premier, it’s not hundreds of co-ops set 
up annually. No, it is not. We’ll be giving you the numbers very 
shortly. We just went through co-ops’ estimates a very short 
number of days ago. Seventy-five co-ops last year sticks in my 
mind; I will be confirming the number, and the year before that 
it was something out marginally less than that. 
 
I’m not talking about co-op implements, Mr. Premier. I’m talking 
about farm machinery co-ops where you get a group of farmers 
together, and instead of having five farmers going out and each 
of them investing $80,000 in a combine where you have a 
$400,000 investment, you

instead get five farmers go together and buy either one slightly 
bigger than $80,000 combine, or buy two $80,000 combines. But 
in any case, the savings is 3 out of $5 — it would be the minimal 
savings there. 
 
You can do the same thing with tractors, where farmers are . . . 
Standard equipment, fairly much so now, is for farmers to have 
a four-wheel drive tractor, and quite frankly that four-wheel drive 
tractor oftentimes sits in the yard just sitting there; meanwhile the 
farmers are making the payments on their tractors — at least most 
of them are, I hope — but they’re always being charged interest 
on this equipment. 
 
And if there is potential to reduce a farmer’s investment from 
$200,000 to something in the order of $50,000 for a total 
investment in machinery, I would think that you should be very 
interested in promoting that. Which leads to the simple question: 
you said, we’re interested in supporting people wanting to form 
co-ops. I ask you, Mr. Premier: how do you go about supporting 
those people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, farmers can co-operate now 
and it . . . You said it was your suggestion; maybe you could 
describe to me how we . . . if this is a new mechanism, certainly 
if you want to set up a co-op, they can do it. Our family operates 
a machinery basis like that. We share the machinery, and we’ve 
got four families that are involved, and we’ll buy one tractor or 
one combine and share in it. I mean, people do it all the time. So 
it’s not really a novel idea. 
 
They even find that if one farmer has an air seeder and the other 
has a drill and somebody has something else and they are doing 
different kinds of land, one guy will use his drill on this area and 
someone will use his air seeder and somebody will use a discer 
or some stubble that they want cut out in one operation. And they 
do that back and forth. Now if you want to set up formal co-ops 
to do this, they could do it. 
 
I wouldn’t frankly see the benefit of setting it up in a structure 
that was so formal unless you could describe the benefit of that. 
They do it all the time. Communities do it. I mean, they recognize 
that that can be the benefit. Families certainly do it. I know that’s 
exactly how our family operates, because each of us aren’t going 
to buy a four-wheel drive outfit or a combine or whatever it may 
be. 
 
Mr. Trew: — You have the basis idea of what you are describing 
goes on in your family operation, Mr. Minister. 
 
The reason that it should be formally set up or promoted as such 
is a great number of farmers naturally pride themselves in their 
independence, in their making all of the decisions themselves. I 
don’t see a co-op changing that, but I do see a need for formal 
mechanism so that when you have, for instance, three farmers 
sharing a combine, they know before harvest time what order the 
combines goes in. Do you all of your fields, for instance, and then 
move in and do all of mine, and then all of someone else’s? Or 
do we do it one at a time, one of your fields, one of mine, and 
then the next partner’s? 
 
There are some tax ramifications in machinery co-ops as 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1030 
 

well, and it is advantageous to be set up that way. 
 
I realize that you find it rather humorous that, you know, farmers 
could save some money, but we’re dealing here . . . You have got 
a dog and pony show, talking about equity financing. You don’t 
think that’s very funny; the farmers don’t think it’s very funny 
either. They think it’s a horrendous, a horrendous program. 
 
I’m putting forward a proposal to you that you should be putting 
some backbone into. You have potential to save many thousands 
of dollars for farmers who are interested in it, and I’m just 
suggesting to you that instead of doing away with the department 
of co-ops, as your administration has, you should be putting some 
teeth into it. You should be having more people out there talking 
with farmers, and people that are actively engaged in farming, 
helping them to save money. That’s what you should be doing. 
That’s what I’m proposing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll be as generous as I can 
under the circumstances, but if this a typical plan by the NDP to 
help the farmer . . . I mean this sounds to me like it’s classic stuff 
where you’re going to now design, by law, regulations for a local 
co-op, and in that law they’ll say that my farm comes first, and 
another farm comes second, and this is the way it’ll be, and then 
by law it’s there. And as it happens this farm . . . I’m supposed 
to be firs, and he gets hailed out, or this one isn’t ripe, but you 
got to farm it that way anyway, and you got to cut his first, and 
you got to combine it first, and them that one because the law 
says it; because the bureaucrats in Regina, under this new 
socialist plan, have figured out how to do it. 
 
I mean, no wonder, not much wonder that farmers are looking 
and saying, this is it. This is the new wave in agriculture under 
the NDP. I mean, I can’t leave you alone on this one. I mean, if 
you’re serious, if you’re serious, standing here in this legislature, 
when people are looking at debt . . . And we’ve just been through 
it, buying land at $1,000 or $1,200 an acre, and you’re sitting 
here designing a new co-op legislation that’s going to say, if you 
just had a plan where your crop could be first, and your crop 
could be second and we’d put it in the legislation, and we could 
have this under the new co-operative movement and this is really 
going to be something special. I mean, you have . . . Honestly, 
you are serious about this. You’re telling me this is going to be 
the answer to save the family farm if you could just legislate, 
under the new co-op department, how you’re going to have, in 
law, my farm comes before your farm and it comes before 
another one and another one, regardless what Mother Nature 
said, regardless of what crop you’re growing. I mean, you should 
have heard yourself. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, all I can say is that, I mean, this is classic, 
this is classic, and knowing that the hon. member, this is classic, 
it’s classic socialist dream world. I mean, this is the big plan. We 
could just farm this from the centre and say, your farm will be 
this way. This sounds like the commune farms in the Soviet 
Union, for Heaven’s sakes. This is the big farm plan. And your 
field . . . They’ve been trying to get out from under that for 100 
years. 
 
This is the way it will . . . You’re first, you’re second,

you’re third, and you’re fourth, and it doesn’t matter whether this 
one isn’t ripe or not, we’ll cut it green; we’ll cut it. It doesn’t 
matter if this one’s hailed out, we’ll run over the land anyway. It 
doesn’t matter. I mean, that’s why farmers want their own farm, 
not so that you can have somebody like you who would sit in 
here and say, the legislation says that you’ve got to go first, and 
this year I go second. And then next year it flips regardless of 
what happens in the weather or the crop or the combine, or next 
you’d say, well we’ll go a round around yours, and then next day 
we’ll go round around mine, the next day a round around 
somebody else’s. Because we got 12 guys in the co-op, we’ll 
have a round around each of you 12 days in a row. 
 
You tell me, you tell me how this country would have been 
developed under a plan that you just described. You tell me how 
we would have been as productive as we are and made massive 
productivity changes when there’s been 67 crop failures in the 
Soviet Union just doing exactly what you’ve described. That’s 
the pathetic nature of what you’re into. You’re saying, we will 
plant it here in the middle, and because we call it a co-op, you 
will all do just as we say and productivity will go through the 
roof. I mean, you have got to be kidding us. That is so naive. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, listen, I finally got to him because he’s 
finally got a bit of a lesson about agriculture. You’re going to 
listen to this, my friend. You know so little about agriculture. 
You could make progress probably if you worked for the Soviet 
Union in telling them how to increase productivity. They’re even 
behind you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell you what . . . His description of agriculture 
and how he would solve their problems is going out across the 
land. He can bet on it. It’s the next plan; it’s the next wave. This 
is how you’re going to do it. You stand there and you say, we’ll 
join a co-op, we’ll put 100 of you in a co-op. And we’ll go to 
your land first and your land second, regardless of the conditions 
— that’s classic commune farming. It’s classic commune 
farming, and that’s why the Soviet Union imports food day after 
day — 67 crop failures in a row because some dream-boat 
bureaucrat figured out that if we just had it co-operated like this, 
it would work. Well there’s a co-ops, but they don’t operate the 
way you think it. You’re in some philosophical dream world that 
is still 100 years behind. 
 
I’m saying to you, the hon. member, if that is your leader’s new 
plan . . . this is the new Leader of the NDP Party’s plan for 
agriculture. We’ve just had it described here in detail. We’re 
going to have co-ops that tell you when to harvest, whose you’re 
going to harvest, how fast you can get into it. If you can go 
around and around this guy’s field in one day, and around and 
around this guy’s the next, and if there’s 100 of you, we’ll go to 
100 different farms and then we’ll go back and do it all over 
again. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only say the hon. member, if this is 
your leader’s new plan for agriculture, I wouldn’t bet on you 
doing too well in rural Saskatchewan, or indeed rural Canada, in 
the next 100 years in agriculture in this province. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1031 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Names on Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

By leave of the Assembly, that the name of Hopfner be 
substituted for that of Mr. Saxinger on the list of members 
comprising the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Names on Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Maple Creek, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the name of Mr. Saxinger be substituted for that of Mr. 
Hopfner on the list of members comprising the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 


