


















































April 12, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 12, 1988 
 
 

525 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
introduce some guests if possible. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this evening to introduce to you and all members of 
this Assembly, in your gallery, 43 Cubs and Scouts from the 
No. 86 Cub and Scout pack which meets at Bud MacNeill 
School in Lakewood. With them are Ed Seal — a good friend of 
mine, Ed Seal — Adrian Mohle, Donald Euston, Charles Webb, 
Laverne Moskal, Mike Partington, and Murray Aasen. 
 
So I welcome all of you to this Assembly this evening and I 
hope that you enjoy the visit here. I look forward to meeting 
with you after 7:30 has passed for some pictures and some 
refreshments. And I’d be happy to answer any questions that 
you may have at that time. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming all of 
these fine people from Regina North West to this Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 2 — Handling of Farm Production Loan 
Program 

 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the evening 
supper break, I was speaking on a resolution put forward by the 
member from Humboldt, a resolution that condemned the 
government for their handling of the farm production loan 
program and how the changes to that had disappointed and, in 
some cases, devastated farmers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t want to take much more of the House’s time this 
evening, but I do want to say that I would be remiss if we didn’t 
offer some alternatives to what could be done in terms of 
providing some constructive criticism to the government and 
would hope, in some cases, they may in fact listen and explore 
some options other than what they’ve done today. 
 
The programs to date that have been viewed as helpful to the 
farming population of Saskatchewan have to a large extent been 
band-aid programs with substantial amounts of money attached 
to them. And as I’ve said before, earlier today, they have been 
appreciated by rural Saskatchewan, by farmers, and it’s been a 
thrust in our economy by having these infusions of cash. But 
when you look at the couple of billion dollars that has been put 
out from the federal government in terms of deficiency 
payments, and you look at the 1.1 or $1.2 billion that was put 
out in farm production loans, it hasn’t really done anything to 
solve the problems of agriculture in  

Saskatchewan or, in fact, in western Canada.  
 
And so I think that we have to look at other options besides just 
throwing out large sums of cash, even though they may be 
necessary, but we have to look at other options than throwing 
out large sums of cash because they certainly aren’t solving the 
problems. And when the farm production loan first came out, 
the production loan was based on very serious economic 
pressures on farmers. Those problems are even worse now, and 
it seems to us that the government has some obligation to 
looking at restructuring of debt. 
 
All farmers acknowledge, that have debt — the 70 per cent or 
so, 75 per cent of farmers that have significant debt in the 
province of Saskatchewan — they acknowledge that debt has to 
be repaid. But in many, many cases they can’t handle the huge 
debt burden that’s there, and I think the government has a real 
obligation to look at some restructuring scheme for the debt 
whereby possibly a portion of the debt could be set aside for 
payment at a later date. And even if they were to make some 
overtures or to suggest some solutions to their federal 
counterparts, I think that would be a constructive step forward 
in terms of the agricultural problems in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the members opposite was saying something about 
initial prices going up, and that’s the next thing that I would 
want the government to explore, that’s some type of targeting of 
price for farm commodities. And by targeting I would mean that 
if your initial price on number one wheat today was $2.50, the 
government should target a price of say, $4.50, or in that 
ballpark somewhere. I’m not suggesting the actual figure 
because the agricultural economists can work that out, but as 
the initial price moves up, the amount that would be paid in 
addition, by either the provincial or federal level of government, 
would decrease so that if you hit the target number, there would 
be no pay-out from the government. But any time that it’s under 
the target price, there should be a pay-out from government 
based on that productivity. And the caps certainly shouldn’t be 
in the hundreds of thousands of dollars area where we feel that 
the cap should more likely be in the area of somewhere between 
30 to $50,000 as a cap on that type of target pricing. 
 
The other thing that I think that the government really has to 
look at is some kind of intergenerational family farm transfer 
program. The answer that the government seems to be putting 
out is equity financing of farm land, and I see this as a sell out 
of the family farm to interests that are not looking at a farming 
operation, but they’re interests that look at the speculation in 
land prices, hoping at some point that land prices would go up 
so that they can get a return on their investment, because not 
many people today would invest in a farming operation with 
any kind of equity financing if they were just looking at the 
immediate return that one would get from investing in a 
farming operation today. So those are some things that we put 
out and challenge the government address. We put them out 
very seriously in light of the agricultural crisis in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to close by thanking members opposite for  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

526 
 
 

their indulgence this afternoon and this evening. And I thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to rise in this debate on 
the resolution by the member from Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I stand on this side of the House and speak in opposition to 
the motion that’s before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve been hearing this afternoon and part 
of this evening, other than the last couple of remarks from the 
member from The Battlefords, is basically a total no-type 
knowledge, no comprehension of the program that was set 
before the agricultural community in Saskatchewan. 
 
What I’m meaning to say, Mr. Speaker, is basically the 
production loan was just that, a production loan, not a 
production give-away. When the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan here decided that this was a good thing for them, 
that they took these dollars that the government provided — 
$1.2 billion worth of funds — and they took that to put into 
their operations, they took it as a loan. They took it; they took 
those funds to put together an operation that they saw fit for 
seeding in 1986. 
 
But I want to back up a little bit, Mr. Speaker, because I’m kind 
of a little ahead of myself on where I want to come from in 
regarding this production loan. This production loan was and 
came from a necessity of putting funds into the farmers’ 
pockets. And why, Mr. Speaker? Why, you may ask. Well I’ll 
tell you why. 
 
Saskatchewan had not been lucky as far as the climatic 
conditions were. And I’ll take you back into 19 . . . and I’m 
talking financial climatic conditions as well as weather climatic 
conditions. In 1981 under the NDP government, interest rates 
sky-rocketed to 24 and 25 per cent in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did they do anything about it? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And, Mr. Speaker, a colleague of mine asked 
me if they did anything about it. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
no. The NDP turned their backs on the farming community in 
this province. They said no, we are not going to help. 
 
Twenty-four and 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker, was the start of the 
dilemma and the downfall of a lot of the farmers that we’re 
dealing with here today, where they had payments that, on an 
overnight . . . almost an overnight reaction from the lending 
institutions had doubled, and more than doubled in some cases. 
Interest rates to that degree on a minimal, small or low interest 
rate . . . would have almost literally doubled or more their 
payments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that and the downfall in the grain prices 
in the market-place was the tremendous strain on the back hip 
national pocket of the farmer. They did not no longer have that 
cash to be able to continue on with their everyday input costs 
for their farms. And they cried out to the NDP government, and 
I remember it very well as a candidate running in my first 
election back in 1982. I remember it very well in my 
constituency of Cut  

Knife-Lloydminster, where farmers were literally begging that 
government of that day, the NDP government of that day, to 
help them — and they did not. They said there is no answer 
other than the fact of the land bank answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I say land bank, that was their answer. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to give you some idea of what the security and 
what they’re talking about in regarding the loan securities on 
the production loan program versus the land bank securities of 
the NDP day. Under the security of the land bank, the NDP 
with land bank took it even further than our security that they 
have been condemning here in the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP were government, the government 
owned the land under land bank and everything on it, including 
the house, grain bins, equipment, vehicle sheds — just literally 
everything, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t demand a security 
agreement because they already owned everything and didn’t 
need it. But they didn’t tell the farmers that, because when the 
farmers went to buy back that land, Mr. Speaker, when they 
went to operate as a normal operation, they then found out that 
they could no longer do that because they did not have those 
types of securities. 
 
And we all know in our everyday life, whether we want to buy 
a car or a house or anything else, and we go to a lending 
institution, they want some sorts of security. And there is 
nothing wrong with that because I think every decent man, 
woman, and child in this province, be it said, when they do 
purchase something and they do take out a loan or something 
like that, they rightfully and in their own rights expect to pay 
that back. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP have been accusing this 
administration of taking security on all the farmers and 
everything they have, and that they cannot no longer go to the 
lending institutions to get backing to continue to operate. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, that is not accurate. The security agreement . . . 
This is what the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Riversdale says, along with the member from Humboldt, the 
agricultural critic. They said, quote: 
 

The security agreement (this is of the production loan 
program) is so wide-ranging that it threatens to make it 
much more difficult for farmers to get their annual 
operating line of credit from their local bank or credit 
union since the government now holds first claim to all of 
their personal property. 

 
That is a quote from the member from Riversdale and the 
member from Humboldt. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s false; it’s totally incorrect. The 
Government of Saskatchewan stands second in line to the banks 
when making a claim in every case, and I repeat that, Mr. 
Speaker, second in line in every case. Even if the farmer is 
borrowing from a lender for the first time and has to sign a bank 
security agreement, the production loan program agreement will 
be second to that lender’s claim. 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

527 
 
 

 
Now if a bank, Mr. Speaker, says it can’t lend money to a 
farmer because the government won’t let it, then I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, the bank is wrong. We are second in line and we 
remain second in line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I was listening to the members 
opposite and I listened to them talk about this production loan 
program, and you know, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t one of those 
speakers over there that could keep on the topic of the 
production loan program. They were all over the map. They had 
to talk about free trade and everything else. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to. I intend to say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I’m proud of our Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture. I am proud of the fact that, Mr. Speaker, our 
Premier is the man that has taken agriculture to the utmost that 
it could ever be taken to. Because for . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Because, Mr. Speaker, it has never been in 
the history of governments, in this province or indeed all across 
this country, where agriculture has ever been deemed at such a 
high priority as it is today. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
this is not the first time agriculture has ever had any type of 
downfall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that it’s not us as members 
here . . . because I’ll tell you, my colleagues on the government 
side of the House here, they are definitely made up . . . a large 
majority of them are actual farmers, come from the farm. I look 
across the way in the NDP opposition, and, Mr. Speaker, I do 
not see a real farmer across the floor of this legislature. I see 
people pretending to be farmers. I see people pretending to 
understand what agriculture is about. But, Mr. Speaker, I call 
them a drug store farmer. I’ll call them an urban cowboy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say — and I’m not saying that for a 
laugh or anything because when I hear them stand in this House 
and try and talk about agriculture, Mr. Speaker, it’s a joke, it’s a 
real joke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the production loan program I 
just want to indicate to you that when we asked the farm groups 
across this province how we could best handle this — because 
when we put it out on a three-year program, and we said well 
okay, we’ll collect a third one year and next third the next year 
and the last third the third year and everything is clear. 
 
Well the dilemma wasn’t over, because with the grasshoppers 
and the two . . . Well going back to the high interest rates of the 
NDP in 1981 when they wouldn’t do anything, and then the 
grasshoppers and the two-year drought — and we may be still 
looking at a drought this year — Mr. Speaker, we did not turn 
our backs on the farming community. We said to the farming 
community, we will give you a break again. 
 
We asked them to pay an interest for the fourth year, which they 
did, and they were happy to do that. And now, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re saying, well here are some more options for you. We’re 
not saying you have to do it. We’re not saying you have to take 
the option. We’re saying you  

can stay in the old program or you can take the new program. 
It’s a free-wheeling deal for them. Then can decide what they 
want to do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, like I said, each and every farmer that took 
that loan want to repay it. They want to be able to say that they 
know how to repay and live up to their commitments. Not like 
the NDP that want total moratorium on everything in this 
province — everything in agriculture. Now there is the 
question, Mr. Speaker, as to where we could get into a real jam, 
because if we were to put total moratorium on agricultural debt 
in this province, the farmers out there in Saskatchewan know 
that the lending institutes would pull right out. They wouldn’t 
lend dollars to the farming community. The farmers might as 
well not walk into the bank. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we went and asked whether this would 
be, maybe . . . asked for some ideas, these are the kinds of ideas 
we got from farm groups. And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 
to you that one particular group — if I may — the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association on February 22, 
1988, made a news release, Mr. Speaker. It was a news release 
— it’s not a government news release; it’s a stock growers news 
release. And what did it say, Mr. Speaker? It says: 
 

Contrary to various other organizations and parties in 
Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association commends our provincial government for 
their plans for repayment of the $25 per acre production 
loan. The production loan has two repayment options. The 
first is a repayment schedule up to three years at 6 per cent 
interest. The second plan has a repayment schedule for up 
to 10 years, averaging 8 per cent interest with limited 
security required (limited security required). The second 
option allows the borrower to use . . . to cash over the next 
10 years. 
 
The Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association has had 
assurances from the financial institutions that the 
production loan will not interfere with regular operating 
loans from the lenders. 

 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, they too went out and asked the 
lending institutions whether it would interfere with normal 
operations and, Mr. Speaker, members opposite today said they 
would. Well, the stock growers . . . Are they calling the stock 
growers a word that we should not use in this legislature? I say 
not, Mr. Speaker, because if they did they’d have to answer to a 
lot of farmers and ranchers across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, it went on to state, the Stock 
Growers Association went on to say, “scare tactics used to rally 
an already nervous agricultural industry are unfounded.” And 
that is exactly what the members opposite are trying to do, Mr. 
Speaker. And they go on to say: 
 

A great deal of havoc and unnecessary work has been 
created for the government, which we could have put to 
better use in solving the real  

  



 
April 12, 1988 

528 
 
 

agricultural problems. 
 

You see, Mr. Speaker, they understand the dilemma; they 
understand what government is trying to do for the agricultural 
sector. 
 
Here it is again, and I go on to say, from the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers, Bill East, president of the Saskatchewan Stock 
Growers Association says, “this production loan was put into 
place to help farmers during an especially difficult time,” and it 
did. Everyone knew it was alone. Besides, where else could we 
borrow money at that low of an interest rate? The Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association strongly urges all sectors of 
agriculture to direct their energy into working towards solving 
the real problems in agriculture and refrain from the petty scare 
tactics that waste a great deal of everyone’s time and energy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you 
something. Members opposite, members of the NDP in this 
legislature, travel around the province — and I know that, Mr. 
Speaker, because they’ve been in my riding — trying to get, 
trying to get farmers to, for some strange reason or another, 
trying to get them mad at government. Well for what reason, 
Mr. Speaker? Well I’ll tell you. 
 
They say, well you should go and tell government that you 
shouldn’t have to pay that loan back, you see. Now they say this 
on the kitchen table. They tell their NDP friends that this is 
what they should do, you see, and well, Mr. Speaker, I want you 
. . . I want to assure you of one thing, that when I hear this on 
the coffee rows and stuff like that — and they shake their 
heads; they just can’t believe where these people are coming 
from. And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about production loan and 
about the sincerity the NDP have for helping farmers, well . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to read to you a letter that our Premier, 
my leader, the Minister of Agriculture of this province, had 
received from an individual. I will not read his name. But I 
would gladly, I would gladly show the letter to the Leader of 
the Opposition to remind him that he did receive this letter. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you give me a time . . . This is how the 
note was to my leader, the Premier. It was saying: 
 

I am sending you a copy of my letter to the member from 
Riversdale. (I won’t mention his name; we all know who 
he is.) I can’t listen to his statements on TV, how he is 
going to help the farmers. I had to tell him how I feel 
about his remarks. Signed (the farmer). 

 
Now this is the letter that he sent to the member from 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

Dear Mr. Leader of the Opposition: Recently I have heard 
on TV a statement which apparently you had made, that 
Devine and Mulroney are not doing enough to help the 
farmer. What are you doing to help the farmer, especially 
. . . 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
want to listen to this letter, I guess, and rightfully. I don’t think 
they really do, because of what it’s going to be saying. But it 
says: 
 

Mr. Leader of the Opposition: What are you going to do to 
help the farmers, especially when you are planning to win 
the next election, handling farm foreclosures and advising 
the banks to take away the lands from the farmers and 
their livelihood. 

 
(1930) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 
 

It must be a very good paying business for you because 
you handle some very petty foreclosures. (And it goes on 
to say) My foreclosure, which you are handling, is for 
approximately $100,000 when I am worth about $600,000. 
I paid about $60,000 in five years. This fall I paid the bank 
$8,000 and about three days after I received a notice of 
foreclosure from your office. 

 
The bank stated that you had advised them to serve this 
notice on me. 

 
The bank stated that the Leader of the Opposition had advised 
them to serve notice on this individual. 
 

Should you win the next election, (he goes on to say, this 
farmer goes on to say) God forbid, there would not be any 
farmers left in Saskatchewan. 

 
And he signed it with a “you hypocrite,” underlined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and that is just exactly the way the members 
opposite are when they speak on, when they speak on 
agriculture, their leader having to stand in this House and try 
and defend farmers when he’s closed, foreclosing on farmers. 
That is hypocritic, hypocritical and, Mr. Speaker, it should be 
unforgivable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say one thing, that if there is anything 
that the NDP have succeeded in it has been to split this province 
. . . it has been to split this province from urban to rural. And, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to, when it comes to the fact of 
instead of going out and explaining to the larger, to the larger 
sectors in larger urban centres, the dilemma that the farmer has 
got, what they do is they run to the urban centres and they say, 
well, the farmers are getting everything in the province from 
this government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s backfiring because the people in the 
larger urban centres realize that this government had to give out 
a program such as a production loan program. People in the 
larger urban centres realize today, as they might have forgot a 
little bit, but they are totally reminded today that the larger 
urban centres in this province do rely on agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my farmers tell me they want to repay that money. 
My farmers thank me and my Premier for the gut tactics that 
we’ve taken to back agriculture in this province. 



 
April 12, 1988 

529 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, when we’ve had grasshoppers 
and when we’ve had years of droughts and when we’ve had 
high interest rates, this government has never, ever turned its 
back on the farming community in this province. Production 
loan programs will continue to be here, similar to your 
programs to help our agricultural society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite this afternoon and 
this evening were talking, you didn’t have to listen too hard as 
they were trying to stumble and mumble around their little 
motion, trying to get onto the side of the agriculture in some 
sort of way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s fairly difficult for those members ever to think 
that they’re going to ever be able to pick up on an agricultural 
support in this province, because those farmers out there — 
even the farmers that went bankrupt, Mr. Speaker — they will 
never forgive the NDP, because it was their fault when the 
interest rates went sky-rocketing and their payments doubled 
and when they needed the help because of the commodity 
prices lowering, and stuff like that. 
 
And the NDP, the old faces of the NDP which I see along this 
front bench over here, the member from Riversdale as well as 
all the other old faces, they’re back . . . There’s a whole line-up 
in the front bench of the old faces. All the new guys are in the 
back, Mr. Speaker, and I hope they stay there because they’re 
even more radical than the front. 
 
And I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, is that we will . . . They 
cannot and do not have that ability to be able to fool the farmer 
and rancher out there in saying that I care for you, I really feel 
for you, because, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t got any idea of 
what it takes to operate a farm or a ranch out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard accusations of what the farmers need is 
hassle-free cash. Well I totally agree. And what better way in 
format do we have to put this $1.2 billion out — hassle-free. 
The farmers knew, the farmers knew that when they took this 
cash out, what the rules were. And they took it out in good 
faith. And there they are, they’re trying to say, well heck, they 
shouldn’t have to pay it back now. Well they want to pay it 
back. 
 
And they’ve talked about erosion of farm families and, you 
know, how terrible we are. Well, Mr. Speaker, along with that 
production loan program we brought in countless other 
programs for agriculture — countless. And each farmer across 
this province knows about those programs because they’ve all 
gotten a pamphlet. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I am trying to say to you is that we 
should not, we should not allow the NDP the opportunity to 
have those freedoms. As an individual elected member, I should 
not allow the NDP to have those freedoms in going around my 
riding spreading the untruths. 
 
So what I’m trying to get at is that with a motion . . . A  

member that could put a motion, a member from the NDP that 
could put a motion on the floor of this legislature and get up 
without feeling the least bit of remorse and try to tear and attack 
our Premier and this government for doing nothing for 
agriculture — Mr. Speaker, I think that is the lowest and the 
sleaziest thing of any individual that I’ve ever seen. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when I see the member from Humboldt, as the critic of 
Agriculture for the NDP, I shake my head when that member 
puts forth such a motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues really want to get in on this 
debate, as members from the NDP opposition have so invited, 
and I definitely want to take this opportunity to say to you that I 
thank you for recognizing me and I thank this Assembly for 
allowing me to speak on behalf of my constituents. 
 
And I’d just like to say, before closing off, that my constituents 
have indicated to me on several occasions, Mr. Speaker, that 
they do not wish our government to avoid the agricultural 
problems that they themselves are kind of foreseeing. And I’m 
talking about in the climatic area right now because, Mr. 
Speaker, right across this province, the way the moisture 
conditions are now, we could be into another severity. 
 
And we need a leader and a Premier and an agricultural minister 
that is at the top — and is at the top and can talk to the Prime 
Minister of this country, because, Mr. Speaker, as you and I 
well know, that it has shown in the past, and I know that it’s 
going to show in the future, that as long as we have a 
Progressive Conservative government here in Saskatchewan 
and one in Ottawa, that we are going to be looked after, our 
farm sector will be helped. It may not be the total answer, Mr. 
Speaker, because we all know that there’s moneys not just there 
in abundance, but at least we have tried to help, and I think that 
appreciation is being shown. 
 
And I would just like to say to the farming community out there 
and to the urban part of Saskatchewan, is that we have to work 
together to survive. We have to work together to bring this 
province to a strength that it’s never had for maybe many years 
since the Depression years. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
young people here in this province, and everybody from seniors 
to the young people, they are prepared to dig in and help out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that I want to thank you, and I will not 
be supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to 
do all of what I want to say in this debate at the present time 
because we have already had three speakers on this very 
important motion. I simply want to begin — and then I will 
adjourn — by saying that what has been talked about here this 
afternoon and this evening is an example of one of those very 
many betrayals that this government has perpetrated on the 
Saskatchewan public. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, it has done so on the farm families of 
Saskatchewan by first of all saying to them one thing, what they 
called, the Premier called, a hassle-free loan at 6 per cent for 
three years. And then when the farm  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

530 
 
 

situation became grimmer and Saskatchewan farm families 
began to hurt even more and when the foreclosures by the 
agricultural credit corporation and the Farm Credit Corporation 
and the banks began to grow in numbers so that now we have 
foreclosures every day throughout Saskatchewan, this 
government backtracked. This government surprised them 
without even talking to them and said, their interest rate will 
now increase from 6 per cent to 9 and three-quarters per cent. 
 
That is a betrayal, Mr. Speaker, of farm families when they 
have been at their very lowest economically and are barely able 
to survive. That is not the action of a responsible government; 
that is an action of a government who thinks that in mid term 
between elections, it can get away with everything, and then 
hopefully somehow recoup all of that as they get nearer to an 
election, and people will forget. 
 
People will not forget, Mr. Speaker. The people of this province 
have been burnt once too often by this government with the 
kind of irresponsible attitude that it takes in the position of the 
government benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And so, Mr. Speaker, because I have a 
lot more to say on another day when we debate private 
members’ motions again, I want at this time to adjourn the 
debate so that we can go to some of the other motions which 
other members of this House want to speak on. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The division bells having rung from 7:45 p.m. until 10 p.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It now being 10 o’clock p.m., and in 
accordance with Rule 3(3) and a precedent dated July 22, 1987, 
this House now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 o’clock 
p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	MOTIONS

