


















































April 4, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 4, 1988 
 

297 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
BUDGET DEBATE 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 
continue on with a short summary of what I had been speaking 
about just before 5 o’clock. And if you will recall, Mr. Speaker, 
I was chatting about the changes in the transportation system 
across the country of Canada that have came about over the 
time period of this administration. 
 
And I spoke specifically, Mr. Speaker, of three major 
significant changes in the transportation sector. And that was, 
number one, national re-regulation or deregulation, if you like, 
of the trucking industry. The second thing that I was speaking 
of, Mr. Speaker, was a national safety code for our trucking 
industry that will be uniform right across the whole country of 
Canada. And the third item, Mr. Speaker, was a national set of 
uniform weights and dimensions across the country. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the significance here is great. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I say the significance is not only great to the trucking 
industry or to the shippers, but the significance here is great to 
all of the public of Saskatchewan. And what we’re talking 
about, Mr. Speaker, is with a less regulated environment in the 
transport industry, you will see there is more competition in the 
trucking industry or the transportation sector, and as a result the 
costs of products to consumers across this country will be 
lessened. 
 
When you have a national safety code, Mr. Speaker, the safety 
of the travelling public across the entire country is greatly 
enhanced by a national safety code. And for the last few years 
we’ve been enhanced by a national safety code. And for the last 
few years we’ve been working very, very hard to come up with 
a national safety code, and it in itself is indeed a milestone in 
this country. 
 
The third one, Mr. Speaker, national uniform weights and 
dimensions, will provide further efficiencies to the transport 
sector so that consumers once again, in effect, will be paying 
less money for their goods. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I once again want to say how very, very 
proud I am to have played a major role, I feel, in the 
development of these three initiatives, to have been a major part 
of these changes during my period of office. And, Mr. Speaker, 
these changes that I speak of, I think, are the most significant 
changes that have taken place in the transport industry probably 
in many, many decades. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, I pay tribute to my colleagues all 
across this country and to the federal 
 

government for the co-operative way with which we have 
worked on these three proposals. And, Mr. Speaker, the public 
of Saskatchewan, I know, are very, very much in agreement 
with what we have done in these three sectors. 
 
Another positive contribution that Highways and Transportation 
is making, Mr. Speaker, involves the development of 
transportation technology. The economy of Saskatchewan 
depends upon our motor carrier industry providing essential 
services for a multitude of commodities. And as I mentioned 
earlier, we have unusually high transportation costs due to our 
geographic location here in Saskatchewan. This results, of 
course, in our highway system transporting . . . about 40 per 
cent of the commodities that we produce here in Saskatchewan 
are transported by or on our highway system. 
 
We have made great strides toward a less regulated, a more 
streamlined motor carrier industry in Saskatchewan and across 
the country. But we need to go one step further, and Mr. 
Speaker, this budget does provide for that. Highways and 
Transportation has been working closely with trailer 
manufacturers and carriers in the development of safer and 
more efficient transportation equipment under the department’s 
transportation technology development program. The objective 
of this program is to provide financial assistance to the 
development of transportation equipment that will achieve at 
least one and preferably all of the following: improve the 
highway system, extending the life of the highway system, and 
reducing direct transportation costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have conducted three major demonstration 
projects, and to date, the results of those demonstration projects 
have been very, very promising. One of these projects has 
enabled payloads to increase by 48 per cent and at the same 
time not increase any pavement damage. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very easy to see the economics of increasing a payload by 
almost 50 per cent and at the same time doing no more damage 
to the pavement structures that we have. And these kinds of 
results, Mr. Speaker, once again are translated into direct 
savings to the shippers and in turn direct savings to the 
consumers. And, Mr. Speaker, this indeed is significant to all 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
With these kinds of results, we are hopeful that in the near 
future a streamlined regulatory environment and a more 
efficient and a safe and less damaging equipment will be soon 
available in a bigger way than it is today. Just importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, we are taking an essential leadership role in 
developing and manufacturing this kind of technology right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, when you develop 
and when you manufacture these types of equipment, that is all 
a part in diversifying the economy. And I say with a great deal 
of pride that Highways and Transportation is playing their role 
in helping to diversify the economy in Saskatchewan. In terms 
of less regulation and the development of safer transportation 
equipment, I believe that this government has made a very firm 
commitment to safety. 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

298 
 

There are several other aspects of safety that must be reaffirmed 
and emphasized. And I am speaking now, Mr. Speaker, of the 
safety of the travelling public. During 1987 I am pleased to 
announce the traffic fatalities on our highway system decreased 
by 8.5 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Another area of concern, another area of 
safety that is of concern to this budget address, Mr. Speaker, is 
a program or a law — firstly a law — that you must slow to 60 
kilometres while passing our highway workers. In 1987 
Highways and Transportation conducted a major advertising 
campaign informing the travelling public of the dangers to 
highway workers if that speed limit is not followed. And I’m 
also pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, that during 1987 no 
highway workers were involved in serious accidents. A survey 
following that showed motorists are most definitely following 
the law. 
 
This campaign, Mr. Speaker, will definitely go ahead once 
again in 1988. And I hear the members of the opposition time 
and time again criticizing this government for its advertising 
policies. I cannot understand, Mr. Speaker, how members of the 
opposition could possibly criticize this administration for 
advertising — advertising that protects the lives of highway 
workers. Mr. Speaker, once again, I want to call on the 
travelling public in Saskatchewan to co-operate with this 
program to protect our highway workers, and I am very certain 
that the public will continue to follow this law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing along safety lines is the all-terrain 
vehicles Act that will be tabled shortly in this Saskatchewan 
legislature. This Bill respects the rights of the all-terrain vehicle 
operators, and at the same time, it provides the necessary 
protection that will ensure the safe and the enjoyable use of 
all-terrain vehicles. 
 
These new initiatives combined with existing programs will 
serve to keep safety at the forefront and they will aid in our 
objective of lowering accidents and decreasing traffic fatalities. 
This new legislation will help to ensure the safe and proper use 
of these vehicles, but, Mr. Speaker, the government cannot 
assume all of the responsibility. Operators and parents and 
brothers and sisters will all have to co-operate and assume a 
good deal of this responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, once again, I’d like to pay tribute to my 
transportation caucus who has worked long and hard in 
developing this legislation. They have consulted extensively 
with different groups throughout Saskatchewan, and the 
legislation that we will be bringing forward, I am sure will meet 
with the approval of the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I do hope that the members of the opposition will carefully 
review this legislation when it is brought before this Assembly. 
I do hope that they will offer their comments and their advice in 
a true and honest and compassionate fashion. And I do hope, 
Mr. Speaker, that members of the opposition will for once leave 
the politics aside and look closely at this Bill and help us to 
bring this 
 

Bill to the legislature and out to the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summation, this Highways and Transportation 
budget of 1987-1988, I believe, is an historic one in many, 
many respects. I am so very, very proud to stand here today and 
announce the $30 million enhanced highway rehabilitation 
program. This program will go a long, long ways to addressing 
our needs of our paved highway system and, Mr. Speaker, I do 
know that the people of Saskatchewan will meet this new 
program initiative with a great deal of enthusiasm. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, Highways 
and Transportation has undertaken these three initiatives that I 
have spoke earlier about, that are of national importance and of 
fundamental significance to the people of Saskatchewan. I’m 
just very, very pleased that I, in my career as a politician, am 
able to be here at a time when transportation is changing so 
very, very rapidly, and at a time when co-operation exists 
between our province and the other provinces in Canada and the 
federal government, to accomplish objectives like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other areas in the budget that I could 
speak on at length. The budget, I feel, is a very, very good 
budget for the people of Saskatchewan. I was out visiting with 
my constituents on the weekend, and I know, Mr. Speaker, that 
the budget was well-received by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I could talk, Mr. Speaker, for hours about the improvements to 
health care that we have made in this budget. Spending of $104 
million, increases have gone primarily to health and to 
education, and, Mr. Speaker, those are two very, very important 
subjects. I take a look at health care, Mr. Speaker, and I see the 
amount of moneys that are being expended in health care, some 
billion and a quarter dollars annually — more that $1,250 per 
man, woman, and child in this whole province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it upsets me to no end when I hear members of the 
opposition trying to scare the public in Saskatchewan that this 
administration is not spending the required amount on health 
care. And they say different things about health care, that we’re 
not funding it enough and that we’re doing this and we’re doing 
that. Mr. Speaker, never in the history of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, have the public in Saskatchewan been more protected 
with health care. 
 
Certainly it is a time for change, Mr. Speaker, and I was so 
pleased to hear the Minister of Health announce that there will 
be a task force that will be reviewing all of the priorities within 
health care. And, Mr. Speaker, when you are spending those 
kinds of dollars, when the health system is some 25 years old, I 
think that a review is probably quite warranted. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the public in Saskatchewan know full well that this 
government is committed, beyond a question of a doubt, to the 
health care of our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, I could speak at length, Mr. Speaker, 
about things that are in the budget, but I’d like to 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

299 
 

take just a minute or so and chat about some things that were 
noticeably absent from the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you go though that budget, I will guarantee you 
that you will not find in that budget any moneys dedicated to 
buying a potash mine. There wasn’t a dime we spent on buying 
potash mines in this budget, Mr. Speaker. You take a look at it 
further, Mr. Speaker, and you’ll not find a plug nickel there to 
buy uranium mines. You take a look at the budget, Mr. Speaker, 
and you will not find one red cent there to buy farm land, to 
speculate on the farm land in this province. You won’t find a 
dime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, you will not find any 
moneys in this budget to go out and do studies and investigate 
on how the government might be able to get into this business 
or that business. 
 
And what brings to my mind when I speak of this, Mr. Speaker, 
is when I was a young man starting out in business, I recall the 
government of the day that was doing investigations — 
investigations into starting their own autobody shops, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s only one example that I, and many others, 
knew of. The question that I have is how many other studies 
were undertaken by the members of the NDP Party of what 
other business they might want to get into? What other 
businesses might they want to nationalize? What other 
businesses might they want to start up on their own? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you will not find in this Progressive 
Conservative budget a plug nickel for any of those types of 
things. But what you will find, Mr. Speaker, is many, many 
millions of dollars dedicated to protecting the people of this 
province. I speak of moneys that are expended on health care; I 
speak of moneys that are expended on education. I speak of 
moneys that are expended on fundamental programs such as the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan and the Saskatchewan income plan 
and on and on. Moneys that are going directly to the people in 
this province who need and require protection. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an exceptionally good budget. It is a budget 
that I am very proud to stand here and speak on. This budget 
has not been just drafted up off the cuff. This budget is the end 
product of countless hours of discussions amongst my 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker. And I would say that all of these, all 
of these suggestions put forth by the MLAs on this side of the 
House have been taken into consideration, and this is the 
culmination of many hours of thought, Mr. Speaker, it is not the 
culmination of any suggestions or concrete solutions put forth 
by the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are here to co-operate as a government. These 
are difficult times in Saskatchewan and these are times when it 
takes politicians on both sides of the House — takes politicians 
on both sides of the House — to stand up and put forth 
solutions to very difficult problems. We 

have not seen any solutions put forward by the members of the 
NDP Party, Mr. Speaker. All we have seen is partisan politics 
for months and months and months — no solutions, Mr. 
Speaker, only ideas that come forth from the old days of the 
NDP, the old dark days of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. And the 
public of Saskatchewan spoke very loudly and clearly in April 
of 1982, and, Mr. Speaker, they spoke once again in October of 
1986. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I look to the east from Saskatchewan, I 
look to the province of Manitoba, and I would say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the public in Manitoba, as the public in Saskatchewan did 
in April of 1982 and October of 1986, will repeat that 
performance, and you will see a Progressive Conservative 
administration within a matter of probably 25 days in the 
province of Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will end my comments 
by saying that I whole-heartedly support this budget, I 
whole-heartedly support our Premier, and I believe that the 
constituents of Melfort, on behalf of whom I am here, will 
whole-heartedly as well support this budget and this 
administration. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to enter this budget debate, the second budget that’s 
been delivered by this government since I was elected in 1986, 
and I’m pleased to speak on behalf of the constituents of Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake and other constituents of other members in 
this Legislature who don’t perhaps happen to agree with the 
nattering and the whining of the member from Melfort. 
 
I note he was indicating that he sees no discontent with this 
budget as he travels throughout the province and throughout his 
riding — reminds me of the ostrich, and I would suggest that 
this particular ostrich has had his head in the gravel pit, because 
if he was listening to what was happening out there, he would 
realize that there is in fact some discontent with the direction of 
this particular government. 
 
He indicates no solutions from this side of the House. I would 
want to suggest and say, Mr. Speaker, that the best solution 
would be an end to this government’s administration and the 
wrack and havoc that they’ve placed upon this province since 
1982. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I wish to share some of the 
concerns of the people of this province about this budget and 
about this government’s record because this government has 
been dishonest, it’s been incompetent, and it hasn’t been 
dealing with the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. It’s 
demonstrated a total lack of compassion, a lack of vision for the 
future, and I would suggest it is rapidly losing what little 
credibility it may have left. 
 
The members opposite continually speak about fear being 
instilled in the people’s minds from members on this side of the 
House. Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that certainly that’s not 
our intention. 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

300 
 

What we’ve been doing, and what we will continue to do, is 
speak for the families in this province and let this government 
know that they are concerned about the future of their families, 
the future of their neighbours, and the future of their children. 
And they’re concerned as well about the future of this province 
we live in — the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as I said, we’re not speaking to frighten people, but what 
we’re doing is speaking for people who are already frightened 
by the mismanagement, the incompetence, and the lack of 
compassion that this government has shown. 
 
And I’d like to say that members from this side of the House 
will be pointing out during this budget debate and into the 
estimates that there is a need for a change in the direction that 
this government is taking, there’s a need for change in the way 
that they’re doing things. People are well aware of what’s 
happened in terms of health care and in terms of education, in 
terms of the millions and millions of dollars that this 
government squanders on empty office space and hiring its 
friends. People are well aware of those things. 
 
As well, they’re aware of the massive amount of dollars that 
we’re going to have to put towards repairing the highways that 
have been neglected since 1982. And I wish the member was 
around to hear this, because I tell you, red flags and pot-holes 
are not what the people of this province are looking for. They’re 
looking for the kind of a highway system that used to be in this 
province prior to this government’s administration, where you 
didn’t have to rattle your car apart to get from point A to point 
B. 
 
And I want to say tonight, Mr. Speaker, over the months that 
I’ve spent in this legislature and the speeches that I’ve heard 
from this Premier and from the member from Weyburn, they 
fondly talk about moving into the year 2000 and beyond, and 
they talk about their vision. But nothing it’s ever done in terms 
of creating the kind of a vision that the people of this province 
want to see in the year 2000 and beyond. And I’ll tell you, there 
was another Tory premier in this province in the 1930s by the 
name of Anderson who apparently had a vision. And I’ll tell 
you, it took the people of this province 50 years to forget that 
vision. And I would want to say today that when these people 
are turfed in 1990 or ’91, it will take another 50 years for the 
people to forget the vision that these members had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And tonight, if I could take the liberty, 
maybe, Mr. Speaker, to look into the year 2010 or 2020 and 
maybe at what the people in those years are saying about this 
administration, like they say now about the Anderson 
government of the ’30s. And what will they be saying, Mr. 
Speaker? What will they be saying of this government, the 
Premier and of his executive council and of the back-benchers 
who sit on their hands as the Premier destroys this province? 
What will they be saying? 
 
What will they be saying about the election campaigns of 1982 
and of 1986 that were proven to be lies by the kind  

of government that they delivered? I tell you that those 
memories will continue for a long, long time and this 
government will never be forgotten. 
 
What will the families of people who have been destroyed by 
this government say in the year 2010 or 2020? Will they speak 
in high esteem of the member of Weyburn or any of the other 
members on that side? I suggest to you not. We’re going to look 
at a direct parallel to what they say about the Anderson regime 
of the ’30s. 
 
And what about those families who’ve been affected by this 
government in terms of losing family businesses that have 
operated in this province for decades and who have found 
themselves in a position that they’ve had to close the doors and 
move out of this province in order to make a living? What will 
those families be saying? Will they be speaking in glowing 
terms of this Premier, of this tear-everything-apart Premier? I 
say to you not. 
 
And I’ll say as well that the farms, the family farms that are 
being destroyed, that are being lost during this term of PC 
government, will not be speaking in glowing terms of this 
Premier or his cabinet or of the back-benchers that may have 
represented them. The pain that’s inflicted on those families 
when they pack up their belongings and leave their farms will 
not be remembered fondly. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, what will the people who 
parade their children to the food banks — the fastest-growing 
industry in this province — what will they say of these 
members in the year 2000 or 2010? Will there be a glowing 
report of how wonderful life was made for them under this 
administration? I would suggest to you there won’t be. 
 
And those that are affected by the destroyed health care 
programs that so much thought and so much care and so much 
attention was given in the 1970s and earlier, when those 
programs were being developed and being built . . . And people 
who have seen those programs destroyed — and I speak of the 
drug prescription plan and I speak as well of the children’s 
dental plan — the families who saw those programs work and 
function and who saw them destroyed and torn apart bit by bit 
by this government, what will their report by of this Premier 
and of his cabinet and of his back-benchers? What will that 
report be? I would suggest to you it won’t be a glowing report. 
 
And what about the changes to the education system in 
Saskatchewan, the community colleges that have been 
destroyed and dismantled? And what about those who are 
affected by the massive unemployment and those who for the 
first time in their lives find themselves on social assistance 
because this province, the government of this province, hasn’t 
created an environment where they can find work? I would 
suggest if the member for Weyburn is around in the year 2010 
and 2020, he’s not going to want to talk about those things as he 
does today. And if he was wise, he wouldn’t be talking about 
them now. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that dreams have been denied 
Saskatchewan people, and hopes have been shattered. and I 
would ask the member from Rosthern and from 
Shellbrook-Torch River, and I guess especially the  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

301 
 

member from Kinistino who indicated to his people in ’86 that 
he was coming down here to clean up this mess, how are people 
going to look on their record in the 21st century. 
 
When you look at the economic statistics that are around this 
province and you look at the number of unemployed people, it 
tells me that this government is on the wrong direction. And 
you can look at almost any indicator you want, whether it be 
housing starts, whether it be the number of people on social 
assistance, whether it be unemployment or whether it be the 
massive debt that these people, this government, has built. It 
would tell me that the people in the next century are not going 
to speak in glowing terms of this administration and of this 
Premier who led it. If you talk about retail sales, you’ll find that 
we’re not keeping up to the rest of the provinces in Canada. 
 
You look at oil revenue, that these people have squandered 
billions of dollars where there were dollars that could have been 
rechannelled into the provincial economy, rechannelled into 
provincial coffers to create employment, to stop the massive 
deficit that they were building — seven consecutive deficit 
budgets. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it’s unforgivable what 
they’ve done. 
 
Oil prices, for goodness’ sakes, 10 years ago we were dealing 
with oil at less than nine bucks a barrel and there was no deficit 
in this province. Fifteen years ago we were dealing with oil at 
$4 a barrel. There was no deficit in this province. 
 
But what has this government squandered away? in ’82, oil was 
at $28 a barrel; ’83, $26 a barrel; ’84, $29; ’85, $27; in ’86 
they’ve had a bit of dip, but still certainly higher than what was 
around when we were balancing budgets in this province and 
delivering sound economic planning and management; ’87, $17 
a barrel; ’88, $15 a barrel. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve heard in this House 
and outside of this House, time after time after time, the 
government opposite complaining about the lack of revenue to 
deliver programs without deficit budgeting. And I say it’s a 
shame; it’s a misrepresentation of what the facts are. It’s a 
deceitful government we have on the opposite side, and I 
suggest that they no longer deserve to govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — But there is a reason that they complain 
about the lack of revenue, and it’s because there has been a lack 
of revenue in relative terms. Relative to what they should have 
got, relative to what they could have gotten, there is a decrease 
in revenues. 
 
In 1983, the value of oil production in this province was $1.7 
billion; they generated $684 million in revenue. In ’84, it was 
$2.1 billion, and they generated just over 700 million in 
revenue; ’85, $2.3 billion, and they generated 600 million in 
revenue; ’86, 1.7 . . . $1.1 billion, and they generated a paltry 
$213 million in revenue. Is there any wonder that this 
government can’t balance a budget, and is there any reason that 
people should believe that they’re  

putting the people of Saskatchewan before their friends, the 
large multinational oil companies? 
 
(1930) 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that these figures are indicative of a 
government who has chosen its friends, and they have chosen 
the wrong friends. The multinational oil companies, when they 
pull their profits out of this province, don’t build roads, and 
they don’t educate people and they don’t deal with our health 
care. When those dollars leave this province, they’re gone never 
to return. This government had a choice. They had a choice 
between letting the oil companies rip this province off of 
millions and hundreds of millions of dollars; they had a choice 
between that and saying, we want you to pay your fair share for 
developing our resources and for mining our resources. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t happen, and it’s a sad commentary 
on a government that pretends to speak for the people. I would 
suggest to you that they’ve been a dismal failure in that regard 
along with many others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the people in the year 2000 and beyond 
will be drawing parallels between the Anderson government 
and the divine government. and I use that as an adjective — and 
if you look up the interpretation of the word “divine” that’s 
what I’m referring to. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I think the hon. member is 
using the name of a member in this House and I ask him to 
refrain from doing so. 
 
Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. The orders . . . the 
rules and regulations do not allow for a member to do indirectly 
what the rules do not allow directly. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll accept your ruling. I 
was merely trying to use an adjective to this particular 
government, and I could read into the record, if you’d like, and 
with your permission I will. What I was referring to, and I’ll 
read the definition our of the Oxford, and it says: “Of, from, or 
God like, or a god; excellent, very beautiful; to discover, learn 
about future events by what are alleged to be magical means, or 
by inspiration or guessing.” 
 
And I would like, with your permission, to spell the word. It’s 
spelled d-i-v-i-n-e, none of which could be used to describe our 
Premier, I might add. 
 
And as I was saying, there are going to be some direct parallels 
drawn between the Anderson government of the ’30s and this 
administration. And some of the similarities are really clear. In 
the 1930s they used to run around looking for food, some of 
those working people, and some of the farmers who had lost 
their land; and they were being fed at soup kitchens, they called 
them in those days; and they formed bread lines. And the 
parallel of the 1980s, of course, are the food banks, the major 
industry in this province right now. 
 
In the 1930s we had cash-for-service health care, and what that 
meant is, if you don’t have the cash you don’t get served. And I 
suggest to you in the 1980s that that’s the direction that this 
government will take. And I believe that  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

302 
 

history will prove that to be correct. 
 
In the 1930s they had Bennett buggies and dirt roads, and now 
we have pot-holes and red flags. And there were some other 
similarities as well, Mr. Speaker, the way this province has been 
devastated in terms of the economy. Those are some direct 
parallels between the ’30s and the 1980s. 
 
But what I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is the sad part of all 
of these memories is that people will know it didn’t have to be 
that way. And they will know this government had choices, but 
that they made the wrong choices. 
 
But they won’t be all bad memories, Mr. Speaker, because there 
are some that are going to have very fond memories of the 
1980s under this administration, and I want to speak about 
them. The sons and daughters of the Peter Pocklingtons, as they 
go to the bank to pick up the interest cheques on the money that 
their parents took out of this province in the 1980s — they’ll be 
very happy people. And I want to say that the shareholders of 
the purchasers of Manalta Coal and their children will have 
very, very fond memories of this administration. And I’d want 
to say that the heirs to the Weyerhaeuser billions will have fond 
memories of your administration as well. And the heirs to the 
multinational oil companies will be quite pleased with your 
administration, and there’s no doubt about that. Because the 
millions of dollars that you have squandered could have gone 
into the hands of so very, very few, will create yet more wealth 
for those people — and you, my friends, will be responsible. 
 
But there are others that will be happy. The Schoenhals and the 
Childers and the Childers family, those will all be happy folks 
— and the Pat Hills. And they’ll have fond memories of the 
1980s under your administration — and the George Hills as 
well. Those folks will all have very fond memories of your 
administration and what happened under your guidance in this 
province. 
 
But I tell you there’s going to be some other positive memories, 
Mr. Speaker. There are going to be memories of the defeat of 
this government, and there’s going to be cheers from one end of 
this province to the other when the member that sits in that 
chair opposite as Premier will be replaced. And I want to say to 
you that there will be memories of the victory of a new 
government led by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — There will be memories of the day when 
this administration was replaced by a government that was 
committed to restore health care to its rightful place as the best 
in North America. And there will be fond memories of 
replacing this administration with a government that will allow 
the people the right to work in this province and earn a decent 
living, the right to play and be with their families in our parks, 
and the right to prosper in this province. 
 
And there will be fond memories of electing a government 
committed to spreading resource wealth to all of the people, not 
just to a few, and there will be fond memories as well to a 
government committed to seeing  

that Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people come first, no 
matter who you are or what you do. There will be very fond 
memories of returning to this province a government of decency 
and compassion and fairness and honesty, all of which this 
administration is lacking, and I want to say the comparisons 
will be black and white. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the 
estimates in the weeks to follow, because I think, and I’m sure, 
what will happen from this side of the House is we will prove 
this budget to be anything but what it’s presented as in the 
throne speech and in the budget speech. The people of this 
province will become very clear, I’m sure, that the actual health 
care services will be decreased because the funding isn’t there. 
 
I’m disappointed, in terms of this budget — I want to say in 
terms of health care — that there was no mention of restoring 
the prescription drug plan or the school-based children’s dental 
plan. And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that in terms of 
education, the people of this province will know that there is 
less actual buying power for this education budget that was 
delivered a week ago. 
 
And I want to say as well that I’m sure the people will 
understand that the budget for the Department of Highways is 
inadequate — $5 million less than what was spent in 1981, and 
if you count inflation into that, it’s a massive decrease. and I’m 
sure that the farming community in rural Saskatchewan will 
know that this government has done nothing to keep them on 
their farms. They’ve done nothing to look at restructuring of 
farm debt. They’ve done nothing to change the production loan 
changes that they made, that were absolutely not acceptable to 
the people of rural Saskatchewan. And I think they’ll very very 
clear that there’s actually a cut in the agriculture budget. 
 
And those that are affected by yet more tax increases like the 
flat tax will know that this isn’t the government that they want 
in power. And those that had expected some sanity to the fuel 
rebate system will know that this government still doesn’t 
understand that you can’t administer that kind of a program. 
And those that were expecting this government to do something 
concrete in terms of business tax will know that this 
government has put up a smoke-screen asking the municipal 
governments — who already are cut back in terms of the 
revenue-sharing grants from this government — to match dollar 
for dollar. They will know that those revenues are not going to 
be readily available to make the reductions in those business 
taxes. They’ll know that the minister has abrogated his 
responsibility. And I would suggest to you there won’t be much 
happiness out there. 
 
They’ll know as well that this government continues to govern 
for the large resource companies rather than to govern for the 
people of this province. And I think they will know clearly who 
their friends are and who their friends aren’t. And that would 
suggest to me, Mr. Speaker, that this government will yet be in 
more electoral problems than they are already. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my belief that members on this side of the 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

303 
 

House will show this budget for what it really is and show this 
government for what it really is — empty and hollow; void of 
all credibility, all competence; and filled with corruption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the day when I can stand in this 
legislature and address the people of this province and indicate 
to them that there is a budget before us that I can support. I 
would suggest that this is probably the third last budget that this 
government will ever deliver . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . so we may have to suffer through two 
more of these after this one. But I want to say to you, that I 
believe in the very near future that there will be a budget before 
the people of this province that will restore some sanity to 
government spending, will restore some semblance of order to 
this province, that will deliver compassion, and a caring budget 
that cares about the people of this province more than it cares 
about the large multinational corporations. 
 
But I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, I can’t say that about this budget. 
And in conclusion, I will just indicate that I cannot and will not 
support a budget that inflicts yet more pain and more suffering 
on average Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
privilege to rise and to speak on this occasion on behalf of the 
residents of Saskatoon Sutherland constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for calling the 
House to order. 
 
It is a pleasure to speak on behalf of the people of Saskatoon 
Sutherland, and to comment on this budget as they themselves 
would comment on it, would that they had the opportunity to 
enter this Chamber and do so. 
 
I would like to talk first of all about some of the 
mismanagement, some of the PC mismanagement that we see 
active still in this budget, because behind every single dollar 
figure in this budget that’s what we have, is PC 
mismanagement. Something like mouse droppings — you find 
them all over the house when the mice get into the house. And 
that’s what happened with this budget — droppings of 
cut-backs and incompetency from this government. 
 
And so I say that if this Premier and if this PC government 
weren’t so utterly incompetent and hadn’t bungled and 
mismanaged Saskatchewan’s affairs as it has, we would be in a 
much, much better situation to comment on this budget. We’d 
have a far different budget. Perhaps let us dream for a moment, 
Mr. Speaker. We might actually have had a surplus of $329 
million instead of a deficit announced in this budget of $329 
million — hardly possible with this crew on the opportunity 
side. 
 
(1945) 

Instead of this budget . . . With this budget we have yet one 
more, the seventh in a row, of seven consecutive PC deficits 
wrought on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in this budget document there are countless 
references to the family and to the self-proclaimed concern that 
this government has for Saskatchewan families. And indeed in 
the last two or three weeks, the Premier himself has begun to 
extol loud and long his deep and abiding concern for 
Saskatchewan families. To hear him speak, you’d think that the 
name of our Premier was synonymous with God’s gift to 
Saskatchewan families. And if this Premier could be believed 
— and he can’t be believed by Saskatchewan people — you’d 
almost think that the family was yet a new PC sacred trust. 
 
Well since this budget is under consideration . . . that’s under 
consideration now is riddled with so many references to the 
family and saturated with all sorts of pious platitudes about 
their commitment to the family, I want to take a few moments 
tonight to look at that commitment and to look at whether it’s 
solid and it’s factual, or whether it’s fantasy. I also want to look 
at that in particular in terms of what this budget means for 
individual nuclear families or Saskatchewan households, but 
also in terms of the larger Saskatchewan family and our 
Premier’s responsibility for that family, namely the whole of 
the province. 
 
One of the things that I noted right from the very beginning, as I 
listened to the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, was that there was a 
lot of talk in this budget about drugs and alcohol, and how 
concerned this government was about that problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. We’re having a little trouble 
hearing the member from Saskatoon Sutherland and I would 
like the co-operation of all members, including the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — One of the very first things I noticed as I 
listened to the budget being delivered last Thursday was all the 
concern for drug and alcohol abuse in the province. The 
Premier even talks about senior citizens abusing drugs and 
alcohol, which is hardly the truth; that really stretches the truth. 
But none the less, there was talk about that commitment. But I 
thought back, Mr. Speaker, that this was the same Premier who 
allowed alcohol advertising in the province after he was elected 
in his first term. Alcohol advertising — now that is really some 
concern for Saskatchewan families. 
 
I also noted, Mr. Speaker, that in terms of the tax increase, there 
were tax increases in the flat tax again, hitting Saskatchewan 
people. There were increases . . . There have been all sorts of 
increases to licensing fees. There was even an increase in the 
tax on cigarettes announced in this budget. But there was not, 
Mr. Speaker, any increase on taxes for alcohol consumption 
from the government that is so concerned about Saskatchewan 
young people and their consumption of alcohol. Well I think 
that puts the lie to the way this government proclaims its 
concern for Saskatchewan families. 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

304 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think of the prescription drug program also, and 
there’s no doubt that this is the number one concern that I have 
heard in the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland over the 
course of the last year — cuts, vicious cuts, to the 
Saskatchewan drug program. And in the last year, more people 
have expressed their concern about this particular program than 
have expressed their concern on any other single issue to me 
personally as their member of the legislature, and this includes 
all of the letters that I have recently received on the abortion 
issue — far more correspondence and phone calls on the 
prescription drug issue than on the abortion issue. 
 
And does this budget do anything to address the issue, to rectify 
some of the heinous problems Saskatchewan people are 
experiencing with this particular budget? This budget doesn’t 
do a thing — not a word about the prescription drug program. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what it amounts to is this government is 
still saving money at the expense of Saskatchewan taxpayers. In 
1986-87 the drug program cost the Saskatchewan government 
— this was before it was cut — $76 million. In ’87-88, after the 
cut-backs, it cost the government $57 million. So an economy 
of almost $20 million in one fell swoop, an economy at the 
expense of Saskatchewan taxpayers, mind you, in the first year. 
 
And what do we find in this budget document this year? A 
further cut in government expenses relative to the 
Saskatchewan drug program. It’s now estimated that the drug 
program will cost the Saskatchewan government some $50 
million — $7 million less for the government; $7 million more 
out of the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
And what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is really the privatization 
of health care. The burden of health care is shifted onto the 
backs of individual Saskatchewan families by the very Premier 
and his government who proclaim that they’re concerned about 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been absolutely no doubt, in terms of the 
people who’ve contacted me in the course of the last year, that 
they want their Premier to protect their health care programs. 
They want these programs preserved and protected not only for 
themselves but for their children, for their aunts and uncles, and 
for their grandchildren. Saskatchewan mothers and fathers want 
to know that if their children get sick, that there is provision for 
their medical care regardless of their ability to pay, independent 
of their ability to pay. 
 
Saskatchewan families have a right to feel that way about their 
medical care. They’re entitled to health care, and it’s a damning 
indictment of this Minister of Health and a damning indictment 
of this Premier that Saskatchewan people have to go begging 
for health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And so we hear the government say that this 
Premier is a protector and the defender of Saskatchewan 
families. That is absolutely appalling. Sure  

he is the self-proclaimed champion of the family, but people see 
through his rhetoric, people see that this Premier is really 
disgusting. They see that he is a fraud and a fake with his false 
concern for Saskatchewan families. And, Mr. Speaker, every 
last man, woman, and child in the province of Saskatchewan 
knows full well that actions speak louder than words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And this budget does nothing for 
Saskatchewan families when it comes to restoring the drug 
program for Saskatchewan people. In spite of all the pious 
words, this government not only has cut the drug program, 
continues to cut it, but fails to restore it in this budget. 
 
Indeed, and this is what is positively immoral, Mr. Speaker, this 
budget provides more, way more than a 200 per cent increase in 
funding for public relations in the Department of Health. Now 
isn’t that wonderful. Doesn’t that help Saskatchewan people? 
From $1.3 million in funding for public relations last year, to 
$2,8 million. 
 
Well what we have is quite obviously an attempt to hide the 
dirty laundry, to sell a new vision of privatization to 
Saskatchewan people — privatized health care — and to cover 
it up and make it smell sweet and good. This is positively 
scandalous when there are 11,000 people waiting for beds in 
Saskatoon hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just this morning, just before lunch, I had a 
constituent phone my office down here in Regina and announce 
to me that she had waited for five months to have day surgery. 
She’d been told that she was to have the surgery last September, 
found out only in February that she would be called for the 
surgery, went those five months, had the surgery — day surgery 
— only to learn then that they found cancer. Now the same 
woman, after that five-month delay, has been told that she has 
to wait two to three weeks for a hospital bed so that she can 
have surgery now done on her cancer. 
 
And there’s nothing in this budget that addresses the situation 
of this woman. She’s now about to enter her fourth week of 
waiting for a hospital bed, and this is positively scandalous and 
immoral in the province of Saskatchewan. There’s no doubt 
about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Medicare like this sure doesn’t do very much 
for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. It does nothing at all. 
 
And what we have in this budget are increases to public 
relations, a 200 per cent increase in public relation funding. 
Well I say this Premier is no friend of Saskatchewan families. I 
say that this Premier is a pretend protector of Saskatchewan 
families, and that he’s positively immoral. 
 
And I’d like to take another look at how this budget impacts on 
Saskatchewan families, to leave health care for a while, and to 
look at another top concern of most Saskatchewan families — 
and that is namely the higher  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

305 
 

and higher taxation that they have consistently experienced at 
the hands of this government. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, if this government were really concerned 
about Saskatchewan families, then this Premier and his budget 
would have done something to reduce the provincial taxation 
and not have increased taxation with the flat tax up to 2 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I be leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
thank the members of the opposition, and in particular of course 
the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, for allowing me to 
interrupt his speech to introduce guests. I thank you, sir, and as 
soon as I’m finished, naturally we’d be pleased to hear you 
continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is a hockey team from the 
town of Spiritwood. They’re here for the 22nd Annual 
Downtowners Optimist Centennial Cup tournament, and so far 
going really well, from what I hear. 
 
The team is from the town of Spiritwood in the constituency of 
Turtleford. They’re called Spiritwood DWs, and they’re in the 
pee wee division, the age group being some 12 to 13 years old. 
They’re accompanied by coach Boris Sidoruk, manager 
Quinton Wingerter, and trainer Kevin Warkentin, and we have 
approximately 35 in the group here this evening. 
 
Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, I may say, my wife has invited the 
parents over for coffee and muffins to our place. We don’t get 
to see folks from the constituency all that often down here in 
Regina. It is a pretty long drive each way to come down here, so 
we appreciate seeing them in the legislature this evening. As a 
matter of fact, my wife taught quite a few of those little duffers 
sitting up there tonight. So I’ll be meeting with you in a few 
minutes. 
 
I invite you to watch some of the debate that’s going on in the 
House tonight. We’re debating the budget, which was delivered 
last week in the Assembly, and at the moment one of the 
members of the opposition is taking his right, his democratic 
right, to put forth his suggestions and his criticisms of the 
budget as it was presented. So I invite you to watch some of the 
debate. Nice to see you here. Welcome to the Assembly, and I 
would invite all hon. members to join with me in giving a very 
warm welcome to that team from Spiritwood. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I do join in welcoming the folks from 
Spiritwood. I hope you enjoy the proceedings here tonight. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, if this government would have 
wanted to have done something for Saskatchewan families, 
something positive, it would not have increased the flat tax yet 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — From the little man with such big concern for 
Saskatchewan families — in last year’s budget we got a flat tax 
increase of 1.5 per cent, a sales tax increase from 5 per cent to 7 
per cent, and a gas tax reinstated — the very tax that the 
Premier had said would never again darken the doorstep of 
Saskatchewan people, and Saskatchewan people are obviously 
betrayed with that promise. Now again, in this budget, from the 
same little man pretending to be the preserver and protector of 
Saskatchewan families, these same families are hit with more 
and higher taxes. 
 
The gas tax stays at 32 cents a gallon, something that the 
Premier said — promised — would never again happen, wasn’t 
eliminated this time, Mr. Speaker. The flat tax goes up again. 
And he wants to see property taxes go up now as he wishes for 
a solution to the problem of local business taxation but refuses 
to accept any responsibility for funding local municipalities. 
 
This budget is duplicity of the highest order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And is it any wonder then, when we see these 
kinds of tax increases, that a Saskatchewan family with an 
income of $35,000 a year pays the second-highest level of 
taxation in all of Canada? And this budget then dares to cut the 
corporate tax rate from 17 per cent to 15 per cent — after all of 
these increases on to the backs of families, the corporate income 
tax rate is cut. And so big business, as is documented in this 
budget, will save some $9 million just in the corporate income 
tax rate changes alone. 
 
And for the resource companies like oil companies, potash and 
coal companies, this budget provides a new resource royalty 
reduction worth more than $30 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The family of big business. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The family of big business gets the concern 
of this government but not ordinary Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And so I would like to know, Mr.  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

306 
 

Speaker, just where this Premier gets off saying that he’s 
concerned about Saskatchewan families — what drivel. I say 
that is absolute utter drivel. This budget shows duplicity of the 
highest order — tax increases for Saskatchewan family, tax 
decreases for corporate friends of the PC Party. That’s the tax 
story in this budget. 
 
And then the good people of Saskatchewan are asked to sit back 
and to hold their breath and to wait for tax reform. Well, people 
have been waiting for tax reform from this government since 
the first year of its election and they haven’t seen it yet, not 
positive tax reform that helps Saskatchewan families. 
 
What a wonderful idea. How considerate the Premier of this 
province really is of Saskatchewan families. After massive tax 
increases in the last year, more tax increases this year, he says 
to people: you just keep on paying your bills, keep on paying 
your taxes and we’re going to look at the tax situation. We’re 
going to study it; we’re going to discuss it. 
 
Well, all I can say is, God help Saskatchewan families because 
this Premier certainly won’t do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, every single solitary time this 
Premier has touched the tax situation here in Saskatchewan, 
he’s taken progressively more money out of the pockets of 
Saskatchewan people. He’s eliminated the $230 property 
improvement grants that families used to receive, individuals, 
Saskatchewan households. And he went to the flat earth society 
to draw up the idea of the unfair flat tax — a flat tax, 
incidentally, that penalizes people for contributing to charities 
and churches and allows people to dodge their taxes if they 
have high incomes and can salt them away in investments. And 
that’s not very fair to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That’s an insult to Saskatchewan people. And 
the members opposite should be ashamed of that flat tax, that it 
ever darkened the doorstep of Saskatchewan. And so I say, 
when those members opposite start to talk about tax reform, I 
say, God save us from Tory tax reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — People have had seven years now, Mr. 
Speaker, to see these folks on the opposite side reform their 
ways, and they haven’t done it. They haven’t done it yet. And 
Saskatchewan families are not going to be holding their breath 
in hopes that this government will decide to tax Saskatchewan 
families less perhaps out of the goodness of their heart, because 
they know that there is no heart on that side of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to relate just a couple of — maybe 
two or three — examples from my personal experience in the 
constituency as to how this government and this sort of budget 
has failed to stand up for Saskatchewan people. And I think of 
an incident that happened last fall, when a young woman on 
social assistance was forced to call me at home on a Friday 

evening in tears because she was sick and she had just spent the 
last of her cash from her social assistance cheque on her 
medication and there was nothing left in her cupboard. Mr. 
Speaker, this was a pathetic, pathetic situation. She phoned in 
despair because she had just learned that the government was 
going to remove her bus allowance and her laundry allowance. 
And this is just sickening. This is absolutely sickening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know enough about theology to call this sort of 
situation downright immoral, downright immoral. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — When the minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order! Order, please. 
Order! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And these actions from this government, I 
call immoral. When the Premier of the province not only 
sanctions these kinds of cut-backs but perpetrates them, that is 
immoral when it comes from the Premier of this province. That 
is not protecting Saskatchewan families. That’s victimizing the 
poor. That’s victimizing the most vulnerable and the most weak 
and those who are most in need among us . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes,. Mr. Speaker, when this Premier trumpets 
his tough love for people on welfare, I get sick. It makes me 
absolutely sick that he can talk about tough love to a 
$100-a-plate luncheon for supporters of the PC Party in the 
Bessborough Hotel and then my constituents can go hungry. I 
call that sickening and immoral. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And anyone on that side of the House who 
would want to defend that kind of thing, I would call sickening 
and immoral as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I think of another example of 
constituents who have come to me and complained about the 
enhanced quality of family life that this Premier has foisted off 
on the province of Saskatchewan. I’m talking about the closing 
of the North Park Centre in Prince Albert. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, came to me concerned because they 
learned of the announcement of the closing. They had no 
consultation. There was no communication, and the decision 
was simply announced and thrown at them. The family was left 
in the lurch. There were no details of any arrangements to be 
made for their son. Simply that he would go to Valley View or 
he might go somewhere else. Where else, when he might go, 
any of those details weren’t forthcoming. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the son of this couple had seen their son live 
in Moose Jaw before, and they didn’t want him to go back 
there; he didn’t want to go back there. And when they heard 
that North Park was closing, they didn’t know  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

307 
 

where else their son might go. Needless to say they were very 
concerned. And for the entire course of the summer, this family 
was left in a limbo, a never-never sort of land not knowing 
where their son was going to wind up, wondering, waiting, 
worrying about their son. And all this from the Minister of 
Social Services who is supposed to serve Saskatchewan people. 
This isn’t serving Saskatchewan people, this isn’t caring for the 
best interests of Saskatchewan families. It’s a sorry, sorry 
commentary on this government. 
 
And then I come, Mr. Speaker, to 6,700 Saskatchewan families, 
many of whom have lost their entire life savings with the 
collapse of Principal Trust, Associated Investors, and First 
Investors. These are people, Mr. Speaker, who trusted this 
government to protect them. In fact, that is precisely why we 
have government involved in that sort of regulation, to do what 
we as individual citizens or households would find utterly 
impossible to do ourselves, namely to scrutinize the financial 
statements of all sorts of trust companies and other financial 
institutions. They trusted their Premier and his government to 
this job, to regulate trust companies doing business in 
Saskatchewan, all three of them. But the job was too big. There 
were two companies too many, First Investors and Associated 
Investors. 
 
And as a result, because of the failure of the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs to adequately regulate the 
trust companies — all three of them — these Saskatchewan 
people lost their entire life savings because of government 
neglect. These are retirement savings for many of these people, 
Mr. Speaker,. They are left empty handed, literally empty 
handed after a lifetime of work. These were depositors, Mr. 
Speaker. These were not risk-takers in high-risk ventures; these 
were depositors in a trust company. There were government 
rules; there were filing regulations to safeguard against this kind 
of collapse; but it was too much for this government to fulfil its 
responsibility in this regard and honour its commitments to its 
own people. 
 
I say that Saskatchewan people are entitled to expect more out 
of their government than this kind of incompetence and 
unacceptable regulation. There’s no protection here. People 
shouldn’t have to be at risk when they put their trust in their 
own government, for heaven’s sake. They expect government to 
protect them. They expect government to assist them in 
retrieving their lost deposits. And so far all this government has 
done is hired a lawyer to sit as an observer in the hearings being 
held at the Code inquiry in Edmonton. A lot of protection, a lot 
of protection. 
 
People in Saskatchewan want fewer excuses and more 
government protection. And I say if this Premier and if this PC 
government really cared about Saskatchewan families, really 
cared about protecting them, then we wouldn’t see 
Saskatchewan senior citizens robbed of their entire life savings 
by virtue of government mismanagement and neglect and 
incompetence. 
 
(2015) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Koenker: — And that’s the situation. That’s what’s 
happened in the last year with people who put their money into 
First Investors and Associated Investors, Mr. Speaker. And so 
how does this impact on the budget? What does this have to do 
with the budget? What do we find in this budget in the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs? More cuts. 
More cuts to the regulatory agencies such as those who monitor 
the trust companies; more cuts to licensing and insurance 
regulations. In 1985-86 there was some $2 million that was 
estimated would be spent in this area, with some 56 people 
policing that kind of activity. The cut-backs of last year’s 
budget brought that figure down a half a million, from 2 million 
to $1.5 million, and cut the number of people involved in 
policing these companies and enforcing regulations from 56 
down to 39. 
 
And we see cuts again in this budget — in 1987-88, down to 1.4 
million, not because the work is getting any cheaper or any 
easier, but simply because this work, this regulatory work, just 
isn’t an apparent priority with this government. It doesn’t fit the 
PC ideology of deregulation, rugged individualism, and 
privatization. Let the buyer beware — that’s the word that goes 
out. 
 
And even when it comes to film and video classification, you’d 
think that they’d want to at least, having initiated that 
classification system in the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, that this government would want to 
preserve and promote that kind of protection of young people 
when it comes to film and video classification. And we see 
cut-backs there as well — down from $130,000 in ’85 and ’86, 
to 1124 last year, and now down to 77. There’s half a person, 
half a staff person allotted to do that classification work now. 
Two years ago there were two people doing that work. 
Wonderful protection, wonderful concern for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
What a paltry commitment to the standards of family morality 
and public decency from the Premier of this province. He likes 
to give his impression of being concerned about family life, but 
I say, let him put his money where his mouth is — and he 
doesn’t do that in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this PC policy of blind faith in the unregulated 
market-place has led to the victimization of Saskatchewan 
families, as I indicated in the Principal Trust fiasco. 
 
Even worse still, perhaps, is the betrayal of farm families in this 
budget. Farm families really get nothing from this budget. Why 
should they expect any more from this government? In spite of 
the trouble they’ve been having, this budget offers nothing to 
Saskatchewan farm families, not even the prospect of hope. 
This budget does nothing about the nine and three-quarter per 
cent interest rate demanded with the farm production loan 
program, while Weyerhaeuser gets preferential interest rates — 
what are they, 6 per cent? Six per cent money for 
Weyerhaeuser; nine and three-quarters per cent that 
Saskatchewan farm families have to pay. This budget does 
nothing, nothing whatsoever to rectify that situation. 
 
And I say if the Premier of this province really cared about 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

308 
 

 Saskatchewan families and not the multinational family of 
international corporations, he would give farm families the 
same kind of deal that he gave to Weyerhaeuser. If 
Weyerhaeuser only pays when it makes money, why can’t 
Saskatchewan people get that same deal from their very own 
Premier, the one who professes to be concerned about them? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like now to look just briefly at the budget in 
terms of the larger economic family in this province — in other 
words, the whole of the province and its people as family. I do 
this because if we consider literally the root meaning of the 
Greek word oikonomia, it means economy, and it means quite 
literally the rule or the ordering, or, we could say, the 
management of the household or of the family. That’s the 
original root meaning of the word “economy,” the rule or the 
management of the individual family household. And now it’s 
been extended to the rule or management of the whole of the 
public business — the larger public family. 
 
And surely if the Premier of Saskatchewan is — or in the case 
of the present Premier, ought to be — more than simply a 
figure-head, then we might reasonably expect t that he could be 
held accountable for his management of the family affairs of the 
larger provincial economy, our larger household, so to speak. 
After all, the Premier is the head of the province, is the head of 
our Saskatchewan family. 
 
And so when we look at the man who loves so much to talk 
about the family, just how has he taken care of the provincial 
family he is responsible for, directly responsible for? He loves 
to talk about the morality of other people and their 
responsibilities, but now we can look more narrowly at his 
responsibility as Premier. 
 
And these budget estimates document, Mr. Speaker, his 
ineptitude and his incompetence. Take, for example, the bottom 
line in this budget, a deficit of 329 million — $329 million that 
the Saskatchewan people will go further into the red during the 
course of this year. 
 
And it isn’t as if this were some sort of unfortunate accident — 
that’s hardly the case at all — due to circumstances totally out 
of the Premier’s control. This has been the story each and every 
year for the last seven years — seven straight, consecutive 
deficit budgets from this Premier — so that today this budget 
documents that our collective Saskatchewan family owes $3.7 
billion. That’s billion with a “b.” In seven years, $3.7 billion, all 
of it incurred since this Premier took office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you what kind of parent mortgages his or her 
children’s future. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what kind of a parent 
is so profligate as to spend the children’s inheritance. Would 
you do it to your own children? Would you drive them into debt 
deeper and deeper, year after year, if there were anything that 
you could do to avoid that, or to mitigate that? I doubt it, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s hardly a parent or head of a family who would 
wish that on their children. And yet, Mr. Speaker, the head of 
our Saskatchewan family has done exactly that — has been 
incredibly derelict in the discharge of his responsibility, his own 
responsibility for this management of the Saskatchewan 
household or  

economy. Derelict and delinquent, I say. There’s no other word 
for his actions. And that’s what this budget documents. 
 
And it isn’t as if he didn’t have options. Sure the times were 
tough in the last few years. But times weren’t always tough, 
especially in the first half of his government. And still his hands 
aren’t tied helplessly behind his back, as the Premier would lead 
us to believe. He still has options, plenty of options, if only he 
has the moral resolve to exercise them. The problem, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the Premier has made decisions and he’s made 
the wrong ones. He’s mismanaged the province’s affairs, and 
that’s why we have consecutive budget deficits totalling $3.7 
billion. 
 
How do we comprehend or understand $3.7 billion? Well one 
way, perhaps, is to say that the daily interest on this deficit of 
3.7 billion is now approximately approaching the 
neighbourhood of a $1 million a day. That’s $1 million a day, 
Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people are paying for nothing. 
They pay it out, but they get absolutely nothing back in return. 
In fact, they get falling credit ratings in return, from the bond 
and banking institutions. Forget about paying off this deficit of 
$3.7 billion, forget about paying that off entirely. This 
government is paying in the neighbourhood of a $1 million a 
day just to pay the interest on the deficit, and not even touching 
the principal; it’s not even talking about the principal. Little 
wonder we don’t hear more about the deficit in this budget. 
 
I know the numbers are large, Mr. Speaker. Another way to 
look at it, as a rough sort of rule of thumb, is to look at the 
amount paid in interest each year, in terms of it being twice the 
amount that the government spends on agriculture in this 
province during the course of the year. More than $329 million 
— that’s what the interest on this deficit is, more than $329 
million. That’s more than twice what the Premier and his 
government spends on all of agriculture. 
 
Now what kind of province might we have, Mr. Speaker, if 
there had been better management, a lower deficit or no deficit 
at all, and one in which we weren’t paying such high interest 
rates? When we’re paying a $1 million a day in interest, that’s 
$1 million a day that can’t go to hospital beds, or into 
educational classrooms at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) or in elementary schools. That’s $1 million a 
day that can’t go into agriculture or into highways or into any 
number of other things. 
 
People can literally name the things that they would will or 
wish the government to address as funding priorities, and then 
turn to the deficit and find out why those aren’t funding 
priorities because of the mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier has had choices and he’s made the 
wrong choices, and that’s why we find ourselves in the situation 
that we presently are. Today with this budget, the Premier . . . if 
we didn’t have this deficit, we could have a far different budget. 
 
This government does have choices. It’s given $1.7 billion to 
the oil companies in royalty holidays. The Premier still wants to 
spend $1 billion on Rafferty-Shand.  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

309 
 

We have $20 million being spent this year in government 
advertising. That would go a long way, certainly, to fund 
hospital beds. We have $8.4 million — 8.4 million this year — 
going to rent empty office space. That makes a whole lot of 
sense. That does Saskatchewan families a whole lot of good. 
We have $70 million given to PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) in a give-away, $23 million to Saskoil in a sell-off, 
and $22 million to Peter Pocklington. That makes a whole lot of 
sense to Saskatchewan families, too. 
 
And so the question, Mr. Speaker, is one of fairness. The 
question is one, when we look at this budget, of what 
Saskatchewan people have a right to expect from this 
government when it comes to this budget and to protection and 
services. The Premier’s hands aren’t tied helplessly behind his 
back. And, Mr. Speaker, I say that when the Premier of this 
province tries to go around and paint himself as the protector 
and defender of the family, the guardian of morality and 
integrity, he had better take a long, hard look at himself, at 
those affairs for which he has direct responsibility and which he 
has some measure of control over. I think it’s high time that we 
began demanding of this government a far better accounting of 
their stewardship of the public purse than we find in this 
budget. 
 
(2030) 
 
And it’s for this reason, Mr. Speaker, because this government 
totally fails to protect Saskatchewan families, either in the 
small, in the sense of the nuclear family, or in the larger sense 
of the whole of the economy, that I cannot and will not support 
this budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
not at all surprised, I am not at all surprised that this 
government, those government members opposite, do not stand 
up and defend this budget. 

 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to start tonight by quoting a few 
passages from the Premier in his speech the other day. I’d just 
like to pick up on the theme of the last speaker, and that’s of the 
family, talking about the family. And the Premier said, and I 
quote: 

 
I also want to say to all Saskatchewan people who may be 
watching these proceedings today in the legislature, to 
listen very carefully to what I am about to say with respect 
to democracy, with respect to families, about decency and 
fairness, and about the many challenges and, indeed, the 
alternatives we face in the legislature and in society. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, is about 
families. And many people in the province are worried 
about what threatens families today — what are the 
dangers; what do we need to do, particularly in this 
legislature; what are the temptations; what are the rules; 
what are the guide-lines that we’re going to provide our 
children with respect to fairness, with respect to decency, 
with respect to principles that hold families together? 

 
That’s the questions he laid out. And he goes on to talk about 
priorities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in health and education and 
agriculture and jobs. And he goes on to talk. He says: 
 

. . . I am concerned — rules for fairness, rules for decency, 
and rules to protect families, and indeed individuals. 

 
After that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he went on in a rage on 
character defamation. This is the rhetoric that’s coming out of 
the Premier of this province’s mouth. 
 
I’ve never in my life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, heard anyone in this 
House stand up and slander other people in this province and on 
these benches more than the Premier did the other day. And I 
find that totally, totally disgusting. He talks about the priorities 
and families and decency, and he turns around and slanders 
people. Talks about people and their decency. Well I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is none more indecent than the 
Premier of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And I say you that in all sincerity. And just to 
prove my point, just to prove my point, just to prove my point, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s talk about families. Let’s talk about 
the labour force in the past year from February ’87 to February 
’88. Unemployed increased by 1,000 to 41,000 in Saskatchewan 
and it fell across Canada at 15.6 per cent. 
 
Talking about families and decencies and his priorities, and 
here is the reality: unemployment going up in Saskatchewan 
and going down in other places. Saskatchewan unemployment 
rate rose from 8.2 to 8.5 per cent. And during the same time 
period, unemployment dropped from 10.5 to 8.6 across Canada. 
 
And he talked about the children and the youth. And here are 
some statistics for the youth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. the number 
of employed dropped in Saskatchewan from 89,000 to 86,000, 
but increased across Canada by 1.2 per cent. The youth 
unemployment rate increased in Saskatchewan from 13.4 to 
15.2 per cent — increased — and it dropped across Canada 
from 16.2 to 13.3 per cent. That’s the priorities of this 
government. And yet the rhetoric that comes out of their mouths 
say, we’re doing it for the people of this province. I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the facts tell the people of this province 
that they’re wrong — it’s pure rhetoric. 
 
And then we can talk about bankruptcies. In 1987 the total 
number of bankruptcies in Canada increased by 5.9  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

310 
 

per cent over ’86 levels. In Saskatchewan, the total for ’87 was 
an increase of 8.7 per cent. That’s the priorities he talks about 
— his priorities and the priorities of his government and 
decency in the family. And he’s bankrupting the small 
businesses of this province with his policies. 
 
And add on to that the PC economic forecast for out-migration. 
And it says 85,000 people could migrate from the province 
between now and 1995. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that is some priority for a government to have. Some priority 
for a premier of this province to stand in this place and give us 
the rhetoric about decency in families when he’s sitting back 
and letting people leave this province in droves. When he 
doesn’t have any ideas on any policies of how to put people to 
work when there’s jobs to be had, but he puts his money in the 
wrong pockets as far as we’re concerned. 
 
And what happens? I can sit back and criticize this government 
for its actions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so what? Maybe I’m 
wrong. But let’s just look at some people who look at 
economics and the economy of this province and decide what’s 
happening. In July 1985, from Moody’s Investor Service, we 
went from a AA1 to a AA rating — we dropped. In January 
1986, we dropped again from a AA to a AA3. In August of ’86, 
what happened? We dropped again, according to Moody’s, 
from a AA3 to an Al. One particular credit rating agency 
dropped us three times from July ’85 til August ’86 — three 
times. They’re the people who supposedly know the economics 
of this province, can see what’s going, and have decided that 
this government can’t do the job. And then there’s Standard and 
Poor’s, another credit rating agency, dropped from, in 1986 in 
April, from a AA plus to a AA; in March ’87 from a AA to AA 
minus. Another agency, Canadian Bond Rating (Agency) 
Service, two drops from AA plus to a AA in January ’86; from 
a AA to a AA minus in January ’87. 
 
That just reinforces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my opinion that this 
government is incapable of running this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — They cannot take the income generated from 
this province and place it to benefit the people of this province. 
We say that, I say that, the people of this province say that, and 
the investing rating agencies say that. Are we all wrong, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? I ask you. Are the people of this province 
wrong when they say this government can’t run? Is this 
opposition caucus wrong when they say this government can’t 
run this province? And are the three highly rated credit rating 
agencies wrong when they dropped the credit rating of this 
province? Is everybody out of step but our boy Johnny over 
here across the way? That’s what he is trying to tell us. The 
Premier of this province is trying to say, everybody’s wrong; I 
have a blueprint. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, his 
blueprint scares a lot of people out of this province as indicated. 
 
And why do we say it scares us, and why do we say they can’t 
be trusted? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1982 this  

government made some big promises in their election campaign 
— big promises. They were going to eliminate the gas tax and 
never see it come back. Did that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, happen? 
It certainly did not happen. You can’t trust them. 
 
They were going to eliminate sales tax in the first term of 
office. Did that happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It didn’t happen. 
But that’s what they promised. And that’s why the people of 
this province can’t trust a Tory. 
 
They were going to cut income tax by 10 per cent, and that 
didn’t happen either. 
 
You can fool some of the people some of the time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I’ll tell you, you can’t fool the people of this 
province when you stand in front of them day after day and 
repeat your rhetorical garbage that comes out of the mouth of 
the Premier of this province. 
 
That people don’t believe him for good reasons — because he 
can’t be trusted. And when you can’t trust the Premier of the 
province, I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the province is in 
pretty bad shape. And that’s the state of it right now. 
 
And the members opposite talk about the New Democrats on 
this side scaring the people of this province. Well let me tell 
you something about being scared. I am scared, and a lot of 
people out there are telling me they’re scared too. They’re 
scared because they can’t get a job. They’re scared because 
they’re losing their farms, and they’re scared because they’re 
going on day after day on welfare or unemployment with no 
hope for the future. And I’m not preaching doom and gloom, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m speaking the truth, the reality that this 
government is loading on the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And I hear the people across, the members 
across, stand in their places and they say, everything’s just fine. 
I talk to people in my constituency, and another one will say, I 
talk to people in my constituency and they’re very pleased with 
the budget, and they’re pleased with what’s happening in this 
province, and they’re pleased with the way the Tory plan is 
going. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they honestly believe 
that, they haven’t gone out of this room for a long, long time. 
Because when you get out of this room and talk to the people of 
this province, they’re telling you: don’t touch the dental plan, 
don’t touch the drug plan, don’t have 11,000 people waiting in 
hospital line-ups. And the rhetoric that comes out of these 
people says everything is okay, we have a plan. How can we 
believe that? 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hungry children of 
this province can’t fill their stomachs with Tory rhetoric. The 
seniors and others can’t administer your rhetoric to cure their 
ills instead of the drugs they need. Cancer patients and other 
people waiting in hospital beds can’t use your rhetoric to 
receive their necessary operations. Dental nurses can’t use your  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

311 
 

rhetoric to get jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. and families can’t use 
your Tory rhetoric to pay their high, high taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll tell you 
what the people are saying, the children are saying of this 
province. They’re saying, Daddy, why do we have to leave our 
farm? Why do we have to leave our farm today? They’re 
saying, Daddy, why don’t you have a job? Why don’t you have 
a job? And let’s think about those young children when they 
grow up. And you listen carefully please, because when they 
grow up, the people . . . the children on the farms will have fond 
memories of you, I’m sure, driving them off the land — 
worrisome looks on their parents’ faces. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the children in the cities who line up in line 
waiting for the food bank will have fond memories of this Tory 
government. And I’ll tell you, those memories will last for a 
long, long time. Those memories of standing in line at the food 
bank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are not fond memories. 
 
And I’ll tell you then, these people stand up in their places and 
they say you’re scaring the people, you’re promoting scare 
tactics. Well I’ll tell you and I’ll tell the members opposite, 
those people are scared. They’re scared because they don’t have 
money, they don’t have income, and they have no hope for the 
future. And yet you stand in your ;place day after day and say 
there’s no problems, we’re going to fix it. You’re going to fix it. 
But it may be too late for a lot of people in this province. It’ll be 
too late for those who left; it’ll be too late for those who 
couldn’t buy their drugs. I’ll tell you, it will be too late for some 
of those people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to turn now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a moment to 
agriculture. We see in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an $8 
million . . . nearly $8 million cut in the agriculture budget. Here 
we go again — 25 per cent cut last year in agriculture, and 
things must have really improved because they can cut the 
budget by another $8 million. They don’t need that money for 
agriculture. 
 
(2045) 
 
And they have some programs . . . they have a lot of programs. 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to show you, to put it in 
context, this government spent as much time talking about 
increasing taxes in their budget as they did about agriculture, 
and they cut $8 million out of the agriculture budget. 
 
We have one little program that I want to talk about just for a 
minute, and that was the announcement in the budget that there 
was going to be an incentive for the livestock industry. 
Partnerships, corporations can receive up to $8 million per 
operation for a livestock incentive — $8 million. 
 
Well I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that every family farm in 
this province is going to run out and grab $8 million to finance 
their livestock operation. I ask, is that geared for the family 
farm who’s running a 100-cow herd? Is that geared  

for the family farm who are diversifying their economy by 
having livestock and grain and hogs? Is that going to help that 
family farm, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
I’ll tell you it’s not, and I’ll tell you who it’s going to help. It’s 
going to help people, the friends of Tories who they tell — and 
they may believe them — that free trade is going to boom the 
agriculture, or the livestock industry in this province. They’re 
leading them down the garden path, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
I’ll tell you why. If you have $8 million at nine and 
three-quarter per cent interest for the livestock in this province, 
I can tell you, I can predict exactly, who is going to take that 
money. And it’s not going to be the family farm. It’s going to 
be large corporate entities, financed by people other than 
farmers to try to put this livestock industry back unchanged. But 
why do they do it that way, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They do it 
that way because that’s the friends of the Tories; that’s the 
business people the Tories are looking after. 
 
They’re not looking after the family farm. In fact, if we look at 
what they’re doing to livestock on the family farm, they have a 
cash advance program that a lot of small family farms took for 
their livestock operation. And what did they do for that cash 
advance? They cut it back to 75 per cent of what they could 
take. They made the farmers pay it back because the livestock 
industry was doing better. Things were doing better in the 
livestock industry. So they cut back on the family operator in 
livestock and they turned around and they’ll give $8 million to a 
corporate entity to promote the livestock industry. What kind of 
nonsense, what kind of illogical garbage is that? 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ll tell the people 
over across the way here, that if they think that Saskatchewan 
farmers are falling for this garbage rhetoric that you’re putting 
out, if you think they can’t see through you like they can see 
through a clear window pane, you’re misleading yourselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Because when you cut back on family farm 
operations and give money to large corporate entities to try to 
promote livestock, that is not in support of the family farm. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can just look a little closer at the trend 
this government is leading to in this budget. And if you look at 
the land transfer program, there is none. And I’ll tell you, I’m 
not one to stand up here and criticize a government or anybody 
who is doing well. I’d like to think that if something’s worth 
mentioning, I’ll mention it. And honestly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I have looked long and hard in here and I’ll give you some 
examples. It says the grant, out of the budget Estimates 
1988-89, “Grant to the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan for interest subsidy pursuant to The Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Act,” last year estimated at 
$36 million, this year estimated at $26 million. Grants for 
interest subsidy down $10 million — down $10 million. What 
kind of support is that to the family farm, to the person who’s 
retiring and who can’t sell his land because nobody can afford 
to buy it? That’s really supporting him — reducing it. 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

312 
 

And then they go along and it says: “Grant to the Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan for an allowance for losses 
on loans pursuant to The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Act,” — for losses on loans. They jump that up a 
million and a half dollars because they know that there’s going 
to be losses. and instead of giving an interest rate protection and 
assistance, they cut that and they put taxpayers’ money into 
insuring the losses. 
 
And let’s read on. “Counselling and Assistance for Farmers — 
Implementation of guarantees,” implementation of guarantees 
meaning that under the CAF (counselling and assistance for 
farmers ) program the government, who is guaranteeing the 
loan, is going to have to pay on some of those guarantees to the 
banks because the farmer won’t be able to pay. 
 
And what do they do? They jump that in their estimates $2.6 
million. and that tells me that this government knows that 
there’s farmers who are going to be going under, knows that the 
banks are going to be calling in the loans under the CAF 
program, and that tells me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government instead of ensuring that the farmers stay on the 
land, it’s ensuring that the banks get their money. And that’s 
where the priorities are. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll flip over the Justice 
department. And under that number 28 is the Farm Land 
Security Board. Farm Land Security Board, last year $608,000; 
this year just about $2.5 million — $2.5 million for the Farm 
Land Security Board. Now with all due respect to the board, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has no teeth. 
 
But is this government taking taxpayers’ money and shoving it 
into the Farm Land Security Board to counsel farmers, to help 
farmers? No, to get them off the land. And if we want to look at 
some of the statistics from the Farm Land Security Board, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, since the beginning there was 2,251 
foreclosure notices filed on 1,806 farmers. Right now they’re 
about 800 cases behind; they are not yet handled, and only 106 
recommendations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the court that the 
farmers should not be foreclosed on — 106 recommended in 
favour of the farmer out of 1,800 cases. 
 
Well let’s look at the recommendations in favour of the lenders 
— 289. So nearly 3:1 in favour of the lender. And where is this 
government’s program to transfer land? Where is this 
government’s program for assistance to agriculture? I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s non-existent, that’s where it is. 
 
And if you just tally out what this Farm Land Security Board 
cost, the cost of the program last year was just over a million 
dollars. 1.284; and if you multiply that out, that’s about $1,215 
per farmer helped. That’s an incredible amount of money that 
this government is spending on possibly helping 106 farmers. 
But they don’t have any ideas of how to keep them on the land. 
They have no idea of how to keep them on the land. And that’s 
the priorities of this government — they don’t have any when it 
comes to agriculture. 
 
I’d like to turn just for a minute now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

 to a couple of recent program changes that this government has 
made. First of all, I’d like to talk about the community pasture 
program. Did we see in this budget anything to show that the 
community pastures were going to be maintained as they were 
as the farmers wanted, as the government didn’t want, without 
consulting with farmers, unilaterally change the program? 
Nothing. 
 
And I’ll tell you, I’ve talked to a lot of the farmers and ranchers 
involved in the community pastures, from a lot of areas that the 
members opposite represent. And those farmers and ranchers 
are telling me that’s the last time I’m voting Tory. And let’s 
face it, I’m being quite honest. Traditionally a lot of farmers 
and ranchers have voted Tory. I don’t take that away from them 
because they were convinced by the rhetoric. They were 
convinced by the rhetoric, and now when they see what’s 
actually happening in the field of agriculture and specifically 
with the community pastures, they’re saying, this government 
doesn’t consult, this government doesn’t listen, this government 
is bent on its ideology of privatizing, and community pastures is 
just one on the list. 
 
That’s what this government and this Premier is doing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, trying to take the money out of farmers’ 
pockets to privatize everything just on ideology. That is such 
garbage. That is no way to run a province and the farmers know 
that. And I’ll ask these members to stand up and deny that. And 
they wouldn’t when they had their turn. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are members, like this 
member opposite over here who has stood behind his Premier 
babbling about the farm production loan program. He didn’t 
have any ideas. The Premier stands up and says well, we talked 
to all the farm groups, and we talked to farmers, and we 
consulted with everybody, and they wanted to extend it over 10 
years, and they wanted to up the interest rate, and they wanted a 
new security agreement. Well, I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is wrong. The consultation merely went as far as 
the 10-year extension. It was nobody’s idea but the Premier’s 
and the government opposite to tie farmers up with security and 
up the interest rates. 
 
And the Premier of this province stands in his place and he says 
farmers asked for it. well that is garbage, and the farmers know 
it’s garbage. And so I and many other people, through letters 
and phone calls, have tried to convince this government. They 
say, look, we don’t have the money. We can’t tie up our 
security because it’s going to put in jeopardy our operating 
capital. Things have gotten worse from last year. Why are you 
increasing the interest rate? Why do we deserve this? That’s 
what they are saying, why do we deserve this? 
 
And members opposite know that they’ve got the letters. 
They’ve received the phone calls, and they’ll stand in their 
place and say the farmers and the farm organizations asked for 
this and that’s what we had to do. Well that’s garbage and they 
know it’s garbage. 
 
And another thing the farmers are asking, they’re saying why 
doesn’t Weyerhaeuser get treated the same as farmers do? And I 
can’t stress this point enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A large 
multinational corporation walks  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

313 
 

into this province at the beck and call of the government, strikes 
a deal, and says, well we don’t have to make any payments 
unless we make some money. And the government says, fair 
enough. You’re an upstanding corporate citizen; you’ll do your 
duty and create jobs and manage our forests properly. The 
government believed that, I’m sure. So they don’t have to make 
any payments unless they make a profit. 
 
And why then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would a Premier — 
let’s just listen — why would a Premier who’s supposed strong 
strength is in the rural areas with farmers, why would he stand 
up and make changes, ridiculous changes, to a program that 
makes no sense to a farmer, that they didn’t ask for, that they 
can’t handle, and give a better deal to Weyerhaeuser? It is a 
straight . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He betrayed them. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I agree, a straight absolute case of 
betrayal. And that is why the movement is out in the country 
away from this Tory government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — They have one sweetheart deal, easy term 
credit for Weyerhaeuser large multinational corporation, and 
another tough deal for Saskatchewan farmers where they have 
to pay regardless of their income. And let’s take it a little 
further. Weyerhaeuser’s profits are going up; farmers’ profits 
are going down. What a betrayal of the farmers of this province! 
 
And if you members over there, if you members over there 
don’t understand that, well I feel sorry for you. And I think you 
could do right now anything that you wanted to do, and the 
farmers of this province would say, sorry, boys, we don’t trust 
you any longer. And that’s what they’re saying, and members 
opposite know they’re saying that. And that’s why they are 
moving away from this Tory government because they were 
betrayed. 
 
So Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was anxiously awaiting this budget 
because I was hoping for some announcements. I was hoping 
for the farmers of this province that there would be some 
announcements on debt, on stabilizing the world economy, 
stabilizing the debt of farmers, helping out the income, 
adjusting the production loans so that it made some sense — no 
such announcements. 
 
(2100) 
 
But I’d just like to go through some of the announcements, 
some of the highlights in the government’s own highlight 
package. Agriculture . . . And just before I do that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to nit-pick a little bit. I don’t like nit-picking, 
but I have to right now. In the speech, the budget address, we 
have a number of headings. We have fiscal policy, economic 
development, and we have other major headings — fiscal 
situation. And what does agriculture have? Small print — 
agricultural development. And I know why they put it in small 
print, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there was nothing there. 
 
Here are some of the highlights. I’ll give the government  

some free advertising here. 
 

Agriculture:: a commitment to continue to press for the 
elimination of predatory pricing and subsidized 
over-production of agriculture products. 

 
That’s okay, but what about the farmers that are going broke 
right now? Where’s the announcement for the farmers who are 
going broke right now? Where is the income support? Where is 
the debt restructuring? It’s not there. They’re running around 
the world telling the European Economic Community, who has 
said that they’ll never go hungry again, to stop producing. 
They’re dreaming, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And another one, the second one: 
 

Enhanced support for agricultural diversification through: 
 
$15 million in 1988 for irrigation-based economic 
development. 

 
That’s okay. But I ask the members opposite, have they talked 
to the irrigation farmers lately? The irrigation farmers are some 
of the guys who are in the biggest trouble because they can’t get 
the value for their product, they can’t sell all they’re producing, 
and they’re paying exorbitant fees for water and power and 
equipment. And this government, one of its highlights is, it’s 
going to put $15 million more into irrigation. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if things were going 
good, I’d say hooray, that’s great. But what about the people 
who are losing their farms and losing their land? It does nothing 
for them. And that’s the highlight. 
 
And I’ve already mentioned the new lending program for 
partnerships and corporation with regards to livestock 
operations. I don’t have to repeat that. 
 
And here’s another one — “active negotiation with the federal 
government to create a world class centre for excellence of 
agriculture at research and technology at the University . . . ” 
Good. Nothing wrong with that. If things were going good, I’d 
say hurrah, hurrah. 
 
But what about the people who can’t make their payments? 
What about people who the banks and the government is 
foreclosing upon? Does that help them, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Does that help them one little bit? That’s the problem with this 
government. It says it’s standing up for farmers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but the reality is it is void of ideas for agriculture in 
this province. 
 
Another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “ . . . commitment to work 
with the federal government on soil conservation issues.” 
Nothing wrong with that. But I’ll tell you there’s a little irony in 
that one, because while the government is committing itself to 
soil conservation, which we should do in this province, it’s 
doing nothing to alleviate the pressure that farmers are being 
put under to produce and mine the soils. Isn’t that ironic? They 
say they’re going to conserve soil, but there is no programs to 
allow farmers to operate their farms in such a manner that they 
can 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

314 
 

produce and harvest the soil and manage the soil on a long-term 
basis, because farmers have to mine their soil now to try to get 
enough production to pay their bills. It makes no sense, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Where are the priorities? 
 
And then, “Continued support (it says ) for farms through (the) 
extension of the Counselling and Assistance . . . Program and 
Farmland Security Board.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, the CAF 
program, with all due respect to those people who are 
administering and carrying it out, simply speeds up the process 
of foreclosing on farmers, and the government over there knows 
that. It speeds up. 
 
And they’re going to extend the repayment of the production 
loan. Need I say any more? I’ve said enough on that. 
 
Maintain the farmers’ royalty rebate, oil royalty rebate. They 
cut it last budget, in half, but they’re going to maintain it this 
time. And what’s that doing for those people who can’t manage 
their debt? What’s that doing for people who can’t stay on their 
land and who are forced into mental stress? I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t work for me, and it doesn’t work 
for the farmers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I have to just interject for a minute, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to read a little report card on one of the 
members. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Name him — Cut Knife-Lloyd. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The member, yes, is from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. And it says: 
 

Our Saskatchewan MLA seems to have changed hats from 
that of visible politician to that of a behind the scenes cast 
member whose name is only mentioned when somebody 
else is at the microphone. 

 
And the following is a short list of major local events and the 
member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster’s record of attendance at 
those events. This has got a lot to do with a member from rural 
Saskatchewan representing farmers and is supposed to be out 
there talking to them and is absolutely invisible because he 
knows the policies of this government are void of ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The record of attendance: January ’87, Marcel 
Masse, border city visit, absent; June ’87, Michael Wilson visit, 
absent; July ’87, Canada Day celebrations, absent; August ’87, 
Hereford display centre opening, absent; September ’87, student 
conference, he managed to make that one; October, ’87, George 
F. Baiten Day, Baiten’s bridge opening, absent; October ’87, 
horizontal drilling well unveiling. Oh, a drilling well unveiling, 
he was present at. I wonder why he was present at the drilling 
presentation and absent in his constituency on other occasions. 

November ’87, PC fundraiser, Upgrader address, absent; ’88, 
John Gormley discusses free trade, absent. Maybe he could 
learn something. I doubt it though. January ’88, Premier’s 
supper at Maidstone, absent; January ’88, Bill McKnight 
address, Two Hills, CoC (chamber of commerce), absent; 
February ’88, Art Price address at the upgrader, absent; 
February ’88, Don Mazankowski address at the upgrader, 
absent; February ’88, Olympic torch relay, he made it to that 
one. 
 
And the chamber president says, and I quote, “Michael hasn’t 
been available a lot in the past.” And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is absolutely the reason, that’s the reason that this 
government is so far out of touch with the people of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And I say it goes for nearly every member; I 
say it goes for nearly every member in the opposite bench. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And if you sit back and look at the policies of 
this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on agriculture and the 
world economy, that is why these people are not in touch. 
They’re out of touch with the people, and even if they do get in 
touch with them, they won’t listen; they don’t consult; they 
don’t respond to the needs of the people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Just to wind up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to wind up, there’s a 
little publication — I believe it came out about the first of 
March — Farm Debt Capital and Income Review — Farm 
Debt Capital and Income Review. This is a study by a Ralph 
Ashmead and a couple of other people. And this study says, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker:  
 

Canadian farmers are saddled with $4.11 in debt for every 
dollar they retain in net income. 

 
Four dollars and eleven cents in debt for every dollar of net 
income for Canadian farmers. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
has this government, under this Premier, under the thumb of the 
Primer Minister of this country, who can’t run his own affairs, 
what are they doing? They’re increasing the interest rates. 
They’re taking security. They’re not managing the debt crisis. 
They’re putting greater taxes on the people of this province. 
They’re taking away the health care and the dental care. 
They’re raising taxes, and they’re paying their friends. They’re 
paying off their friends. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my estimation that is a 
sorrowful way to run government. The people of this province, 
out in rural Saskatchewan especially, know the truth. They 
know the difference between the truth and lies. And this 
government is trying desperately to hang onto that rural part of 
Saskatchewan with their rhetoric, with their garbage about 
deficiency payments and all other things like that — they’re the 
only ones that could do it. Well I’ll tell you, the people are 
seeing through that. 
 
And the Premier can stand up and talk about families, rules of 
fairness, rules for decency, and rules to protect  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

315 
 

families and, indeed, individuals. And I tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is not true. He’s not doing it, and that’s why the 
people don’t trust him. And that’s why I cannot stand in my 
place and support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to participate in the budget debate this evening. I am 
somewhat dismayed that the members on the government side 
refused to stand up and defend their budget. All evening, not 
one speaker from the government side of the House — a budget 
that the government is absolutely ashamed of, absolutely 
ashamed of. They’re acknowledging . . . they’re drawing to my 
attention, Mr. Speaker, the fact one member concluded his 
remarks this evening — the Minister of Highways concluded 
his remarks, but since that time not one speaker from the 
government side of the House. And it shows the shame that 
they must feel for the budget that was introduced by the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget seemed to me to be a situation where I 
had never seen anyone take so long to say so little. Basically, he 
could have wrapped it up by saying Saskatchewan people are 
going to pay more while they receive less services, and some 
people in our society, those who have the most, will be paying a 
lesser share of the burden that this government has created for 
us. 
 
I think it is worth drawing to people’s attention this evening, 
Mr. Speaker, although it’s been done many times before, the 
situation in the province of Saskatchewan where we had a 
balanced budget, a surplus budget at the end of the 1981-82 
fiscal year. But since that time, since this government has come 
to office, every budget — 1982-82, ’83-84, right up until the 
current budget introduced, is a deficit budget putting us into a 
position where we’re paying almost a million dollars a day in 
interest alone just to service the debt. And think, Mr. Speaker, 
what a million dollars a day could do for agriculture in this 
province, what it could do for our education system in the 
province of Saskatchewan or, yes, what it could do for health 
care. 
 
There are many things that we could address this evening in the 
budget debate, but I think that I will try and confine my remarks 
as much as possible, Mr. Speaker, to the whole area of health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan. We don’t have to go into 
the history. 
 
We all know that the medicare system that we have appreciated 
up until the last couple of years came into place in 1962 after 
very long and very dedicated work by some members of this 
political party who set against almost impossible odds, it 
seemed like at the time, that yes, we could have a health care 
system in the province of Saskatchewan where it wasn’t a 
system where those that can pay the most get the best health 
care. We believed, and the people in this party prior to myself 
and others that sit here this evening believed, that you should 
have good quality health care regardless of your income or your 
financial status in life. 
 
(2115) 

There were extensions to that program, of course, Mr. Speaker, 
since 1962, and the two that come to mind immediately are the 
school-based children’s dental program, and secondly, the 
prescription drug plan. 
 
In terms of the dental program in the province of Saskatchewan, 
it’s been privatized — piratized is more accurate. The member 
from Moose Jaw North points that out quite capable. And now 
we find the utilization rate, especially of rural children in the 
dental program, to be far down from what it was under the 
dental program when it was school-based, and we had dental 
therapists and trained professionals to repair and to provide 
good dental hygiene for the young children of this province. we 
no longer have that in the province of Saskatchewan because of 
the privatization measure that the government has taken upon 
themselves. 
 
and what we’re leading to is again a system going back to the 
dark ages where those that have the money can pay for a level 
of care, and those that don’t have the money don’t get the care 
that they should be receiving. And it shows that the lack of 
compassion in this government is creating a great deal of 
mistrust with people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of the prescription drug plan, other members have 
quite capably pointed out here this evening the very strenuous 
and devastating circumstances that have arisen by people who 
cannot afford to put money up front to purchase the prescription 
drugs that were e prescribed to them by physicians in this 
province of Saskatchewan. They have to turn away from the 
drug store counter, walk out and look for funding to pay for the 
prescription drugs they need to sustain their health, in some 
cases life-sustaining drugs. In other cases they make decisions 
in repriorizing the meagre funding that they do have for their 
families — making a choice between food and their prescription 
drugs in many, many cases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were told, I should say misled is more accurate, Mr. 
Speaker, that the provincial health care budget in the province 
of Saskatchewan increased this year over last by some $66 
million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The member from Saskatoon Sutherland says 
not true, and he is absolutely right, Mr. Speaker. If you look at 
the bottom line in the budget documents, and you subtract last 
year’s budget from this year’s budget, it would appear that 
there’s an increase of about $66 million, in fact a little over $65 
million increase in health care spending . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Appearances are deceiving. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — But appearances are deceiving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at a couple of examples as to why this is deceiving, 
and why people in the province of Saskatchewan are being 
misled, and why they’re losing trust in the government sitting 
opposite and running this province into debt. 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

316 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would look at item number 22 under the health 
care budget, and it reads: “Grants to Hospitals — Repayment of 
principal and interest on capital loans from the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation.” Last year, Mr. Speaker, 
$4.5 million was budgeted. This year, Mr. Speaker, $15.9 
million is budgeted. But does that go into health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan? No, it doesn’t go into health care. 
But it goes into paying money to a Saskatchewan Crown 
corporation which is a new invention by the Conservative 
administration in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It used to be, Mr. Speaker, that the department of supply and 
service always provided plant and facilities for government 
departments to operate under and within those facilities. That’s 
no longer the case. They abolished the department of supply 
and service and created the property management corporation, 
and therefore charge government departments for facilities that 
are utilized. Well some people might say that’s good in 
principle. But what happens is that the people are being 
deceived in the province of Saskatchewan because on that one 
item they would say, well, the health care budget has gone up 
by $11.4 million. Totally false, Mr. Speaker, because not one 
cent of that money goes into health care programs in the 
delivery of those programs to people who require the medical 
facilities in the province of Saskatchewan. And I say, shame on 
the government opposite for misleading the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Another item . . . I’d look at item 17 in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. We have: “Payments to Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation.” And I would assume this 
would have to be for the rental of facilities of the Department of 
Health. They had an increase there, Mr. Speaker, of a little over 
a million, almost $2 million. Does that money go into health 
care services and the delivery of those services to the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker,? Does it? No, it 
doesn’t. 
 
So there, Mr. Speaker, just in those two items alone, we have 2 
and 11, we have about $13 million that has nothing to do with 
health care. It’s a juggling of figures by this government 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, and I say shame on them again for 
misleading people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like, Mr. Speaker, to address a very delicate subject in 
the legislature this evening during the budget debate, and that is 
one of the whole question of abortion. Abortion is dealt with, 
with great sensitivity on both sides of this legislature, in fact, 
throughout the country as a whole, it’s a topic which arouses 
great emotions in people on all extremes of the abortion issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would want to say that the topic of abortion is 
not something I and my spouse gave a great deal of thought to 
before I entered a political life. It was something that we 
assumed that no one would want. Why would anyone want 
abortion? But I found, Mr. Speaker, that when I got involved in 
the political forum, people, like those politicians opposite, 
would try and paint people into corners as if it was a black and 
white  

issue. You were either anti-abortion or you were pro-abortion. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would want to say this evening that it’s not 
a black and white issue — absolutely not a black and white 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my spouse and I finally had to sit down and 
discuss between us what the abortion issue meant to us as 
individual citizens of Saskatchewan and this great country, 
Canada, because we felt a responsibility to let constituents and 
people in the public know where we stood on the issue. and I’m 
going to lay that out this evening, because the members 
opposite have not laid out, in fact, where they stand on the 
abortion issue. They prefer to hide their heads in the sand and 
cast aspersions and accusations on something that should be 
dealt with very seriously, and not to try and make great political 
gain out of something that’s a very serious issue with our 
society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well finally, through discussions and through discussions with 
the public and with our own family, I decided that I didn’t like 
abortion very much, just as I had found that many people I 
talked to did not like abortion, Mr. Speaker. And I suppose 
what it came down to for me was that it was so clear that it was 
not a black and white issue because there were situations where 
I could not tell someone no, you cannot have an abortion. 
 
And I want to point out a couple of instances, Mr. Speaker, this 
evening. For example, if my spouse came to me and said Doug, 
I’m going to die if I carry through with this pregnancy, I 
wouldn’t be able to tell her no, you can’t have an abortion. And 
I challenge members opposite: which one of you could stand 
and say to your spouse, you die rather than abort? Which ones 
of the members opposite could do that in all of your hypocrisy 
sitting over there on that side of the House? 
 
Or we have daughters in our family, Mr. Speaker. In the case of 
an attack or a rape situation, I would not be able to tell one of 
my daughters absolutely no, you can’t have an abortion. I could 
not inflict that kind of control and that lack of compassion over 
members of my family. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite stand up and say so 
sanctimoniously that they’re all pro-life, that they’re against 
abortion in every situation is what they want to lead people to 
believe. Well is that so, Mr. Speaker,? Let’s see what happens 
in practice. 
 
First off, the government opposite takes birth control pills out of 
the prescription drug plan. Many, many people, especially 
low-income people and single parents rely on birth control pills. 
What do they do? For people who can’t afford them, they 
virtually take away one of the methods of birth control for 
many, many individuals in our society, Mr. Speaker,. 
 
Secondly, what do they do? They cut funding to groups that 
want to promote information about sexuality and pregnancy and 
how you raise a good family in support of strong families in 
Saskatchewan and Canada. They take that funding away, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what’s the worst sin of all, Mr. Speaker? The worst sin of 
all is they say they’re absolutely pro-life in every case  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

317 
 

over there. That’s what they say to the media; that’s what they 
perpetuate. But when the child is born into a poor family, in 
many cases a single-parent family, they’ve cut the levels of 
support so low that families are virtually on the verge of 
starvation. They resort to food banks and begging for food, 
school lunch programs. That’s a betrayal of families in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, an absolute betrayal of 
families in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The federal law, Mr. Speaker, under which 
abortions were governed, was controversial for a long period of 
time. Many people supported the law; many people wanted the 
law changed to make it easier for abortions; many people 
wanted it taken out so it would be impossible to get abortions in 
our society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Supreme Court, thanks to some politicians turning over 
more and more and more authority that legislators and 
parliamentarians should have, turning it over to the courts, the 
Supreme Court struck down the abortion law in Canada. And 
what happened? 
 
Well the Premier in the province of Saskatchewan said, we’ll 
fund abortions. And then he said, no, we won’t fund all 
abortions, we’ll fund some abortions, we won’t fund other 
abortions; we won’t tell you which ones will be funded, but 
we’ll leave that up to the physicians in the province of 
Saskatchewan as to which abortions get funded and which ones 
don’t. So they say pro-life, but then they still want to fund 
abortions, so which is it on that side of the House? What is your 
policy on the abortion question in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
You have the right to let people know. You’re the governors of 
the province. You’re the people who set the legislation, and you 
sit by and hide your heads in the sand waiting for one of your 
federal colleagues to change the law, or bring in a new law with 
a notwithstanding clause so that there’ll be some governance of 
the whole abortion question again in Canada. 
 
Now which of those members opposite support the position of 
one Barbara McDougall, a member of the Privy Council, a 
cabinet minister in Mr. Mulroney’s government? She recently 
had an interview which she’s quoted, and she’s referring to 
abortion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a moral choice. There is no getting around it, and the 
only one who is really qualified to make that choice is the 
woman to whose body this little thing is attached. 
 
Is that the position of the members opposite? This little thing 
attached, is that the position of the members opposite? Stand up 
and be counted alongside Barbara McDougall, or state your 
own position. What are you to do? The sanctimonious babbling 
on the side opposite — no one knows what your true position is. 
Your rhetoric is wearing very, very thin. and, Mr. Speaker, the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan will bring them to task 
in the very near future. 
 

(2130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a delicate situation, and I would encourage 
all members on both sides of the House to do some 
soul-searching about this very serious issue. We can’t run and 
hide our heads in the sand. People elected us to make decisions. 
 
I’ve pointed out what my personal position is here this evening, 
Mr. Speaker,. The government doesn’t care to do that; they 
don’t care to take action. But I don’t want to get into a squabble 
of, what’s your position, what’s your position — arguing back 
and forth. The government has a responsibility to, very clearly, 
take action on this issue, and we want, along with man people 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to see the 
government take action on this very important issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would want to conclude by saying how 
disappointed I am in the government, as many of my 
constituents are, as they’ve told me. The lack of action in 
agriculture, although they spent horrendous sums of money, the 
agricultural situation is getting worse and worse. Health care — 
very serious situation again, Mr. Speaker. The government is 
not listening to people in the province of Saskatchewan on the 
growing waiting lists. The education system is underfunded, 
Mr. Speaker. and the government plays with figures in their 
budget, not telling the whole story to people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, relying on rhetoric and little action. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that if the government wants to 
hear a clear message from the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, they should call the by-elections in Regina 
Elphinstone and Saskatoon Eastview, and people in 
Saskatchewan will speak very clearly to them in defeating them 
soundly in both of those by-elections, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be dealing with the issues in 
relation to the general budget and the general issues that come 
from it. I’ll also deal with the issue of the budget as it relates to 
the North and also the budget as it relates to Indian and Métis 
people. 
 
In general, as I listened to the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, 
again I found that there was very little in there for ordinary 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — There was little in there for people in northern 
Saskatchewan, and there was little in there for Indian and Métis 
people of Saskatchewan. I have seen the same formula used in 
regards to this budget. There is less services for people, and at 
the same time more money taken from the pockets of the 
people. And as I looked at the whole issue of the deficit in 
general — we now have a deficit of $3.7 billion — I look at that 
deficit figure and that’s an interest rate of $329 million per year 
— that’s $329 million. That’s the interest rate. What that 
means, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re paying so much money to the 
banks and the large scale corporations that this figure, this 
interest rate figure, is twice what we spend in agriculture  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

318 
 

in this province. It’s over 300 times what we spend in Indian 
economic development. It is a tremendous, tremendous figure 
and a tremendous burden for the people of this province. 
 
As I looked at other aspects of the budget, I looked at the 
Highways budget. In northern Saskatchewan we have been 
working at trying to improve the Hanson Lake Road, Highway 
102 north and 905. There’s highway improvements that are 
required from 102 to Grandmother’s Bay. There’s highway 
improvement and a request for highways from Cumberland 
House to the mine where people could work, just 25 miles 
away. There’s requests for roads to be built this past year and 
improvements, let’s say, at the Muskoday Indian Reserve so 
that people could have a walkway on that bridge going across 
and to have proper lighting on that bridge. But we haven’t heard 
anything — not a thing. There was supposed to be a road 
improvement from the main highway to the James Smith 
Reserve — but nothing, absolutely nothing. We looked at the 
highway system on the north-west side of the province, as we 
see throughout the province. What we see is a cut-back situation 
of $4 million. Highways have been cut back. 
 
When a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan have talked to 
me about the need for improving the road, at the same time this 
government brags about the new deal which will lead to 
privatization which we have to pay for, SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation) Eldor Resource, and the 
requirement for a road in that area, the people don’t even build 
one mile on that Highway No. 102 north. 
 
Here we have 48,000 pounds in regards to the transporting of 
hazardous chemicals like cyanide that are being transferred on 
this road, and there’s a record number of accidents because 
there’s not only a lack of improvement, there’s even a lack and 
a cut-back on maintenance on that highway. Not only do more 
people die on the road, but there are more spills of hazardous 
chemicals. 
 
And what do we see from this PC government? We see 
complete neglect and a complete lack of concern, not only on 
the safety of people as they travel on the roads in northern 
Saskatchewan, but on the fact that more dangerous chemicals 
can be spilt on that road. There is no money for the road in the 
northern area — no mention. 
 
As I look at another aspect of the budget, in the general terms of 
an issue that strikes at the very heart of every individual in this 
province, something that, when we look back at the history of 
last year, we know one thing — that health had to be the 
number one issue of this province. We saw for the first time in 
the history of Saskatchewan, 100,000 names put on a petition in 
direct regards to the policy and practice of this government in 
regards to health and erosion of medicare, especially in the year 
when we had celebrated the 25th anniversary of medicare. 
 
There was the road to privatization of the dental plan; there was 
the fact that the drug plan had affected the very nature of how 
people would relate to government in regards to the health care 
system; that the prescription  

drug plan brought untold hardship for many people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But when the debate came — and I would like to mention this 
again; it’s a very important point — when the laws were 
changed last June to bring into play this new prescription drug 
plan, many people were very struck by the fact that they would 
have to have money out front — $40 here, $100 here, $150 
there. In a situation where you have 60 to 80 per cent 
unemployment at the community level, where the up-front 
money and the up-front cash is not so readily available as we 
would have in the urban centres, here you have a case where a 
lot of the people decided . . . when they went into the drug store 
they made a decision sometimes to turn away because they 
didn’t have enough money to buy their drugs. 
 
And that to me is a sad situation, especially when it’s 
historically recognized that Saskatchewan was one of the 
tremendous leaders in this world in regards to health care. We 
have come down to a situation where people couldn’t get health 
care because of policies brought in by this government. The 
drug plan to this day, with the reflection of the people’s own 
thinking last year, a lot of the people thought, yes, I think 
maybe the government will change its mind. But when I looked 
at this budget speech, there was absolutely no change, 
absolutely no change in regards to the issue of the drug plan. 
 
All we got was the aspect of a task force. And we know that the 
task force is just another excuse for cutting back. We know that 
a lot of genuine people out there want a good strong task force. 
They have a strong feeling because of the tradition of this 
province, they have a strong tradition of building up and 
improving on our health care system, and they genuinely feel 
that a task force would be good. But they see the record of this 
government and they see the fact that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
The member from across has asked me to, so I’ll beg — 
because it’s getting close to the time — beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:45 p.m. 
 
 
 


