


















































April 14, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 14, 1988 
 

581 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought perhaps 
tonight when the Deputy Premier says that I was standing up to 
speak, he might stand up and try to adjourn the House, because 
he knows that I was on the speaking list the other evening when 
he decided that he would close down the legislature rather than 
to give me my chance to address the Assembly on private 
members’ day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Undemocratic. 
 
Ms. Smart: — It certainly was undemocratic and it certainly says 
something about closing down our freedom of speech in this 
legislature when we have the time to address the concerns of our 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Chairman, tonight we are debating an interim supply Bill, a 
government supply Bill, and certainly those of us on this side of 
the House have no intention of voting against this Bill because 
we realize that the needs of government must proceed. But before 
we get to the vote on this issue . . . I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if 
you could get the boys across the way to be a little more quiet so 
I could have some order, so that I could speak in this legislature. 
 
Speaking to this interim supply Bill gives me a chance to make 
some statements on the budget in general, because it’s part of the 
budget tonight that we are going to be voting on, and it’s very 
important that those of us, particularly who haven’t had a chance 
to reply to the budget speech at this point, have an opportunity to 
say some of the things that are important to us and to our 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this was a budget prepared by a Minister of 
Finance who has demonstrated clearly to those of us in this 
legislature that he can’t read a balance sheet, that he doesn’t 
understand audited statements, that he doesn’t care that people 
get hurt by his government’s total failure to enforce legislation 
and regulations of this province. And that’s a serious charge that 
I make, Mr. Chairman, but I make it particularly in view of the 
6,700 depositors from Principal Group. 
 
And I want to say that they particularly have learned how little 
confidence they can have in the Minister of Finance and in his 
cabinet colleagues who have kept passing the buck literally 
between them, as to who is responsible for answering to this 
issue. They won’t take the responsibility for not being able to 
understand the balance sheets and the audited statements. They 
won’t take the responsibility for the fact that Cormie has said that 
they misled the people with the annual review that he put forward 
from people with the annual review that he put forward from 
Principal Group, and they won’t face the fact that it’s this 
government in the province of Saskatchewan responsible for 
monitoring The Investment Contracts Act under which this 
fiasco has taken place. And there’s 6,700 people in this province 
who’ve been badly hurt by the Minister of Finance’s inability to 
function properly as a government  

representative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I say the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs have been passing the buck on this issue. And 
they’ve also been passing the bucks among themselves, as 
friends, and the budget certainly reflects that. 
 
This is also a Minister of Finance who has stated publicly, Mr. 
Chairman, that he feels he has a right as a politician to mislead 
people, to deceive people, and to betray people. And I find that 
absolutely shocking. But what is also shocking, Mr. Chairman, 
and I know it shocks the people in Saskatoon Centre and people 
in Saskatoon Eastview whom I’ve been talking to lately as I’ve 
been knocking on doors, that the Minister of Finance, along with 
his other cabinet colleagues, has demonstrated that he’s just 
another one of the little boys in the school yard who get a big 
bang out of name-calling and insults. Many of the members 
opposite, all of them in an adult manner and with statesmanlike 
dignity, elected by the people of Saskatchewan — they’ve 
demonstrated that the only level of debate that they’re capable of 
presenting in this House to the people of this province is the level 
of the elementary school yard at recess-time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And I want, on behalf of the constituents in 
Saskatoon Centre, to express my extreme disappointment at the 
level of discussion in this legislature, not only defending the 
budget, but also debating all the other motions and issues that 
have come before us. And I think particularly the Minister of 
Finance’s performances in this House are as pathetic as his 
budget and as his justification for the budget. 
 
The people I’ve been talking to are horrified, as I’ve said, by the 
insults and the hate mongering, by the double-talk and the 
deception, and by the total lack of competence and compassion 
shown by the PC government to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I know that grass-roots PCs are turning away in droves, and 
so they should. The government opposite deserves to be 
abandoned completely, to sink itself in its own dirty mud hole, 
and I trust the voters in Elphinstone and Eastview will do just 
that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have been asked by the Leader of the Opposition 
to be the critic for seniors’ issues. They’re not a department of 
seniors, but there are very many seniors in this province, and my 
emphasis in my new critic area is to . . . I’m meeting as many 
older people as possible, both individually and as representatives 
of senior organizations. 
 
I represent, as I’ve said often in this House, a constituency where 
one-third of the people are over the age of 60, and I know that 
they’ve been bringing to me a great number of their concerns. 
 
In my constituency and across this province there are  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

582 
 
 

people living on very low incomes who are seniors — not all 
seniors, but a great number of them. And I notice that in the 
budget this government effected in November, which is a long 
way from now in April, will be giving a $15 increase to the senior 
citizens’ income supplement — $15, Mr. Chairman. That 
apparently is to ensure a minimum income of nearly 10,000 per 
year, and that, Mr. Chairman, is just at the poverty level for 
people living in Saskatoon and in the big cities. 
 
Now I know from talking to seniors that many seniors are better 
off than that, and many seniors are saying, we’re all right, but 
we’re terribly worried about the younger generation. They’re 
worried because they see the programs that they have worked so 
hard to build up over the years in this province being destroyed. 
Programs that they put in place for the benefit of their children 
and their grandchildren. And there is a great sorrow out there in 
this province to see that many, many programs that this 
government is not funding and not supporting and is actively 
destroying. And I’ve said this before in the throne speech, and I 
will say every time I have an opportunity in this House to express 
the seniors’ great disappointment, that whereas they’re the ones 
that have built this province, they are watching what they built 
demolished. 
 
And I want to go back now to the many of them who have an 
income just at the poverty line or below in order to manage their 
finances here in Saskatchewan. And it was with some sadness 
that I joined the pensioner who was demonstrating in front of the 
legislature yesterday and today and who says that he’s going to 
go on being in front of the legislature with his pamphlet, pointing 
out the fact that in this latest budget, and last year, the 
government members opposite would do nothing to increase the 
superannuated pensioners’ fund. 
 
Now this is a fund, Mr. Chairman, which has been increased 
every year for the last 15 years to cover the cost of inflation or to 
help the seniors to manage to finance their homes and their food 
and their clothing. But for the last 20 months there’s been no 
increase in that pension — absolutely no increase. And this is 
people who are being pensioned on what’s called “the old plan,” 
where very often they were working for a salary that’s really 
quite low and they’re pensioned off on 70 per cent of that salary. 
They very much want that pension which they’ve contributed to 
over the years to help them to be able to fund their costs and to 
live independently into their old age. But this is not happening. 
That’s another 6,000 people in this province very bitterly 
disappointed with this government. 
 
And whereas this government in the budget provides a $15 
increase to come up in next November, the government has 
thought nothing of increasing the taxes in this province to the 
point where the seniors and other people on low incomes are 
groaning under the burden of it. 
 
The flat tax up to 2 per cent, largely responsible for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers being burdened with the highest income 
taxes in western Canada. And the flat tax hits seniors. The 
property taxes are up, and that hurts seniors so badly. So many 
of them on fixed incomes, living in their own homes, particularly 
in my constituency; I meet  

them every day. They don’t know how long they’re going to be 
able to afford to stay in their houses. 
 
You’ve reduced the payments to the municipalities, and that 
means the property taxes will have to go up. And it’s so ironic to 
me to see you say you’re going to increase the cost of home care, 
increase the budget of home care, and at the same time, put 
municipalities in the position where they have to increase the 
municipal tax, which means that people may not be able to stay 
in their own homes. 
 
There’s sky-rocketing utility rates, and many of my colleagues 
have mentioned this. Since 1982 the telephone services have 
increased 23 per cent. This from a government that promised free 
telephones to seniors. And that’s just a small example of how I 
say this government has betrayed the people of Saskatchewan. 
They made a promise to the seniors that this is what they would 
do, and yet the telephone service has increased 23 per cent. 
 
Home heating costs have increased since 1982 by 55 per cent; 
electricity by 51 per cent; car insurance by 37 per cent; and now 
we get large increases for our registration. Perhaps the 
government opposite members think that seniors shouldn’t drive 
cars. Perhaps you think that somehow with their $15 a month 
more that they’re going to get next November, they’re going to 
be able to afford the increases in their licences and registration. 
But by cutting back on the municipal taxes, you’ve even cut back 
on the opportunity for the municipalities, of cities like Saskatoon, 
to provide public transportation, and that hurts the seniors. 
 
And there are also the hidden expenses, what we call the hidden 
taxes. Over 230 fees for public services, many of which are 
valuable to older people, have been increased. And now we have 
an article in the Star-Phoenix just last month, “Saskatoon’s a nice 
city but it’s costly, costly,” and it’s a report on the inflation rate 
for Saskatoon. At 6.3 per cent inflation, Saskatoon’s rate in 
February continued to be the highest of major Canadian cities, 
according to StatsCanada Figures. We’ve got higher costs for 
food, clothing, gasoline, and prescription drugs, and they’re 
contributing factors to the annual increase. 
 
We have food prices 20 per cent of the cost of living index. It 
rose 2.5 per cent in Regina and 4.2 per cent in Saskatoon. And 
this government gives people $15 a month extra in next 
November to help pay for these costs that people are incurring 
right now. It’s so sad, it’s so unfair. 
 
(1915) 
 
I want particularly to refer to the prescription drug prices because 
this is the area where we are experiencing a lot of concern among 
the sick and particularly, among the seniors. The prescription 
drug prices have already risen 20 per cent in Regina from a year 
ago and 27.7 per cent in Saskatoon, reflecting the out-of-pocket 
costs of the new drug plan without the rebate. This destruction of 
the drug plan means that now 60 per cent of families in 
Saskatchewan will be paying 100 per cent of their drug costs, 
another 30 per cent are paying 50 per cent of their drug costs, and 
10 per cent of those needing more than 20  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

583 
 
 

prescriptions a year will still pay 34 per cent of their drug costs. 
 
Looking at the drug plan budget estimates for 1986-87 and 
’87-88, I was shocked to see that there was a shift of at least $26 
million from the drug plan onto the shoulders of the consumers. 
That’s a $26 million tax on the sick. And now in this new budget 
that’s come forward in 1988-89, another cut to the drug plan — 
nearly $7 million less available from this government for needed 
medication. And I say that this is a drug plan and a cost increase 
being borne by the sick and the elderly from a government that 
is irresponsible, it’s uncaring, and it’s incompetent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I’ve talked to people in my constituency, Mr. 
Chairman, who are on heart drugs. And this has got to be the one 
area where the most increases in prescription drugs are being 
experienced. I have couples in my constituency who are both on 
heart medication and they’ve got bills of 4 and $500 every month 
for their drugs. But the government opposite seems to want to 
present these as whingy senior citizens who are going about 
indulging themselves in drugs and abusing the system and 
spacing out on heart medication. And it is taking six to eight 
weeks for the rebate, so people have to get their next prescription 
long before they get their rebates. 
 
This is a very serious situation because some people are taking 
less of their medication trying to make it stretch. The only people 
who are getting any compensation from this government are the 
ones that phone up and complain. They have to do a lot of 
complaining, a lot of phoning, a lot of putting the pressure on the 
drug plan before they get their rebates. How many people, how 
many of the people who are sick and elderly in this province 
know that there is a form to fill out that they can apply for a faster 
service on the drug plan? I don’t think there are very many 
because it hasn’t been well advertised. And I know that I have a 
lot of constituents, I have a lot of constituents in my constituency 
who don’t know that those forms exist. 
 
Now the government opposite is laughing and saying that they 
. . . you know, how many? I know that if we hadn’t sent those 
drug plans out to people, they wouldn’t be able to get them. And 
I resent a government that can only function if the opposition 
brings individual cases to their attention. That is not the way to 
govern this province, to do it that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — You want the names of the hungry children. You 
can’t go to the schools and find out that this situation exists. You 
want the names of the seniors who are sick and paying high drug 
costs — you want their individual names. You want the names 
of everybody that’s on the hospital lists in Saskatoon and Regina 
or you’re not going to do anything. What kind of a government 
functions like that, I ask you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Smart: — I think that’s a shame to have a government like 
that. There are many people across this province who don’t 
contact . . . who are left alone. I have been in a nursing home in 
Saskatoon where many people speak Ukrainian, and they’ve 
been having trouble dealing with the drug forms and knowing 
what their rights are. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re all my supporters too. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Oh the member for Saskatoon Mayfair says 
they’re all his supporters. Well I’ve got news for him. That’s 
certainly not what I’ve been hearing, not one bit, not one bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — They are part of the seniors who are so terribly 
unhappy with the kinds of destruction of the system that they’ve 
worked so hard to build up here. 
 
And I want to continue talking about the increase in drug costs 
with seniors around this province because I want them to know 
that on this side of the House we are going to continue to raise 
that issue because it is a very serious issue, not only for the people 
who can’t pay for the drugs, but for the destruction that you’ve 
done already to the medicare system that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s not lost on the people of Saskatchewan the terrific irony 
of the kind of destruction that you’ve done to the drug plan and 
the high costs that you’ve made people incur after . . . before 
you’ve actually come forward with the task force to study the 
future of medicare. That has got to be the silliest kind of a way 
to govern — to do destructive things, to break down programs 
that people have worked hard to build up and then to turn around 
and say, oh, we better study this and see if it’s a good thing. I can 
tell you, it’s not a good thing. I can tell you, the seniors are very 
concerned and so are the people with chronic illness who are 
facing very high bills. 
 
And the other issue that I want to address, Mr. Chairman, in 
speaking to this budget speech isn’t . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, with the indulgence of the 
members of the House, I would like to apologize to the member 
for interrupting; but I would like to make an introduction if I have 
the leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — I take a great deal of pleasure at this time to 
introduce two people in the government galleries: Mrs. Connie 
Blacklock and Mr. John Schreiner, who are both directors on the 
board of Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan. ACS, 
and do an awful lot of work for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
And I would like both of you to know that it is greatly 
appreciated. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I might just add that Mr. Schreiner 
happens also to be the president of the PC Party in my 
constituency, and we also appreciate that work that  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

584 
 
 

he does for us. 
 
And in conclusion I would just like to say that that is one 
president that is not going to resign. I ask you to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well that was a very 
interesting break in my presentation, because it just came at the 
right time for me. I’ve been talking about the concern that seniors 
have about the high costs that they’re facing as a result of this 
government and this Minister of Finance’s budget, and now I 
want to turn to another area that I’m very concerned about, and I 
want to turn to it linking it with the drug prescription plan. 
 
The other area that I want to speak to is the issue of family 
support. And that’s because I represent a constituency where 
another one-third of the people are between the ages of 20 and 
29. And I have a very high level of families in my constituency 
who are single-parent families. 
 
And I want to talk about what this budget and what this 
government has been doing to families, from my perspective. 
The most alarming circumstances in which both the health and 
the welfare of women and teenagers is threatened by the drug 
plan changes is the whole area of birth control and contraception. 
 
Now many people don’t realize that the government opposite 
have not taken oral contraception out of the drug plan entirely. 
And oral contraceptives, I’m told by a doctor, now cost $15 a 
month or $180 a year. And I want to know how many people they 
think . . . how many teenagers have access to the $30 needed for 
an initial year to spend on birth control pills, and even more 
disturbingly, how many of them can be open enough with their 
parents to submit their contraceptive bills to the family for 
reimbursement on a family claim submission. 
 
We are facing, as we’ve said, a crisis in unplanned and unwanted 
pregnancies in this province, and pricing birth control beyond the 
reach of low-income women or teenagers is a sure and a certain 
formula to make things worse. 
 
One in four of the people in this province live in poverty and 
many of those are women. You only have to realize that 70 per 
cent of the minimum wage-earners are women, and they earn 
approximately $756 a month on the minimum wage. And even 
without dependents, a woman on the minimum wage lives 
significantly below the poverty line, Mr. Chairman. If you add 
children to the burden that she carries, it’s clear that extra money 
for medication or contraceptives is beyond the reach of many of 
the working poor, most of whom are women, and most of whom 
use health services disproportionately more because of their 
reproductive functions and their mothering roles and because of 
their children’s medical needs. 
 

Now I find it terribly sad and ironic that the Minister of Social 
Services will provide details of a new program called “families 
matter” which will encourage community agencies to develop 
innovative programs that promote positive parenting. Now, Mr. 
Chairman, is taking away the money from the oral contraception, 
putting that so high, is that a way to support positive parenting, 
taking away access to birth control information and birth control 
services? It’s one way to support positive parenting, but it’s not 
in a way that we would support on this side of the House, and it 
certainly is not a way to support the families who are struggling 
so hard to make ends meet with this budget. 
 
I’m very afraid for those people. I’m very concerned about the 
fact that so many young women who want to keep their own 
children and become single parents are being so badly punished 
by this government. 
 
Now I remember when birth control was illegal in Canada, and I 
know that what used to happen in the good old days was that 
people had to get married. When young women found themselves 
pregnant, they had two choices: shotgun wedding or go off to 
another community far away from home, have a baby with no 
one knowing what had happened, come up with some excuse 
about where they’d gone, and put the child up for adoption. And 
there are many of us who remember those days. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All you brave men think it’s a real joke 
don’t you? 
 
Ms. Smart: — Look it, they’re laughing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Big joke. 
 
Ms. Smart: — It’s a joke, isn’t it? Ha, ha! They are laughing. 
Isn’t that sad? Isn’t that sad? 
 
Do you know that the statistics show — we talk about the 
increase in teenage pregnancies in Saskatchewan right now — 
the statistics show that the number of teenage pregnancies was a 
lot higher in the good old days, but it doesn’t show up because 
the women were married. There’s actually a decrease in the 
number of young women having children in Saskatchewan today, 
but they’re called teenage mothers because they choose not to 
have shotgun weddings. They choose very often to keep their 
children, and I think they should have that choice with our 
support. 
 
I think we should be very careful, though, that we also provide 
opportunities for women to get information to control unwanted 
pregnancies. And this government is doing nothing about that, 
absolutely nothing. 
 
There’s no money for sex education and birth control information 
and services. There’s very little money for teen-age women to 
get the kinds of help that they need, and women who do choose 
to keep their children, out of love and concern for them, have to 
live through a life of poverty because they’ve made that choice. 
And I think we can do better than that in this province, a lot better 
than that. And we can certainly do a lot better than sit there and  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

585 
 
 

laugh at the issues that I’m talking about, because you may not 
think they’re serious, but there’s an awful lot of women in this 
province who take it very seriously. And I for one am going to 
be a person in this legislature who raises these issues and points 
out that you’re not doing anything to help women and children. 
 
You haven’t given enough money for day care. You haven’t 
raised the subsidies in day care for six years. You’re giving only 
$235 per month for day-care services, and the cost to families 
now is $340 per month per child. And I know that I have 
constituents who are searching desperately for good child care. 
They’re not getting it; they’re not getting the support that they 
deserve, and the children are not getting the support that they 
deserve. 
 
(1930) 
 
And you say you value families, and yet you won’t do anything 
about the hungry children, and you’re not doing anything to help 
the mothers, the young mothers in this province. You want to 
help them give their babies up for adoption, but that’s been a 
choice that many women have resisted from the time 
immemorial. That’s a very painful choice, and I think they should 
have better access to child care so that if they choose to keep their 
children, they can do it with dignity. 
 
You say you’re going to bring in new standards for child care, 
and yet you’ve reduced the budget for the staff who monitor the 
quality of day care by $70,000. And yet you say you’re going to 
give parents a choice — you’re going to give them a choice of 
private day care, which will cost an arm and a leg, or a choice of 
staying home with their children and getting a tax credit. And 
that’s no choice for many women in this province today. It may 
be a choice for the wealthy women that you want to provide 
services for, but it’s not a choice for many of the women in 
Saskatoon Centre constituency. 
 
What you do with these women is put them into job-training 
programs, and you’ve admitted in the budget speech that more 
than half of these trainees have been single parents who you say 
have received special allowances to cover child-care costs and 
other expenses related to the participation in the programs that 
you provided. 
 
Let me tell you what you’re doing. You’re saying that women 
with babies who are four months old are now single, employable 
women, and they have to go back to work, while you want to give 
choices to families and lots of opportunity for women who 
already have money. You say single-parent women have to go 
back to work when their babies are four months old. And that’s 
shameful, because there’s no child care available properly for 
children of that young age. 
 
And again I have people coming to my office and saying, I can’t 
find child care or I have to leave my child in a situation that’s 
really grim, but I have to go back to work because this 
government opposite says I’m employable with a four month old 
baby — still a nursing mother. And this government opposite will 
have them going back to work full time in order to get minimum 
wage, in order to get $700 a month, in order to pay 400, $500 
rent. It  

doesn’t make sense to me. It’s terribly cruel. 
 
So there’s nothing that this government can say that would make 
me believe that they have any sense of what it means to support 
families. 
 
They talk about the New Careers Corporation and the fact that 
they’ve had a project, a major restoration of the eroded river bank 
in Saskatoon from the Meewasin Valley Authority. And one of 
the teams of workers on that project, picking rocks on the banks 
of the Saskatchewan River, were women. Again, single women 
— often single, employable women or single women with 
children, labelled employable — picking rocks all day long. A 
number of them have had injuries. A number of them have been 
hurt. A number of them . . . and then none of them get the amount 
of money they need in order to survive. 
 
It’s cruel; it’s not a support for families. It’s a budget that hurts 
people, ordinary people, in all the ways that my colleagues have 
pointed out in this House, both debating the budget and in 
debating this interim supply Bill. I think the members opposite 
should be really ashamed of bringing forward a budget that vies 
so much to people who already have money, and gives so little 
to the people who are already hurting — except higher taxes, 
higher fees, higher rates of payment that they have to make on 
services — from a government that has promised them otherwise 
and betrayed them badly. 
 
And I reluctantly will support the interim supply Bill, but I 
certainly wish that this government had done far more for the 
very deserving people of this province, the people that I represent 
in Saskatoon Centre whose concerns deserve to be taken very 
seriously because they’re the ones that are hurting badly for this 
government’s policies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for 
recognizing me and giving me the opportunity to participate in 
this debate on the Appropriation Bill on interim supply. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I want to say from the outset that the 
previous speaker, I think, very clearly indicated to the House that 
in the area of women and teenagers this government is a very 
uncaring government. It’s a government that is callous when it 
comes to the needy and those who cannot help themselves, but is 
very luxurious and generous to those who have money of their 
own and are fairly well off. This budget that was brought forward 
and approved last week, Mr. Chairman, is a budget that should 
never have been brought to this Assembly. It’s a budget that 
simply does not address the problems, and the interim supply 
therefore does not address the problems either. But reluctantly 
we will have to support the interim supply so the activities of the 
provinces can be carried on. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to let the House know that over the supper 
hour I had a couple of calls from constituencies represented by 
the members opposite. And I will be referring to those, and I will 
be referring to those in my  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

586 
 
 

speech just a little bit later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend my time this evening, in the few 
moments that I have, on education and indicate very clearly to 
the people of Saskatchewan that the people were disappointed, 
the people were . . . The hypocrisy of the government is shown 
in its allocation of funds to education. 
 
We all know that before the budget was brought in the Minister 
of Finance and the Minister of Education and the Premier said 
that education would get a high priority, that this budget would 
rectify the things in education. And what have we seen, Mr. 
Speaker? We have seen an allocation to education which gave 
some — and I say some — school boards an increase of a little 
over 2 per cent, but many school boards received a substantial 
reduction. I am told, although I haven’t got it on . . . haven’t got 
the actual evidence here, that the Regina Public School Board 
will receive a reduction of $700,000; the Regina Separate School 
Board, a reduction of $100,000. We heard this afternoon, and I 
read in the Star-Phoenix, that the public school board received a 
reduction of $513,000 in this budget. The separate school board 
did not receive a reduction because they had a substantial 
increase did they receive an increase. 
 
What the minister did, opposite, and what the government 
opposite did was that for the cities they went and increased the 
computational mill rate and said, now that your assessment is 
higher, you can therefore raise more money locally, and therefore 
we’re going to cut back your operating grants. Well isn’t that 
being nice and generous of you people — tax it on the local 
people, saying to the people in Saskatoon, now we’re going to 
tax you some more. 
 
And the lone member from Mayfair obviously doesn’t support 
the city of Saskatoon because we never hear of him in the debate. 
He seems to support all the things that go against Saskatoon, and 
he won’t even answer questions directed to him on his 
department. But, Mr. Chairman, I want to say this: one member 
like that is just one too many for Saskatoon. We don’t need any 
more like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And I say to the member opposite that Saskatoon 
Eastview will make that very clear to you in the next few weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman . . . yes, Mr. Chairman, I do get 
annoyed; I do get annoyed when our representatives from 
Saskatoon, no matter what side of the House they sit, don’t 
support Saskatoon and speak for Saskatoon in the allocation of 
funds in our budget. I get annoyed when we get penalized in 
Saskatoon because we run an efficient government, and the 
minister opposite, the Minister of Finance, says, well I’m 
reducing my . . . I’m reducing our deficit, now I want the people 
at the local level to tighten  

their belt. That’s of utter hog-wash, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — He didn’t tighten his belt — didn’t tighten his 
belt at all. 
 
What does the budget say? He gets 100 per cent increase on the 
equalization from the federal government — that’s how he’s 
going to reduce it, number one. 
 
Number two, he makes a substantial shift in income tax to the 
local people and property tax to the local people, and he says, but 
we are tightening our belts. That’s absolute nonsense, absolute 
nonsense, Mr. Speaker. And the people of this province are going 
to speak very shortly on this in the two by-elections. They’ll tell 
you exactly what they think of your kind of budgeting and tax 
shifts. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chairman, if I seem annoyed, I am annoyed because all 
day today I have heard from the people out there. I have heard 
from the people in Saskatoon, I’ve heard from the people in 
Yorkton, I’ve heard from the people in Sturgis, I’ve from the 
people in Stenen who are all upset because of the increases. 
 
Yorkton, for example, I’ll give you an example. Yorkton for 
example. Yes, Minister of Education, Yorkton today in the paper 
said they are going to have to let three teachers go because of 
your generosity. Yorkton said they had . . . ;Yorkton Regional 
High School are shutting down five courses next year that will 
no longer be available to those students. Economics won’t be 
available; law won’t be available; psychology won’t be 
available; machining won’t be available — all because of your 
generosity — shifting the burden from your shoulders onto the 
local taxpayers and saying to them that you, the people out there, 
are being irresponsible. You are the guys that are irresponsible in 
your lavish spending on all the others but not on our own people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — People from Stenen phoned me today, asked me 
if I could do something to save their school. The people from 
Stenen and their . . . I’ll say to the minister opposite — and this 
is exactly what they said to me — that the Sturgis School unit 
had to close down three schools because of the lack of funding 
from the Minister of Education. That’s what they told me today. 
That’s what they told me today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And they asked me, Mr. Minister, to make that 
message loud and clear to you in this House, and that’s exactly 
what I’m doing right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are many others, there are many other areas 
in this province where the courses have to be eliminated because 
of the lack of funding that you are making available. 
 
Dr. Lowell Loewen, from Saskatoon, certainly no supporter of 
this party. This is what he has to say about your generosity: 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

587 
 
 

Board members (he said) unanimously approved a budget 
Tuesday evening, although they did not debate the 
distribution of the funds, many expressed anger that the 
provincial government’s contribution of 28.6 million is 
295,000 less than offered last year. It’s the second 
consecutive year the provincial contribution has dropped by 
1 per cent. 

 
And that is from a member of the Saskatoon Public School 
Board. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many indications here where people 
say that, and here’s Dr. Lowell again. He said: 
 

The burden of paying for education has shifted from a 50-50 
split between government and taxpayers, evident in the 
mid-1970s, to rely more and more heavily every year on 
property owners. 

 
Mr. Chairman, when you take into consideration the property 
improvement grant that was paid in the 1970s, the provincial 
government at that time paid 74 per cent — 74 per cent of the 
cost of education in this province from K to 12. What is 
happening today? Instead of 74 per cent in Saskatoon, the public 
school board only receives 33 per cent from this government. 
That’s how the burden of taxation has shifted, that’s how it has 
shifted. 
 
And they call themselves a caring and honest government. Caring 
for who? Who are they supporting? Certain you’re not supporting 
the taxpayers at the local level. And I say to the member up in 
the gallery, if that’s the kind of support that they want in 
Saskatoon area, well just continue because the people around that 
area are thinking a lot differently than that, a lot differently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — There are a lot of angry people out there. There 
are a lot of angry people out there because they were deceived. 
They were deceived by the Minister of Education; they were 
deceived by the Premier. When the Premier promised them that 
he would take care of their needs in education, he simply was not 
honest with them. He simply was not honest because education 
did not get that priority. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to say that this Minister of Education, as I 
indicated the other day, this is his third portfolio, and it must be 
probably his worst influence and his worst performance that we 
have seen, because he obviously didn’t have any influence. He 
obviously didn’t have any influence because otherwise there 
would have been a greater increase for education. What happened 
to the EDF (educational development fund) fund, the education 
development fund, which really helped the schools in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who brought that in? 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, you people brought it in, but you  

people also said, you people also promised the people out there 
that it would be a five-year program and you could plan 
accordingly. And that’s exactly what the people did. They took 
you at your word. You said five years, and then you turn around 
and unilaterally change it and make it 10 years, wipe out many 
of the programs that the school divisions in rural Saskatchewan 
had planned. Many of them were wiped out. 
 
I say to the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, there he goes again, 
not defending education. Why don’t you go out there and talk to 
the teachers? Why don’t you go out there and talk to the school 
boards? I have visited many of them and they have enumerated 
all of the programs that had to be cut because of your unilateral 
decision. I say to the member of Mayfair, you keep that up and 
this will be your first and your last session in this legislature. The 
people will take care of that. 
 
It’s time, I think, that you get out to the ordinary people again, 
listen to them, and listen to the hurts that you people have 
inflicted upon these people. 
 
I say to the members opposite, you can’t say one thing before the 
budget and promise the people that you will take care of their 
problems in education and in health, as you did — and in neither 
one did you take care of it — and then give them a 2 per cent 
increase. I asked the minister, I asked him the other day in the 
House about the increases for teachers, and he seemed to indicate 
that that will be taken care of. The members that I spoke to today, 
from Yorkton and Sturgis and Saskatoon, certainly didn’t seem 
to think that there was extra money available. Where is that 
money for the 3 per cent increase? Do they have to again add it 
on to the local taxation or is the government going to make some 
money available for them? If not, what you’re saying is that the 
property tax has to be increased again. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to spend just a few minutes on the area of 
university. We have seen what low priority the K to 12 have 
received from this government. We know that the taxation has 
shifted from the provincial government to taxpayers, local 
taxpayers. And this is opposite to what it was in the 1970s under 
our government. And many of the people are saying, boy if we 
could only go back to the kinds of sharing there was in education 
in the 1970s, everything would be all right, everything would be 
all right. 
 
I’ll tell you, in this last budget in education I think nobody was 
hit harder than our two universities. Our two universities, over 
the last number of years, have lost their grounds as far as inflation 
is concerned. In fact, they’ve lost about 10 per cent of the actual 
funding from what it was in 1982 on a per . . . from 1982 to 1987. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I want to just draw to your attention 
something that maybe many of us aren’t aware of. In 1982 the 
average tuition fee in Regina was $816. Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
$1,248 — an increase of 53 per cent. The taxation has again been 
shifted from the provincial government to the students at the 
university. At the U of S (University of Saskatchewan), it has 
gone up to 45.5 per cent. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

588 
 
 

Let me, Mr. Chairman, just draw to the people’s attention the 
kinds of revenues that were made available in the 1970s and ’80s 
when we were the government, compared to this government 
opposite. From 1982 to 1983, real operating grants per student, 
from 1982-1983 to 1987-1988, last year, the real operating grants 
per student have declined — I want the members opposite to 
know — from $9,016 to $6,907, a decrease of 23 per cent. The 
financing to our universities in operating have gone down by 23 
per cent under this government, not including this year. So even 
this year, you probably, if you add it on, it’s gone down about 25 
or 26 per cent. Is it any wonder, is it any wonder that our 
universities can’t operate on the high quality standards that we 
have expected of them? Simply not possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I don’t know when the last time was that the 
Minister of Education has talked to either one of the presidents 
of the university. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I talked to him today. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well, I can tell you if you listened, what the two 
presidents will tell you. They simply cannot function any longer 
on the operating and capital grants that you people are providing. 
And more and more, more and more of the burden will be shifted 
to our students. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, not only did they cut the operating 
grants, but they also cut out most of the bursaries. No longer do 
our students get bursaries. A student today in a four-year course 
on an average will be 25 to $30,000 in debt when they get 
through, thanks to the government opposite who cut out one of 
the best bursary programs that existed in Canada under this 
government, under this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, there are lots of other things that 
one could talk about in this Appropriation Bill for interim supply. 
My point simply was to point out to the people of Saskatchewan 
that when it comes to education this government simply has not 
allocated sufficient funds to guarantee us the quality of education 
that we have become accustomed to in this province. Under their 
rule, education has gradually gone down, and it’s going to be our 
students and our future leaders who are going to be the ones that 
are suffering. 
 
Budgets must adequately fund education, and this government 
promised that they would. It was a promise made and another 
promise that was broken. And Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 
members opposite that we cannot tolerate this any longer. This 
province simply can’t afford not to have top-notch universities, 
top-notch schools from K to 12. Yes, that takes money, but it is 
a worthwhile investment. This budget does not address those 
problems and it’s . . . I’m sorry to say, Mr. Speaker,, that 
reluctantly we will have to support the interim supply so that the 
government can carry on at least with its function of governing 
this province as badly as it may be. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. Mr. 
Chairman, we are being asked to approve an interim expenditure 
when the budget, as my colleague mentioned earlier, does not 
address the problems. This is a budget that’s devoid of 
commitment, it’s devoid of vision, and it’s devoid of compassion. 
 
The Minister of Finance and the Tory government are telling the 
public that they’ve increased the health care budget by 5.6 per 
cent, Mr. Chairman, and that’s not true. That’s simply not true. 
When you look very carefully at the budget and take into 
consideration capital expenditure, supplementary estimates, and 
payments to the property management corporation, it becomes 
very obvious that the health care budget has been increased only 
3.5 per cent from last year. 
 
And the Tory government over the years has fiddled around with 
their health care budget and have shifted many programs and 
expenditures out of other government departments to the 
Department of Health. Examples include: continuing care 
expenditures, which used to be funded through Social Services; 
the minister’s salary, which used to be funded through Executive 
Council; and routine support services, which used to be funded 
through supply and services. And these transferred items, Mr. 
Chairman, now amount to more than $240 million per year. 
 
And you know why they’ve done that, Mr. Chairman? Do you 
know why they’ve done that? They’ve done that because they 
want to say to the public of Saskatchewan that they have been 
spending increasing amounts of money on health when we all 
know that it’s simply not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The 3.5 per cent increase in the Health budget 
over last year, Mr. Chairman, does nothing when one takes a look 
at the fact inflation in Saskatchewan is at the rate of 6 per cent. It 
doesn’t even meet the inflationary requirements. How are we 
supposed to maintain our hospitals and continue to provide health 
services when we’re actually experiencing a 2.5 per cent cut? 
Because when one considers the fact that inflation is at 6 per cent 
and the increase is only 3.5, it’s in effect a 2.5 per cent cut. 
 
And I listened to the budget speech, Mr. Chairman, something 
like 10,000 words in that budget speech. And I listened to every 
single word and not one of them mentioned the prescription drug 
plan nor the dental plan, which are two very serious issues in the 
province today Not one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — the dental plan was the best of its kind in North 
America, Mr. Chairman. It was accessible to school children and 
it provided a high quality of dental services. And this government 
destroyed the school-based dental plan and have not substituted 
the dental plan with any acceptable alternative. They were 
planning on a drop in the utilization of the plan in order to save 
money. And I  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

589 
 
 

understand that utilization is at approximately one-third of the 
potential for utilization in the plan. 
 
They fired some 400 dental workers to achieve their end of 
destroying this very valuable and highly successful dental plan. 
They fired 400 dental workers — most of whom are women, I 
will point out, most of whom are women. And these women and 
other dental workers were dedicated, competent workers. And as 
I indicated the other night, one of them went to her PC MLA in 
Shaunavon and said to him, what am I going to do? A farm wife, 
incidentally, who was fired as a result of the decimation of the 
dental plan, and what did the PC MLA tell this woman to do? He 
told her to go on welfare. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, that’s their commitment to farm families. 
That’s their commitment to families. 
 
And the Premier has admitted his mistake with respect to the 
dental plan. He’s admitted the fact that this was not the right thing 
to do and it was a wrong choice on the part of this government, 
and he talked about a new and exciting dental plan that was going 
to be implemented in rural Saskatchewan. And I listened for it, 
Mr. Chairman, in the budget speech, and I heard not one word 
about this new and exciting dental plan — not one word. 
 
The prescription drug plan is another example, Mr. Chairman, of 
this government’s wrong priorities. Low income families are 
simply unable to meet their daily living expenses and pay the 100 
per cent up-front costs on prescription drugs, and they’re 
suffering from these heartless PC policies. 
 
They’re making decisions between whether they put groceries on 
the table or buy their prescription drugs. And we hear about this 
every single day, Mr. Chairman. This is not an exaggeration, it’s 
a fact. And if the members opposite were listening to their 
constituents — some of whom write to us, incidentally — if they 
were listening to their constituents they would realize this was a 
serious problem, and this budget should have addressed this 
problem. But what did it do, Mr. Chairman? A $26 million slash 
in the prescription drug plan from 1986-87 — a $26 million slash. 
 
And what else does this government do? It supports Brian 
Mulroney and the federal PC government to endorse drug patent 
legislation that has already shown an unprecedented increase in 
drug prices across Canada. I understand the legislation hasn’t 
even been finally approved and the multinational drug companies 
are already upping their drug prices. And this Tory government 
supported that, and the people of Saskatchewan are paying for it 
in 100 per cent up-front drug costs every day. Low income 
families are paying for it. 
 
And then we take a look at the hospital waiting lists in the 
province, Mr. Chairman, which are now 15,000. I am told, and at 
the end of February in Saskatoon was 10,000. And we take a look 
at the fact that we’ve had summer bed closures in this province 
on a regular basis; the fact that people are waiting for urgent 
surgery and can’t get beds; the fact that doctors make decisions 
every single day as to whose case is more life threatening, to 
determine who is  

going to get priority for the surgery. And these problems are 
occurring on a daily basis in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this budget, what does this budget do? It gives an increase 
in health care that doesn’t even equal the rate of inflation. That’s 
what it does — or doesn’t do, I should say, Mr. Chairman. The 
waiting list is absolutely intolerable in this province, and there 
has to be immediate action taken by that government to make 
sure that this waiting list is brought down to a more tolerable 
level. 
 
(2000) 
 
And what about the problem with respect to specialists in this 
province? We have an extreme amount of difficulty getting 
specialists to come in this province. And what did this 
government do? It froze the training program in the health budget 
last year. It froze the funding for the training program, and this 
year we’re talking about a 1.3 per cent increase only in that 
training program. How can we possibly hope to educate doctors 
into specialties and keep them in the province if we’re not 
providing adequate funding for these training programs? 
 
There’s absolutely no question, Mr. Chairman, that they have 
betrayed the people of Saskatchewan because they promised . . . 
Their election promises were promises of good health care but 
instead they have chosen not to make health care a priority, to 
slash and cut on health care, and not to put the adequate funding 
in health care, and then to go about Saskatchewan trying to 
perpetrate this myth of spiralling health costs — which is a 
complete myth, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And I’ve referred to some of my reasons for that 
when I talked about the shifting in programs and expenditures 
from one department into the health budget in order to pad the 
health budget. 
 
So this government has constantly made wrong choices and 
wrong priorities, Mr. Chairman. They attempt to tell people that 
there is no money for health. Well let’s just see whether or not 
there is no money for health. 
 
Let’s take a look at the 1.7 billion that has been given away to 
big out-of-province oil corporations in oil royalties. Let’s talk 
about the 1 billion they can pull out of their hat when it comes to 
the Premier’s riding and the Deputy Premier’s riding — 1 billion 
on the Shand-Rafferty dam. Let’s talk about the $20 million a 
year they have to spend or $27 million a year they have to spend 
on self-serving advertising, and the 8.4 million a year, $34,000 a 
day, on empty office space. And what does a hospital bed cost 
per day? I believe it’s $400 a day, Mr. Chairman. They’re 
wasting $34,000 a day on empty office space. That’s their 
priorities, Mr. Chairman, that’s their priorities. And what about 
the 23 million to the Saskoil sell-off and the 22 million they gave 
to their friend, their PC friend, Peter Pocklington, in gifts? 
 
Meanwhile, because of these misplaced priorities, who’s paying 
the bill? Who’s paying for their $3.7 million deficit and their 
misplaced priorities? I’ll tell you who’s paying,  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

590 
 
 

Mr. Chairman. It’s the ordinary men and women in this province. 
It’s the men and women in Regina Lakeview and all the other 
constituencies in Saskatchewan that are paying for their 
incompetence, their mismanagement, and their misplaced 
priorities. Individual income tax is up some 79 million, Mr. 
Chairman, up some 79 million. They’ve increased the flat tax to 
2 per cent. They’ve increased the tobacco tax. They’ve re-levied 
a gas tax. Utility rate increases are up an average of 47 per cent 
from 1981 to 1987. And every dollar paid by individuals, Mr. 
Chairman, in individual income tax — for every dollar paid, 
corporations pay 16 cents. 
 
And what do we see in this budget? We see that the corporations 
are getting a tax reduction in income tax, but individuals are 
having to pay more. Since the PC government has been in office, 
Mr. Chairman, total individual income tax revenue has increased 
by 103 per cent — 103 per cent, and that’s in tough times, Mr. 
Chairman. During that same period, total corporate income tax 
revenue has increased by 10 per cent. So we know where their 
priorities are and it’s not with the families of this province and 
with the men and the women of this province. And they can say 
all they want about being for the family but their actions speak 
louder than their words, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, the 
men and women of Saskatchewan, are asking for this government 
to quit its destruction of medical care in Saskatchewan but the 
budget simply does not address that issue. 
 
And they’re asking us to approve their expenditures with this 
interim supply Bill. Well obviously the people of Saskatchewan 
need what money they can get; obviously they do. And it is with 
reluctance that I support this legislation but I must make the 
point, Mr. Chairman, that this budget is a heartless budget, and 
it’s the product of an arrogant and uncaring government. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take just 
a few moments to take the time of the committee, to express a 
few words with respect to this debate on interim supply, not so 
much because of the specifics of this Bill — because it does 
provide just that, interim supply — but because it is part and 
parcel of a larger, overall budget scheme which the government 
announced a few days ago in a budget proposal which, Mr. 
Chairman, in my travels around the province of Saskatchewan, I 
want to assure the members of this House, has been rejected and 
rejected soundly by the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter whether one 
travels to Carnduff, Saskatchewan or Estevan or Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan or Saskatoon Eastview or Regina Elphinstone. 
The message that the people of Saskatchewan are telling us is 
that this government’s budget is based on essentially no hope, no 
sense of  

direction, no sense of relief for the great problems which are 
facing individual, ordinary families and individuals in this 
province, be they on the farms or in the cities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, in effect this budget is 
based on the Tory philosophy, the Progressive Conservative 
philosophy of competition. It can be summarized in one word — 
competition. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Rugged individualism. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The belief . . . The rugged individualism, as 
somebody opposite said. Thank you very much. Rugged 
individualism and competition. 
 
For six years they have practised this approach to the public 
affairs of the province of Saskatchewan, and the results are 
evident for all of us to see. The results today, Mr. Chairman, are 
devastating. That’s not an overstatement. 
 
Today, in the city of Saskatoon alone, the unemployment rate is 
in excess of 12 per cent. It’s way above the national average. In 
fact, the unemployment rate in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Chairman, is way above — well, perhaps, not way above — 
but above the national average. 
 
In the city of Saskatoon, the rate of inflation, Mr. Chairman, 
today is at 6 per cent. It may be not quite as high in rural 
Saskatchewan, but I’m pretty sure that it’s at about the same 
level, if not in fact higher, when you consider the costs of 
production with respect to agriculture and the costs of living in 
rural Saskatchewan. An inflation rate which is steadily creeping 
up at 6 per cent, 12 per cent unemployment, and people feel this. 
 
Mr. Chairman, on top of this unemployment, on top of the fact 
that there is no hope, on top of the fact that there is a greater 
squeeze on the family dollar, we are seeing this government 
contributing to the difficulties and to the crisis of family farms, 
and farmers in Eastview and in Elphinstone, in Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw — it doesn’t matter where they may be — to 
make ends meet. 
 
Utility rates, power corporation rates have gone up steadily and, 
I might add, dramatically, Mr. Chairman. Telephone rates have 
gone up steadily and, I might add, dramatically, Mr. Chairman. 
Yesterday in question period, the minister in charge of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) acknowledged the fact 
that the moment that the by-elections are over in Eastview and in 
Elphinstone, SGI will have an increase again in the registration 
fees for car insurance. 
 
The Deputy Premier scoffs at the suggestion. I hope that I’m 
proven wrong, and we’ll see whether or not I am or not. 
Everybody knows that in January a cabinet document, which is 
before the document of the . . . consideration of the cabinet, 
indicated a $25 per car surcharge. The government neither has 
accepted or rejected that position, but it has told everybody that 
it is under consideration and that they’ll be some increase that 
$25 is, in the words of the minister from SGI, “too high.” 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

591 
 
 

I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, whether it’s $25 per car or $10 
per car, given the fact that we’ve had in SGI, as we’ve had in 
SaskPower and SaskTel, and all of the utilities, increase after 
increase — any kind of an increase, Mr. Chairman, in this regard 
is undesirable and is going the wrong way with respect to the 
families of the province of Saskatchewan and Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So we have high unemployment, we have the 
question of high inflation, we have the question of high utility 
prices, we have the question of the taxation levels of this province 
increasing. This has been well documented by the members on 
this side of the caucus . . . on the House, of the legislature, this 
group of the caucus, Mr. Chairman, members on this side of the 
House. 
 
The taxation rate in this budget has gone up from 1.5 per cent to 
2 per cent flat tax. I invite you, sir, if you haven’t completed your 
income tax yet, I invite anybody who might be watching this 
particular debate in the House this evening. If you haven’t 
calculated your income tax, calculate the flat tax rate. Calculate 
the income tax and ask yourself whether or not you’re paying less 
tax or more tax to the Government of Saskatchewan. And of 
course the obvious fact is that this government is picking the 
pockets of the small person. Not the small person, every taxpayer 
— middle income, upper middle income, low income — picking 
and picking away at the tax rates and at the pocket-books of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan on top of all of this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And for all of this, Mr. Chairman, we have 
to show a province which is nearly on the verge of bankruptcy. 
For all of this, for all of this increased taxation, for all of this 
increased utility rates, we have to show, Mr. Chairman, a 
province which is, as I said, nearly on its knees with a total 
cumulative debt, according to the Minister of Finance in his own 
words, of $3.7 billion, Mr. Chairman. Or translated another way, 
$3,700 for every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan, for 
everybody who might be watching tonight — $3,700 obligation 
of debt on the principal alone, a new debt, a new debt since 1982 
on the consolidated budget, Mr. Chairman. 
 
To service that debt is approximately in the order of 325 million 
to 350 million a year. Or translating it in general terms, that’s a 
million dollars to the people of Saskatchewan, to the people of 
Saskatoon and Regina, and to the people of rural Saskatchewan 
— a million dollars a day in interest charges alone, Mr. 
Chairman, in interest charges alone. 
 
If ever we should bring the province’s budget into equilibrium 
— that is to say the amount of money that the province takes in 
by way of taxation should equal the amount of money that goes 
out by taxation and expenditures, Mr. Chairman — we’ll have to 
find an extra $350 million just to meet the interest payments 
alone, and that’s not even to touch one penny of the $3.7 billion 
principal debt that we’re all carrying on our backs. 
 
This, Mr. Chairman, is a horrendous situation. It’s a  

horrendous situation, not only for us, those of us who are 
taxpayers and those of us outside this Chamber, but this is a 
terrific charge on the future generations. I won’t say “terrific.” I 
will amend that to say, an horrific charge on the kids, on the 
children of tomorrow. 
 
A debt of $3,700 per man, woman, and child will be partly paid 
off by us, but it’ll be mainly paid off by the children of today’s 
families. It will be the obligation of those young men and women, 
as they enter school and graduate from school and then search for 
jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, to find a job, to keep their 
families, their new families, intact, to develop their families, and 
yet to pay off a debt incurred by this administration in five to six 
short — years of PC administration; a debt which is, Mr. 
Chairman, in no simple terms to be described other than horrific, 
horrific, and that is the state of affairs in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
We see a farm community, Mr. Chairman — you’re a farmer 
yourself; you know what I talk of — a farm community where 
the total debt is in the amount, according to the estimates of the 
wheat pool and responsible farm organizations, of $6 billion. 
Two-thirds of that farm debt, Mr. Chairman, is farm debt owed 
to government institutions: one-third, roughly, to provincial 
institutions like ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan); one-third, roughly, to federal institutions, like 
FCC (Farm Credit Corporation); and one-third to private lending 
institutions — a $6 billion debt, two-thirds of which, in one way 
or other, is encumbered by the family farmers to the provincial 
and the federal governments. Today there’s a debt crisis of 
monumental proportions. 
 
(2015) 
 
I’d say that the crisis today is equivalent to — perhaps even in 
some ways worse than _ the farm crisis of the Dirty Thirties. The 
farm crisis of the Dirty Thirties was a crisis not only of 
economics but it was a crisis also of nature and climate. And 
today, sadly and scarily, we see almost a repetition of this 
situation. I don’t blame the government for the drought; I don’t 
blame the government for the total complete problem in the debt 
situation with respect to agriculture; I even don’t blame the 
government for the fact that the world situation has affected the 
markets and the supplies and the costs and the prices for 
resources and has affected the revenues of the treasurer. It’s not 
an easy job being a treasurer in the province of Saskatchewan or 
anywhere in Saskatchewan or perhaps in Canada in the world 
today, the free world today. 
 
But I do blame this government, Mr. Chairman, for not having a 
game plan in place. I do blame the Minister of Finance, and I do 
blame the Premier and the Progressive Conservatives for having 
a game plan which seems to be predicated essentially on 
budgeting by polling information, by what public opinion says, 
and budgeting on what I think is a philosophy of unbridled 
competition — a philosophy of competition which sets divisions 
of our society against other divisions; which sets working person 
against farming person; which sets young against  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

592 
 
 

old; which gives all of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan little hope. And that’s why we’ve characterized 
this budget as a budget with no hope, no help, and no heart, Mr. 
Chairman — no heart. 
 
It’s as if the government has almost given up in its 
responsibilities of governance. Again, sometimes I don’t really 
envy the fact that the treasury benches have to cope with this 
problem, but the reality is that they’re charged with the 
responsibility. And if you look over at the government benches, 
I don’t say this only on subjective grounds, although one can only 
observe what they do and how they react, their response seems 
to be exclusively motivated on day-to-day ad hocery. 
 
This is a government which has not articulated a large game plan, 
other than of course something called free trade with the United 
States. We can debate that and are going to debate it in other 
estimates, perhaps something in a broad general term about the 
international crisis for agriculture, but nothing here of a concrete, 
tangible way for the working person in Elphinstone, the business 
person in Saskatoon Eastview, for the farmer in Sturgis, or for 
the farmer in Carnduff, Saskatchewan. There is no solid game 
plan except debt, debt, more debt, hopelessness, helplessness, 
heartlessness, more taxes on that farmer, more taxes on that 
working person, more taxes on that business person who’s trying 
to make a bottom line work. There is no game plan, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
And indeed if the Minister of Finance had come to this legislature 
and explained to us in a sensible way that what was being done 
was cast within a broader, philosophical approach, that there was 
some light at the end of the tunnel, than I suspect, while we might 
not agree, that there would at least be something by which we 
could meet in our debate, and we could discuss and debate with 
some specifics and with some concrete matters before us. But 
that’s not been the case at all. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance and this government has, 
as I’ve said, no game plan. And it’s a game plan which is, in 
effect, if there is one, one of simply sitting back and letting events 
unfold as they should unfold. I don’t understand, Mr. Chairman. 
I know that members will say this is a political speech and I guess 
it is a political speech, but I put it as honestly as I can. I don’t 
understand a government or any government, Mr. Chairman, that 
can justify an 11,000-person hospital bed waiting list in the city 
of Saskatoon alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — There are reasons. There may be reasons; 
there may be excuses; there may be explanations. Those are cold 
comfort, Mr. Chairman, cold comfort to those people who are 
dying or sick or need help. I don’t understand how any 
government can stand and defend that. 
 
I don’t understand, Mr. Chairman, how any government can 
defend the situation which I’m hearing everywhere in the 
province of Saskatchewan with respect to the prescription drug 
plan, especially on the basis that the Premier does. I don’t 
understand. You know yourself, sir, that you’ve received 
numerous phone calls and letters on  

this problem. I know you have, because I’ve received copies of 
correspondence directed to government members where you 
have people who have to make the choice between drugs, 
prescription drugs authorized by a doctor, and their day-to-day 
necessities of shelter and food. 
 
Some say that that’s overstating it starkly. It isn’t overstating it. 
Last night I was in Weyburn at a public meeting, and I had two 
people come to me, both of whom said that they’d never held a 
party membership for the New Democratic Party — they said 
they’d never held a party membership for any party for that 
matter — both of whom on separate occasions related to me the 
incident with respect to drugs and prescription drugs in their 
family. 
 
What defence am I to give to them? They may not even know 
that I’m a member of the opposition. They think that we’re all 
trying to do the best that we can for the province of 
Saskatchewan. What defence am I to give to them? What defence 
is the Minister of Finance to give to them, to these people who 
are struggling on this issue? I have the names of these people. 
I’m going to be communicating with them, obviously, and 
explaining the circumstances as best as I can. 
 
How do you explain to the Minister of Education, the Minister of 
Education who absolutely has given up as well on the young 
people of Saskatchewan? The Deputy Premier laughs, but the 
reality is that what our young people are asked to accept is some 
vision of the 21st century of education. Our young people are 
asked to accept some vision of tomorrow, a vision which of 
course nobody has ever articulated from the government 
benches, a vision which only seems to exist in the fevered mind 
and the feverish mind of the Minister of Education. He’s never 
put it down on paper. It’s a concept which he simply throws out 
willy-nilly. 
 
How do you tell? How do any one of us tell a young man or a 
young woman about to graduate from university, or trying to get 
into university, what the next step is with respect to education 
and with respect to the post-secondary education? What can you 
tell them? I tell you, Mr. Chairman, you simply are not able to. 
We’re not able to describe the circumstances to them. 
 
What do we say? That there’s some hope down the line. Where 
is the hope down the line? There is no game plan articulated by 
the Minister of Finance. And I don’t dump on the Minister of 
Finance as a person himself because I repeat again, I think that 
this is not an easy job being Minister of Finance as a person 
himself because, I repeat again, I think that this is not an easy job 
being Minister of Finance. But in the government that he is a part 
of, a government with no game plan, no hope, no heart, there is 
little help or no help for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and for the people of Saskatoon and for Regina 
and for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Chairman, that under those circumstances we 
have to take the occasions that we can in this legislature, such as 
interim supply, to communicate to the Minister of Finance and to 
the Premier and to the Deputy Premier, that they have to stick 
around and attend to these problems here. And they have to give 
us a specific game plan, and they have to get off  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

593 
 
 

this message of competition. They have to get off this idea of 
unbridled competition. They have to get off this political notion 
of divide and conquer. They have to defend the working people 
of Saskatchewan, not attack them. They have to defend the 
working people as they would the farming people. That it is no 
longer applicable in the crisis that we are living in, Mr. Chairman, 
this theory of competition. That the only theory, the only ethic 
which applies in this crisis that we’re living in now, Mr. 
Chairman, is the ethic of co-operation, not competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That we’re in this boat together — all of us. 
That it’s going to take the best of our people, it’s going to take 
the best of our brains, it’s going to take the best of our young men 
and women — all of the goodwill of our farming people, all of 
the goodwill of our city people. It’s going to take the principle of 
co-operation to make it work, Mr. Chairman, and not the 
principle of competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — If the economic pie is diminishing, as we are 
told by the Minister of Finance, there’s got to be a sitting down 
around the table to discuss this with the people of Saskatchewan, 
and the farming people, and the working people, and the business 
people, to describe the difficulty and the shares that are obligated 
and that they can take out of that pie. We’ve got to practise the 
ethic of co-operation. 
 
If we’re expecting that people in Saskatchewan and Canada are 
to help the unemployed worker, we’ve got to explain that through 
the principle of co-operation to our farmer, who’s also equally 
hurting. 
 
If we are going to continue on our programs of assistance to 
farming people, we’ve got to explain that to the city people, to 
make sure that that ethic of co-operation is understood and 
accepted by them. We need now, more than ever, Mr. Chairman, 
the principle of co-operation. We need now, more than ever, a 
government with competence, a government with vision, a 
government that seeks to build and unite — not a government 
that seeks to divide — a government that has some hope for the 
people of Saskatchewan. We need that now more than ever, and 
we don’t have it, unfortunately, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I know, Mr. Chairman, that in this kind 
of an atmosphere, in this kind of a forum, in a partisan political 
forum that we exist in, that somehow the members opposite will 
view this in exclusively partisan terms. I suppose I’ll have the 
same tendency when I listen to them. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Chairman, as I’m ready to take my place on 
this particular interim Bill, we need now not an old, outdated 
philosophy of competition — ruling by polls, seeking to rule on 
the basis of dividing farmer versus labourer, young versus old — 
we need now, Mr.  

Chairman, as I take my place, a budget and a government and a 
leadership which is leading us to a new and higher principle of 
co-operation. 
 
We need now a government and a leadership and MLAs that are 
devoted to that principle of co-operation more than ever. And I 
say that maybe we can’t do much in this Legislative Assembly. 
Maybe we can’t get the government defeated or amend the 
budget because of the numbers situation, but we’re not helpless 
in this situation. The people of Regina and Saskatoon and even 
Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, are not helpless. They’ll 
have a chance fairly soon in two by-elections, and hopefully in a 
general election, to see whether or not they ascribe to this ideal 
and principle of co-operation to which we commend the 
government opposite to consider. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I was 
pleasantly surprised to hear the Leader of the Opposition join the 
debate tonight because I appreciate the fact that he has taken a 
stand on a few issues. 
 
I was a little surprised with respect to the Leader of the 
Opposition tonight to say that there wasn’t a strategy, even 
though the budget document set out the strategy. And we make it 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has to participate in a 
world economy. And I get frightened for Saskatchewan people 
when I hear the Leader of the Opposition say, you can’t have a 
competitive world, you can’t be competitive, that we don’t want 
Saskatchewan people to compete with others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you can’t compete, you will not survive in the 
world. And the NDP tonight, and we’ve had it articulated so well, 
the NDP philosophy of “back to the ’60s,” which is: we will draw 
a big wall around Saskatchewan; we won’t compete because 
we’re afraid to compete; that Saskatchewan people can’t 
compete; that competition is evil, that it’s wrong, that it’s 
immoral. And that’s what we heard, the restatement of the 1960s 
philosophy from the leader of the New Democratic Party. And I 
was saddened — I was saddened, Mr. Speaker, because, 
notwithstanding what the Leader of the Opposition says, the 
world has changed, Mr. Chairman; the world has changed. And 
Saskatchewan people want, Mr. Speaker, to be able to compete 
on the world stage and they will not buy that philosophy that 
there’s no competition. 
 
And we take a look, Mr. Speaker, at other comments made by the 
hon. member when he talks about no . . . Well I said competition, 
but then he said there’s no strategy. And it was very, very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that one of the areas that has come 
through loud and clear, and I think it applies, with all respect, not 
only to the Leader of the Opposition but to the finance critic, and 
it came through loud and clear on budget day. And I sat in this 
Chamber and all parties had guests. There were a group of people 
that traditionally come to the budget speech and they’re the 
investment community from around the world. And we had 
people here from Japan, we had people here from Europe, people 
from Canada, people from the United States. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

594 
 
 

(2030) 
 
And they were absolutely shocked — absolutely shocked, Mr. 
Chairman — when the Leader of the Opposition stood before this 
House and indicated that he had absolutely no comprehension or 
grasp of the investment corporation of Saskatchewan; when he 
said that the investment corporation was going to take over the 
operation of the auto fund and the Workers’ Compensation 
Board; that he couldn’t understand the financing between, Mr. 
Speaker, who are managing and investing in pension funds, Mr. 
Speaker, as opposed to who are operating the various proposals, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ve heard now on three different occasions from investment 
people around the world that, what has happened to the New 
Democratic Party, when they at least, in the past, understood 
finances and understood budgeting and understood financial 
management? And what has happened to that party today, that 
they don’t understand the financing and they don’t understand 
the need, Mr. Speaker, for this province to participate in the 
world economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I found it a little surprising, Mr. Speaker, to 
listen to the hon. member when he talks about the unemployment 
rate in Saskatchewan, and four or five days ago stood up in this 
Assembly and said, you’re bailing out SED Systems. Don’t help 
SED Systems, and don’t help Develcon in Saskatoon. And the 
NDP said, don’t help SED Systems and don’t help Develcon. 
 
And on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, they complain about the 
unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker, a rather great surprise to people 
watching. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we heard some rather strange comments from 
the Leader of the Opposition and several of his supporters, and 
they talked about, Mr. Speaker, the family. That party over there 
is being criticized from one end of this province to the other for 
probably the greatest attack on traditional family values that the 
people of this province and their families have ever seen, are 
coming from the New Democratic Party. And that’s why today 
there are old CCF members, and others, that are tearing up their 
memberships, like the president of the New Democratic Party in 
Melville, who says, I can’t support the NDP any more and their 
moral stands or lack of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And can’t support, can’t support, Mr. 
Speaker, what we’re seeing out there as, and I use the phrase 
lightly, a war — a war and an attack on traditional Saskatchewan 
values, the likes of which we have never seen in the province, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
And they stand up tonight and they criticize this government 
because, when the New Democrats were in office, they wanted 
to give the seniors a measly $25 a month — $25 a month 
supplements, the NDP. And the hon. members sit over there and 
said that was fine. And this budget says that it will be $80 a month 
in November,  

and they voted against it, Mr. Chairman. They said that they were 
opposed to the increase in the senior supplement of $15 a month 
starting November 1, 1988. And the New Democratic Party said 
no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, dramatic increases for student loans. The NDP 
said no to more money for student loans, and they said it by 
opposing this budget. And they said no to the students again, Mr. 
Speaker, when they stood up here one member after another 
member and said, it’s all right, so that students can’t write their 
exams, that that’s fair and that’s proper. And the NDP said they 
support efforts so that students couldn’t write their exams, 
perhaps would be lost to the job market, and perhaps lose job 
opportunities. And the NDP said, we don’t care about the 
students; all we want to do is support the trade union efforts to 
stop the students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP did absolutely nothing in 11 long years for 
the family tragedy of alcoholism and drug abuse. They stood up 
in this House, one NDP member after another, and said, no more 
money for Whitespruce, for the youth treatment centre for young 
people suffering from substance abuse and the tragedy that that 
is causing families around this province. And again, the NDP 
said, no more money for drug and substance abuse treatment in 
this province. And that’s what they stood here and said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only province in the country that has a special 
tax credit for single families and the difficulties that they face, 
and the NDP members, one after the other, said no, we don’t want 
a tax credit for single families in this province, and each and 
every one of the NDP voted no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP had an opportunity to say to the seniors, 
we support the seniors’ tax credit, the only one in Canada. And 
every single New Democratic member stood up and said no, 
we’re not voting for the tax decrease and tax credit for seniors. 
They’re saying again no to the seniors, Mr. Speaker, and every 
single one of them stood up and said no to the seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve talked about welfare reform, and we’ve 
heard from the member from Moose Jaw his views about welfare 
reform. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget made it clear that one of 
the prime efforts of this government is trying to break the welfare 
cycle. And when we stand up in the budget after welfare reform 
and say that every single employable in the city of Prince Albert 
that formerly was on welfare is now working, the NDP said no, 
we’re against welfare reform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They said no, we’re opposed to people on 
welfare getting a first chance or a second chance to get a 
meaningful job. The NDP said no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very interesting that when educational 
leaders and health leaders and hospital administrators are saying 
it’s a fair budget, it’s fair in the circumstances, the NDP still stand 
up and say, no, we’re opposed to the government giving more 
money to health and education, and voted against the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

595 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, they mentioned small business when they call small 
business the corporate friends of the Conservative party. Mr. 
Speaker, I wear that badge with some pride. And they said when 
this government is making an effort to deal with the business tax, 
the NDP had an opportunity to deliver a message to small 
business and say, it’s a good idea to reduce the business tax by 
50 per cent. And what did the NDP say? No, Mr. Speaker, they 
said no to small business. They said no to the hospitals, no to 
education, no to small business, no to seniors, no to people on 
welfare wanting assistance and help and the opportunity. And 
that’s what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, is the same 
old rhetoric from the same old people in the same old way, and 
over and over and over again. 
 
And one of the great tragedies, Mr. Speaker, of what we’ve seen 
in this session, what we’ve seen in this session . . . And here was 
an opportunity with a new leader, here was an opportunity with 
a new leader to stand up and say, I’ve got some new ideas; I think 
that there is an alternative, I think there are some different 
proposals that we could bring to the people of this province. And 
if it’s one thing that’s coming through loud and clear, Mr. 
Speaker, is that New Democratic Party members from one end of 
this province are already saying, we need Allan Blakeney and we 
miss Allan Blakeney. And that came through loud and clear over 
the budget efforts of members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Never have we seen, never have we seen a 
less intelligent response to a budget from the opposition 
anywhere in the Dominion of Canada than what we have seen 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve got some ideas of what 
they’d change. They’ve got a couple of ideas. They’ve taken 
different positions, and I won’t talk about the issues of who 
should be allowed to adopt, as the member from Moose Jaw so 
ably articulated the NDP position. And I won’t talk about some 
of their other issues that are so disconcerting New Democrats 
from one end of the province to the other. And I am sorry that the 
Leader of the Opposition . . . I’m sorry that the Leader of the 
Opposition isn’t prepared to listen. And I know why he doesn’t 
want to hear the message, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t want to hear 
it because he knows he’s wrong; he knows his party is wrong. 
And Mr. Speaker, above all I think he knows he made the wrong 
decision last fall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve seen the tragedy, Mr. Chairman, of a 
New Democratic Party, of a New Democratic Party that so 
regrettably doesn’t understand agriculture, doesn’t understand 
farming, doesn’t understand the problems, and most of all, Mr. 
Speaker, doesn’t have any solutions for farmers. 
 
It’s all right, Mr. Speaker, to take the traditional NFU (National 
Farmers Union) approach on agriculture which  

is write off all the loans, give the money, write off the land bank, 
give us our land bank, and the government put in the money to 
run the farms, Mr. Speaker. That is not the acceptable position of 
farmer after farmer and the vast majority of farmers in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, not one new idea, not one new 
proposal, not one new suggestion from the New Democratic 
Party for the farmers of this province. 
 
And I think it’s another tragedy, Mr. Speaker, that a new leader, 
a new leader, Mr. Speaker, you would have thought would have 
said, farmers, farmers, I’m prepared to listen and I’ve got some 
new ideas. But what did we hear? Absolutely nothing. Absolutely 
nothing. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what he’s giving the 
farmers — absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the NDP tried the 
other day, rather mistakenly, to indicate that they now are having 
a conversion on the road to Damascus that they now favour day 
care. And they voted against, Mr. Speaker, doubling the amount 
of money for day care and the number of spaces in this budget. 
And what did the NDP try and do, Mr. Speaker? Oh, the 
government’s not doing enough they said. All of a sudden we’re 
in favour of day care. Mr. Speaker, they voted against, they voted 
against, Mr. Speaker, doubling the number of day-care spaces in 
this province when they had the opportunity to say, we’ve had a 
conversion. We do believe in day care. They just turned around 
and said, no, Mr. Speaker — no more money for day care, and 
we oppose the provincial government for nearly doubling the 
spaces, day-care spaces. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of others I forgot, and I apologize 
to the Leader of the Opposition. It’s a rather auspicious session 
and his confrere from Saskatoon, and being the first unionized 
law firm in the province of Saskatchewan, and . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And, Mr. Speaker, I, on behalf of many other 
lawyers are asking the question around the province: is that now 
party policy, or is that a unique situation? 
 
I suppose, when I look at the anemic effort of the opposition, and 
I look at their anemic support on so many issues, and I look at 
their anemic support for farmers, and I look at their anemic 
support for families, and I look at their anemic support for those 
on welfare, you know what the surprising thing is for me, is why 
the steelworkers were the ones to unionize the new member’s law 
firm. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Why the steelworkers? Mr. Speaker, I think 
that there’s something a little humorous, and I think all members 
will join with me in recognizing, Mr. Speaker, that there has been 
a rather serious distortion, distortion, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that 
the new union is  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

596 
 
 

generally perceived to be strong — you know, strong views, 
strong position, strong industry, strong people. And what we saw 
was anemic efforts. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve also seen through this session, and 
I want to take . . . I want to take us a look. And I think the press 
— and I know they’re watching on television — are sitting here, 
and the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. We all remember, 
we all remember, how when Bill 2 came down, the New 
Democratic Party and its leader and its justice critic said, the 
Government of Saskatchewan under Grant Devine didn’t go far 
enough on French language rights. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please, order. I 
know that in the enthusiasm of the debate we tend to forget that 
the names of members are not to be used, but rather position, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m sorry. I thought I referred to the Leader 
of the Opposition. And the justice critic for the opposition said 
that they were going to want this government to go further, 
further and fight for, and they were going to fight, fight, fight for 
more French language rights and issues. And what happened, Mr. 
Speaker? They asked one question on the first day. They got not 
only their fingers burnt, Mr. Speaker, and they haven’t said one 
thing further, and they have backed out and backed away, Mr. 
Speaker, from another issue and another flip-flop and another 
position. 
 
Oh no, Mr. Speaker, even today when we met the students from 
Gravelbourg, the justice critic, articulating the New Democratic 
Party position said, oh, I’m not sure what we’re going to do now. 
I’m not sure. I don’t like what the government’s doing and the 
Premier’s doing, but I’m not sure now what I’m going to do on 
this issue. Oh no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where’s the leadership? All we’ve seen is jelly. 
Jelly, and there’s no position, Mr. Speaker, that they’re not 
prepared to sacrifice in the interest of politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, Mr. Speaker, No, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
seen them do flip-flops. The member from Moose Jaw is not sure 
now whether his position on homosexual adoption is one that he 
necessarily supports as strongly as he did beforehand, Mr. 
Speaker. But the people of this province, from one end to the 
other, are now starting to ask the question: why do the NDP 
attack my traditional values, and why do the NDP under their 
new leader, Mr. Speaker, decide that what Saskatchewan has 
traditionally stood for and what Saskatchewan has traditionally 
fought so strongly for, why is that being thrown out? And why 
has that new leader and that party all of a sudden, instead of 
defending the family, declared a royal war on the families of 
Saskatchewan? And that’s what we’ve seen from the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am a little reluctant to give some advice to the opposition. I am 
a little reluctant to give some advice to the New Democratic 
Party, but let me tell you,  

Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, please. I realize that the 
minister has created some excitement, but I would suggest that 
we contain our enthusiasm somewhat, and all of you will have 
the opportunity to contribute. So please, let’s have a little bit 
more order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There’s nothing more heart-rending, Mr. 
Speaker, than being goaded into an argument in the House that 
. . . But, Mr. Speaker, the issues that were raised by our hon. 
members are such that the people of this province are beginning 
to question. And some very prominent members of the New 
Democratic Party, from one end of the province, are beginning 
to question. And they’re beginning to ask, and they’re beginning 
to phone the members, and the members know full well the phone 
calls they’re getting on their positions. 
 
And I’m going to bet, Mr. Speaker — And I’ll bet with the press 
and I’ll bet with anybody in the New Democratic Party that the 
New Democratic Party, when Bill No. 2 was introduced, said it 
was not good enough and that they were going to oppose it. I’m 
going to predict, Mr. Speaker, with the political heat that the NDP 
are getting from one end of the province to the other, that they 
are going to do another new flip-flop and they’re going to support 
the government on Bill 2. And I’ll bet . . . And I’m going to 
challenge the press, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to challenge to 
remember what they said at the beginning of the debate, and what 
they’re not saying as the debate goes on, and what they say at the 
end of the debate, Mr. Speaker. Because no political party, I don’t 
think, has ever had such a strong reaction to their position as the 
New Democratic Party are getting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are asking New 
Democrats from one end of the province to the other, and they’re 
asking Liberals from one end of the province to the other, to 
support our Premier on this issue, to support the government on 
this issue. That’s what they’re asking for. And woe betide 
members opposite that don’t support this province, this Premier, 
and this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated what the NDP have said no to — no 
to families; no to single families; no to seniors; no to farmers; no 
to small business; no to our traditional values. The only thing 
they’re going to say yes to, and mark my words, is they’re going 
to vote for this Bill tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman I wasn’t going to get into 
this debate because I think the members on this side of the House 
have displayed, have displayed the kind of high level and 
concerned and intelligent debate that it wasn’t necessary for me 
to speak. But after listening to this pitiful example, pitiful 
example of a Minister of Finance trying to defend a totally 
indefensible budget, I think I am compelled to say a few words 
in rebuttal. 
 
We saw here today, Mr. Chairman, the most feeble defence of a 
budget ever given in this House in my memory. And I say that 
with some concern, because as the Leader of the Opposition so 
ably displayed in the  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

597 
 
 

speech that he made on this Appropriation Bill, there is a need in 
this province, above anything and everything else, the getting 
together of the people and the legislators to do what is right, not 
pit people against each other. But what did the Minister of 
Finance do? Instead of defending his budget, he has done . . . he 
has followed the leadership of the member from Melville, whose 
leadership the Premier has followed, and has attacked minorities 
once again. When will this stop? When will this attack on the 
helpless and the disadvantaged that this government has 
perpetrated — the dividing, and the splitting, and the driving of 
the wedge stop? For what purpose is this? Is it that power to them 
that is so important that they will do anything, including the 
destroying of this province as they have so seriously started to 
do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say to the people of this province who 
may be watching this today: don’t forget the spectacle you saw 
when you listened to the Minister of Finance make his defence. 
It was a sad day. A sad day when a Minister of Finance spends 
most of his remarks defending the investment companies as he 
did in his speech, and does not address the hurt and the suffering 
that exists among the people of Saskatchewan because of the 
misguided policies of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say also to the press, Mr. Chairman: 
notice that this government has refused to table the Public 
Accounts. If they are so proud about the expenditures that they 
have made of the taxpayers’ money, what are they hiding? Isn’t 
it news to tell the people of Saskatchewan when we have an 
unprecedented delay in the tabling of the Public Accounts. In 
most places of a democratic country, Mr. Chairman, that would 
be scandalous, that would be scandalous. Why is that not a 
headline? Why is that not an attack on this government which 
refuses to disclose to the people expenditures of this money, their 
money that they made over two years ago. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, it is reported in the Public Accounts 
(meeting) today that the Minister of Finance, who spoke just 
now, had the Public Accounts printed on April 4th of this year 
and has had them on his desk for many days and is sitting on them 
and is not tabling them in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You didn’t know that, Mr. Chairman, as a 
member of the caucus and not sitting on the front benches, but 
I’m telling you and those other back-benchers that’s what your 
Minister of Finance has done . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s morality. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s irresponsible. That’s an abuse of 
this Legislative Assembly. That’s an abuse of power that any 
government has when it can collect hundreds of millions of 
dollars from taxpayers who can hardly afford to meet their 
mortgage payments, some of whom have to sacrifice the kind of 
groceries they buy. That’s the way  

this government is taxing the people of this province, and yet will 
not tell them where it is spending their money by refusing to table 
the Public Accounts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I heard the Minister of 
Finance talk about small business. Well, I want to tell him, 
through you, that the way small business prospers is when there 
is money circulating in the economy. Well here is what this 
government has done for small business. When they cancelled 
the property improvement grant, which was a massive property 
tax increases on everybody in Saskatchewan. They took $80 
million out of the economy which was spent in the small 
businesses of Saskatchewan. That’s what they’ve done for small 
business. 
 
They have shifted the tax load from the provincial government to 
the property taxes so that now there are $400 million more spent 
on property taxes than there were six years ago. That’s money 
that was spent in the small-business men and women shops where 
they employed people and created work. Is it any wonder that 
today in Saskatchewan there is an unemployment rate of 15.2 per 
cent among young people. That’s shameful. 
 
And what does the government do? It cuts back the employment 
job creation program for our students by $6 million. That’s their 
response to unemployment. The minister didn’t want to talk 
about that. Oh, but he did talk about SED Systems, this great, 
marvellous answer to everything, selling it off to Fleet Aerospace 
of Toronto. But he didn’t see the result of that. What was the 
result, Mr. Chairman? We have now got 70 people who have lost 
their jobs in SED Systems because of the policy and the sell-out 
by this government. 
 
And whereas that high-tech industry was managed in 
Saskatchewan, do you know where it’s managed from now? The 
member from Saskatoon knows. It’s managed in Toronto. The 
management has moved out. And this happened time and time 
again where their misguided, ideological, blinkered, blind 
approach to privatization . . . 
 
(2100) 
 
Saskoil, they did the same thing. Before Saskoil was so-called 
privatized, it made a profit of $22 million. That was dividend for 
the treasury and for the people of Saskatchewan. This year 
Saskoil made a profit of $44 million, and do you know where it 
went? It went to those 75 per cent shareholders who don’t live in 
this province. That’s what is happening with their ideological, 
blinkered approach. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, we don’t need a government that drives 
wedges between people. We don’t need a government that has 
ministers stand up in this House and attack the churches of this 
province. And why? Because they approach that in the same way 
as everything else. If somebody as much as questions the policies 
of this government, if somebody as much as speaks on behalf of 
the poor, which the churches have done — and so they should — 
you know that’s part of their responsibility, Mr.  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

598 
 
 

Chairman, as well as I know; they are doing what the churches 
of anywhere in the world of any denomination have always done 
in time immemorial: speak on behalf of the poor and 
disadvantaged — and instead of listening to them, this 
Conservative government attacks, attacks those churches for 
saying that, because they dared, because they dared speak on 
behalf of people that these heartless people have forgotten and 
choose to neglect. 
 
And the question then is, Mr. Speaker, and I say to our viewers, 
who’s next? Who is next? No one knows, but it’s limitless. They 
have attacked so many minorities that now they’re beginning to 
attack the majorities as well. 
 
That’s no way for government to operate, Mr. Chairman. That is 
heartless and cruel, and it is no wonder that many of the people 
of our society are saying, about governments like them, that there 
is really no more hope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — There is a better way, there is a better way, 
and I was proud as I sat here to listen to our leader, the Leader of 
the Opposition, talk about that better way. And if anything else, 
Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And if anything else, Mr. Chairman, that 
came out today that I know that the viewers who are watching 
this debate saw, they saw a contrast. They saw the attacking and 
the dividing of the Conservative government, and they saw the 
understanding and the feeling debate by members of this side of 
the House, including the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And in Saskatoon Eastview and in Regina 
Elphinstone when the canvassers go to visit them, that’s what 
they’re talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — These are the antics of a desperate 
government. It’s a desperate government that feels itself 
cornered, and feels, instead of trying to work out compromises 
and understanding, it has got to attack. This has got to stop. 
 
In closing I want to say I am sure anyone who will have listened 
to this debate will notice very clearly that the minister did not talk 
about certain things. He didn’t talk about the budget, hardly. He 
didn’t ;talk about the prescription drug plan, which is causing 
people to have prescription costs that are backed up over 6, 7, 
$800. Some of those people don’t make that much money in one 
month. I wonder why the Minister of Finance didn’t address that 
question? But he’s defended the investment companies of the 
international world from New York. 
 
Did the Minister of Finance stand and make a comment about the 
children’s dental plan which they destroyed? Did he even address 
the promise made by the Premier when he said, oh, we made a 
mistake; we’re going to change it; we’re going to have a new 
policy to provide  

dental service in rural Saskatchewan. Was it in the budget? No, 
it was not in the budget. Did the Minister of Finance address that 
question and explain it? No, he defended the investment firms 
and the banks. 
 
Now that tells you something about the priorities of this 
government. It is not the people whose income taxes have 
increased unbelievably, it is that the priorities are the corporate 
sector, the banks to whom they have reduced the income tax rate 
from 17 to 15 per cent. The Minister of Finance didn’t talk about 
that. 
 
Why didn’t the Minister of Finance, if this was a caring 
government that had things in charge and in control, address the 
question of the 11,000 people, sick people waiting to get into a 
hospital bed in the city of Saskatoon, because, Mr. Chairman, 
again the priorities are wrong. Eleven thousand people waiting 
and hurting and being afraid and worrying, but they are spending 
$34,000 a day, I say to member from Yorkton, $34,000 a day on 
empty office space all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now those, those are priorities, Mr. 
Chairman, the priorities of that government, but not the priorities 
of this opposition. 
 
And I close finally by saying this: this budget and this debate 
today is about fairness. And there is nothing fair about the kind 
of spending this government is doing and the kind of taxation that 
it’s imposing on people of Saskatchewan. This budget is about 
competency, and when any government inherits . . . any political 
party becoming government inherits a surplus of $140 million 
and in six years drags that down into a deficit of $3.7 billion, 
that’s incompetent. 
 
This debate and this budget is about a closed and secretive 
government, a government that won’t even table the Public 
Accounts because it knows that those public accounts report on 
the expenditures of this government in a pre-election year, and it 
knows that they are afraid that when the people of this province 
set those expenditures, they will say to this government once 
again, you’re never going to get re-elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And in Eastview and in Elphinstone they 
would barely show up as a distant third once those public 
accounts are available. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, this debate has been about honesty. 
The one fundamental thing that any citizen of any democratic 
nation should be able to expect of their government is honesty. 
There has not been anything honest about the approach of this 
government. Were they honest with the farmers of Saskatchewan 
when they provided the farm production loan program at 6 per 
cent and said hassle-free cash? We will never bother you. We 
want to be good. And then turn around this year, when the 
Premier is on one of this junkets down in the United States, have 
his department announce that it’s now going to be nine and 
three-quarters per cent. Is that honesty? Is that fair? No, it’s 
shocking. It’s dishonest, and it’s unfair. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

599 
 
 

And therefore, Mr. Chairman that budget is not meeting great 
favour with the public of Saskatchewan. And that’s why the 
Minister of Finance feels he’s got to stand up and attack people 
because he’s got to divert, in his mind, a debate away from those 
real issues onto something else in the hope that it will distract 
people’s attention. But it’s not working; it’s not working. 
 
Now in this interim supply Bill, there are public servants and 
there are municipal grants that have to get paid. We’re not 
opposing the interim supply Bill. But in this debate we’re making 
it very clear that we did, and we will continue to, oppose the 
unfairness and the inadequacy of a budget that has been brought 
down by a government that is washed up and does not deserve to 
have the right to govern any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I was not going to speak 
about the . . . I was not going to speak on interim supply. It is 
traditional in the Assembly for interim supply to be some 
questions directed to the Minister of Finance with regards to 
one-twelfth of the expenditure of that particular month. That’s 
what this interim supply Bill is traditionally about and has 
traditionally been about in this House for perhaps 50 years, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
So what are we hearing now, Mr. Speaker? What are we hearing 
now, Mr. Chairman? What we’re hearing now is the members 
opposite saying, we’re not opposed to this, we’re going to vote 
in favour of it. But this debate started seven hours ago. Seven 
hours ago that this debate started, and they say, oh, we’re going 
to vote in favour of it. 
 
What they’re doing, Mr. Chairman, is the following thing. 
They’re holding this Bill up, they’re holding this Bill up, Mr. 
Chairman, holding this Bill up knowing full well that tomorrow 
this Bill will not pass because they’re going to try to drag it on 
and on and on. This Bill will not pass so that we will not be able 
to send cheques out to people in hospitals, to people in the 
schools, to local government. 
 
Tomorrow, tomorrow, that’s when that Bill has to be passed by 
in order to send those cheques out or people will go without their 
pay cheques. That’s exactly what they’re doing. 
 
Seven hours ago we started on that. Did they ask questions of the 
Minister of Finance? Did one of them stand up and ask questions 
of the Minister of Finance, as you traditionally do? No, they 
stood, Mr. Chairman, and read from typewritten speeches, many 
of them running for 50, 50 to an hour, not asking a question, 
simply rolling out the rhetoric. 
 
And why are they doing that, Mr. Chairman? Why they’re doing 
that is the following, which is a reflection of what this institution 
quite frankly has become. This institution has become the 
following, Mr. Chairman: that what was traditionally done in 
this Assembly by way of debate, by way of asking questions, 
grievance before supply, which what the purpose of parliament 
is, what has it become? It has become nothing more than people 
standing up in this Assembly so they can be seen on television. 
That’s exactly what this institution has become. 
 

And I think it’s time for all members to ask themselves, Mr. 
Chairman, to ask themselves, are we doing a service to the 
legislative system and to the legislative process? If this becomes 
nothing more than simply standing up day after day, making your 
speech to the television camera . . . Because that’s all it’s 
become, Mr. Chairman, absolutely all it has become. 
 
And the speeches are pure repetitive, repetitive, repetitive, 
repetitive, in a place that is designed as the ultimate of debating 
institution of this province, and the fundamentals of what a 
legislative system is about. It’s ceased to be a debating forum, 
Mr. Chairman. It has ceased to be a debating forum, and nothing 
more than a spot for everybody to stand up and speak on 
television. That’s what it’s become. 
 
And I think we should ask ourselves: are we going in the right 
direction? Are we doing the right thing? And when we talk about 
the institution of parliament, perhaps sometimes we should think 
back and reflect about what parliament in fact is. Reflect about 
what in fact parliament is, Mr. Chairman, because that has not 
been done, that has not been done. Seven hours, seven hours, 
seven hours ago we started interim supply. Not one question 
posed to the minister, not one question posed to the minister who 
sat here, who here in his place for most of that seven hours 
listening — not one question. Simply stand up and give a speech, 
give a speech, 45, 50 minutes, rhetoric out. It’s nothing more, Mr. 
Speaker . . . this has become nothing more than a free-time 
political broadcast, this institution. That is exactly what this 
institution is becoming, a free-time political broadcast for both 
sides. And where are we in this democratic system if all we have, 
all we have is free-time political broadcast. I think we have to 
look for a different way and a different way to deal with this. 
 
The member from . . . The opposition House Leader raises a 
question, raises a question, Mr. Chairman, with regard to the 
Public Accounts. Mr. Chairman, the Public Accounts of this 
province have traditionally been filed when the Provincial 
Auditor files his report. That has been the case for at least 25 
years in this province, 25 years in this province. The Provincial 
Auditor is independent, and nobody in this Assembly, I’m sure, 
will say anything but that. And that is the tradition of this House, 
the tradition of parliament that we seem now so ready to throw 
out — to throw out all concepts of parliamentary democracy as 
we rush towards the free-time political broadcast. And we’ve 
become a television studio here is what we’ve become, a 
television studio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Public Accounts will be filed in the traditional 
way of parliament, and that is when the Provincial Auditor files 
his report. He can file his report whenever he wishes to file his 
report, and I assume he will do that very, very quickly. 
 
(2115) 
 
With regard to the question of attacking minorities. The member 
stands up and says we are attacking minorities — referring 
directly, Mr. Chairman, to Bill No. 2 dealing with the French 
language issue in this province — we’re  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

600 
 
 

defending . . . or we’re attacking minorities. Mr. Speaker, that 
Bill has nothing to do with attacking minorities. We are left with 
a situation in this province where the Supreme Court came down 
with the decision that, if we were to implement that decision as 
the Supreme Court says, would cost this province $15 million, 
and $15 million right now. Now if you’re talking about grievance 
before supply, if you’re talking in this Assembly about how we 
should spend our money and how we should raise our revenues, 
let’s then ask, where do you want to take that $15 million from? 
Do you want to take it from more taxation? Do you want to crowd 
out something else? And those are legitimate decisions. Those 
are legitimate questions to be asked. And the members opposite 
say, in a simplistic way, you’re simply attacking a minority. 
You’re dealing with a real question there, Mr. Chairman, a real 
question. And we will have an opportunity to deal in much more 
detail with Bill 2 when it comes before this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the opposition also refers to the farmers, that we 
have nothing for the farmers. And I can go through the list if you 
want, but I want to read instead a speech delivered by the Leader 
of the Opposition back in — let’s get to this — 1986; June 21, 
1986. I think you should take some time to listen to this because 
he’s speaking about farmers and he’s speaking about free trade. 
I will read it and I will allow the rest of the Assembly to judge. 
Let me quote, Mr. Chairman. 
 

To allow farmers or other primary producers unfettered 
access to the huge U.S. market, the American government 
is going to have to get something substantial in return. The 
Americans are too shrewd to give us a free lunch. What have 
they suggested in return? 

 
Was the question posed by the Leader of the Opposition. And he 
answered that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 

. . . that they will raise our dollar, which will mean interest 
rates will rise. We know what happened to farmers the last 
time interest rates went up. 

 
What happened to farmers the last time interest rates went up? 
Nineteen eighty-one, 1981 interest rates are at 21 per cent and he 
says, we remember what happened when interest rates went up. 
What happened, Mr. Chairman, from the government of the day, 
of which he was the Deputy Premier, was nothing — nothing, 
Mr. Chairman. That’s exactly their response to the farmer in 
1981. Interest rates at 23 per cent, what kind of help did they 
bring forward? None. And what was their justification for it? We 
don’t have enough money for that. Because their money was 
going, Mr. Chairman, a hundred million dollars of it, into buying 
people’s farms — buying people’s farms. And he says we have 
done nothing for the farmer. 
 
I’m going to take a little time, Mr. Chairman, and read some of 
the things that have been done for the farmers in western Canada 
by Progressive Conservatives. 
 
The livestock cash advance, estimated revenue to farmers or 
money to farmers, $22.4 million. That’s more than their budget 
was back in 1981 for agriculture totally.  

Number two, livestock facility tax credit, $2.6 million; 
agriculture development fund, over five years, $200 million. 
That’s not doing something for farmers, Mr. Chairman? 
 
The production loan program, $1.1 billion. Mr. Chairman, $1.1 
billion, and that’s not responding to farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Agriculture credit corporation, low 
interest loans — in the hundreds of millions of dollars in low 
interest loans. The feeder association, supporting cattle feeding 
in Saskatchewan; the livestock investment credit; counselling 
and assistance for farmers; The Farm Land Security Act; the 
farmers’ oil royalty refund; the rural enhancement program, and 
funding of $78 million to the College of Agriculture — that they 
today were critical of and said, bit deal, what’s that going to do 
for the farmer? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the College of Agriculture in this province 
has done a great deal for the farmer since its inception, and will 
continue to do under a new College of Agriculture for many, 
many years into the future. 
 
And they fail to want to then reflect about what the federal 
government has done. That’s what this government has done, 
failed to reflect about what the federal government has done in 
back to back years, in excess of a billion dollars a year alone in 
outright grants to farmers under the special Canadian grains 
program or the deficiency payment — over a billion dollars a 
year for two years. 
 
And I’ll tell you one thing, come next fall the federal 
government, the Progressive Conservative federal government, 
will be there for the farmers with at least another billion or more, 
Mr. Chairman, because that’s where they’ve always been in the 
past. And that’s not to refer to the stabilization programs, the 
various stabilization programs, the last one in fact pumping $750 
million. 
 
I talked to a farmer the other day in my riding. He says, in the 
last three years, in the last three years on our farm, we have 
received more assistance — they had received one of these 
50-year awards because their family had been on the farm for 
over 50 years — and they said, in the last three years we have 
received more assistance on our farm than my father and my 
grandfather who had farmed that land for 50 years had received 
in the 47 years before that. Forty-seven years — most of it were 
the NDP and the Liberals were in power in Saskatchewan and 
Ottawa. They have received more in three years than the 47 years 
before that. 
 
And the members opposite vote against that type of support, Mr. 
Chairman. And they say you’re giving them nothing, you’re not 
helping the farmer, you have no programs for the farmer — how 
foolhardy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Let me close simply by stating again, and I say this to members 
of the House and I ask members of the House to give some 
consideration to the institution of parliament. As I said before, 
we have to be more than simply a  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

601 
 
 

free-time political broadcast. The legislature has got to be more 
than simply a television studio. Surely it’s got to be more than 
that, but that is unfortunately what we have made it into. And it’s 
not all the members opposite; it’s all members, quite frankly. But 
that is exactly what we have made it into, and it’s wrong, Mr. 
Chairman. It’s wrong. It’s wrong. It’s wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ask yourself what this Bill is. This Bill is asking the 
Assembly to award one-twelfth of the expenditures so that we 
can pay the bills tomorrow. It’s asking the Assembly so that we 
can debate the budget from now till next year at this time, if we 
so desire. But surely we should pass this Bill so that the cheques 
can go out tomorrow; so that the cheque can go to the hospitals 
in each of our ridings, or to the school boards in each of our 
ridings, or to welfare payments that they so asked for some more. 
They say, give us more, and now they’re basically stonewalling 
this Bill, filibustering this Bill, so in fact they will get nothing 
tomorrow. 
 
I ask all members to put that aside. I ask all members, if you say 
you’re going to support this, let’s stand and approve this Bill so 
that we can send the money out to the people that so rely upon 
the government for that money. I plead all to stand and support 
that Bill on that purpose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I want to have some closing remarks. And I say, first of all, that 
the worst speech here tonight was by the Minister of Finance. 
And the second worst speech was by the former minister of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think it’s a sad spectacle, Mr. Chairman, to see 
a discredited Tory, a past Liberal, stand in this House tonight and 
be afraid to defend his budget. 
 
Here is a Minister of Finance who is a disgrace to the finance 
community. Here is a Minister of Finance who is saying that the 
finance community . . . I’m sure must be laughing at him, must 
be laughing at this government. A Minister of Finance who 
couldn’t come within $800 million of his budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A Minister of Finance that has absolutely no 
credit, no credibility left. And the Minister of Finance has the 
audacity to stand in this House and talk about morality, Mr. 
Chairman. The members over opposite, I tell you: he who has not 
sinned shall not cast the first stone, because I’ll tell you, there are 
a number. 
 
Allan Blakeney ran a government for 11 years — 11 years. And 
I’ll tell you, there was scrupulous morality and integrity in 11 
years of the Blakeney government. And I’ll tell that you can’t 
stand into the public and say that there is not a cloud over the past 
members of some cabinet members. I ask you to dare to say that 
you stand for families. Check around among your groups and ask 
how you stood for families and morality. That’s the question.  

I’m not going to stoop to the level of the Minister of Finance 
because I’m going to leave it there. But I ask the people of 
Saskatchewan to judge morality; judge the morality of the Allan 
Blakeney regime; and judge the morality of this government 
present. And I’ll tell you, New Democrats will come out looking 
good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I stand here before you, Mr. Chairman, and the 
Minister of Finance gets up in the House, and I’ll tell you, they’re 
squealing, they’re squealing, it’s hurting. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please, order. Order. Order, order. I 
ask all members just to calm down; I’m having trouble hearing 
the speaker. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to 
continue in a very determined way of setting out some of the 
issues that this budget does not address. 
 
This government here, the Finance minister indicated, said oh 
yes, we have to have a competing society, a competing economic 
order. Well I’ll tell you, isn’t it strange that under Allan Blakeney 
and 11 years of New Democratic regime that we had 11 balanced 
budgets, that we were able to finance education. We had the best 
health care system in the world, and today, we’ve got a 
competing society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It’s competing, Mr. Chairman. Do you know 
what it’s competing? Outside multinational corporations picking 
off the assets of Saskatchewan against the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll tell you, there’s no competition because 
it’s being handed to them. They don’t even have to compete. 
They come in to address the situation with this government, and 
I’ll tell you, they walk right over them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Weyerhaeuser picked up a pulp mill. Manalta 
Coal picked up a coal mine. The Americans and other provinces 
picked up our highway equipment. Eastern corporations picked 
up SaskMinerals. Well this is a competing and building society, 
I say. Well let’s take a look at some of their economic 
performances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — But before I get into that, let’s take a look at 
some of the indicators of this here wonderful, competing society 
— this free enterprise. Let’s take a look. Here are some of the 
indicators that they have been able to develop for the people of 
this province: the highest inflation rate in all of Canada; the 
fewest housing starts in the last decade; the highest number of 
farm bankruptcies in Canada last year; the second-highest 
incidence of low-income families in Canada; the slowest growth 
rate increase in the labour force in all of Canada — projected  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

602 
 
 

deficit of $328 million and a total deficit of $3.7 billion. Are we 
ever humming, this society — this new, competitive society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Aren’t we building? We are building, I say — 
building, yes, for their bankers. The only ones that we’re building 
for are the bankers, the bond dealers and eastern and 
outside-of-the-country multinational corporations, at a cost to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Chairman, $26 million they have stripped from 
the seniors that have built this province, in their drug program. 
They had the meanness of spirit to destroy the best dental 
program in North America. And I say to you that not only that, 
they have laid on the backs of the people of this province taxes 
which are unconscionable. And they have cut corporate tax and 
also resource royalties. 
 
You know, the former Minister of Finance got up, and you know 
what he said? He complained that we had a debate talking about 
his budget. Well I know why he is complaining, because he can’t 
defend it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s why he’s complaining. They don’t want 
to talk about their budget. Why would anybody want to talk about 
a budget that destroys our education system, destroys our health 
care system, destroys the drug program, the dental program? I 
say, no wonder they don’t want a debate on the issues of the 
budget. And he stands up — and I know it must have felt like it 
was seven hours, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, it wasn’t seven 
hours. It just seemed like seven hours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It just seemed like seven hours because we beat 
them up on their own ground. We told them this budget is no 
good, and the people of Saskatchewan agree with us. Because we 
didn’t debate it for seven hours — be about four and a half hours, 
but it seemed like seven. I think to the Minister of Finance it 
seemed longer because he’s disappeared again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know, they stand here with the hypocrisy or 
the audacity, audacity to come forward and say, you got to pass 
it because we got to get those cheques out. Well you know what? 
After the election, they never got a budget out until June, June 
17th, and they say the opposition . . . Let’s face it, Mr. Chairman, 
this government cannot defend the undefendable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s the fact. Every indication indicates that 
this budget is being rejected by the people of Saskatchewan. And 
I’ll tell you that this budget is going to drive a coffin into the 
future of that political party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koskie: — And, Mr. Chairman, in closing these brilliant 
remarks, let me say . . . I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that we have 
a chance and an opportunity not only to debate but to have 
judgement on this budget. And I’ll tell you, it took a long time 
before the Premier was able to pucker up his courage. But I’ll tell 
you that over into Elphinstone and Eastview the people of 
Saskatchewan will speak, and the people of Saskatchewan will 
support the New Democrats and oppose that vicious, mean, 
hopeless budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $42,031,000 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1989. 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask that 
this House please come to order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you what the 
financial community thought of you being $800 million out in 
respect to your budget. 
 
But also I want to ask you is that: have you gone through this, 
and have you talked to the Minister of Urban Affairs and the 
Minister of Education to see that, in fact, that you have the right 
figures, because last year you came in with an interim supply, 
and suddenly you realized that you hadn’t consulted, and the city 
of Yorkton weren’t able to get their funds. 
 
So could you just give us your complete assurance that you have 
done the proper checking and that what you’re asking for here 
will cover the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . the basic needs as indicated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’d made some comments earlier about the 
change in the critic positions. If I recall last year when there was 
an error on the Appropriations Bill, that the opposition critic of 
the day was able to pick it out himself. I’m assuming that with 
the active co-operation of the former finance critic, that I’m sure 
that if there had been an error he would have identified it already. 
 
And so I indicate to the hon. member that, just for his edification, 
that if we go beyond the one-twelfth as we debated last year, 
there’s an appendix or a schedule indicating the departments that 
would get more. This is the straight one-twelfth, and that’s 
precisely what it is. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I appreciate that assurance, but your facts 
are wrong again, because it was your Minister of Urban Affairs, 
when we raised the attention of the Yorkton situation, who 
indicated that it was our negligence, not yours, in drawing up the 
appropriation.  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

603 
 
 

And you were the one that didn’t consult; you were the one that 
didn’t supply sufficient funds for the city of Yorkton. 
 
I just want to ask you, Mr. Minister, just in respect — and I’ll get 
into details when the budget comes forward — but one of the 
significant things that what we are dividing up here, what we’re 
dividing up, is a twelfth, approximately, of the total budget which 
you have put forward. And one of the things that I see here, and 
running through it, I was wondering whether you could confirm 
whether the largest revenue source, in respect to the increases, is 
that, in fact equalization payments, because we have now 
qualified again as a Tory number first — a have-not province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me indicate while my officials are 
pulling the figure to put equalization in perspective. I was 
surprised that you raised it. 
 
Equalization came into effect in 1958. Since 1958 there have 
been six years — in the province’s history since 1958 — where 
we have been classified as a have province, that is, having paid 
more in to equalization than we’ve taken out. Now one of those 
years was under the Liberal government of Ross Thatcher. One 
year was under the 11 years of Allan Blakeney, and four years of 
the six were under the administration of this government where 
we paid more into equalization than we got out. Only six times 
in the last 30 years; four under our jurisdiction. 
 
Secondly, equalization now makes up approximately 10 per cent 
of our revenue base. In 1972-73 it was approximately 25 per cent 
— 24 point-some change. That’s a quarter of our provincial 
revenues. In 1972-73 under your administration . . . were from 
equalization. And in 1973 it was still 21 per cent. 
 
So I indicate . . . well I can take it a step further. As a matter of 
fact, in 1982 of your last budget, it turned out that there was an 
overpayment to your administration of $125 that we finished 
paying off last year. 
 
So on the equalization formula, yes, there’s an increase, I’ve 
indicated that. I’ve given a history of equalization that of the 30 
years, only six has Saskatchewan ever paid in. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to ask, Mr. Minister, whether, within 
the appropriations, whether he gave any consideration to undoing 
the damage that you have done to the drug program and to the 
dental program, the best dental program Saskatchewan and North 
America has seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A drug program which was decimated. A drug 
program which you gave to the people of this province a 
guarantee that not only would you improve but that you would 
remove all of the prescription fees. And look what you have 
given to the sick people and the elderly people that need drugs. 
 
And I ask you whether you have seriously considered within this 
appropriation to make some amends to the destruction that you 
have done to those programs. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I believe that the Minister of Health 
was yesterday or today in Cut Knife opening a new dental office, 
and I believe there are now 27 or 28 that have already been 
opened. I do suggest to the hon. member that where the dental 
offices are being opened in rural Saskatchewan, they’re being 
well-received. And I would hope that the hon. member would 
acknowledge that. 
 
Secondly, the debate tonight is on the one-twelfth of the 
expenditures, and any policy announcements on any programs 
would be made in the appropriate manner. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, the sum 
of $42,031,000 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(2145) 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 
read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill 4, An Act Granting to Her Majesty certain sums 
of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year Ending 
on March 31, 1989, be now introduced and read the first 
time. 

‘ 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, and under rule 
48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:48 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS
	APPROPRIATION BILL

