


















































March 22, 1988 Hansard


  
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 22,1988 
 

5 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to give 
notice of intention to introduce a Bill. I give notice that on 
Thursday I shall introduce a Bill to amend The Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure today 
to introduce to you some adult patients of the Cancer Patient 
Lodge located here in Regina. The adults located in the Speaker's 
gallery are accompanied by Evelyn Francis and driver Myrna 
Kew. 
 
It is a real pleasure for me to introduce these people to members of 
the legislature because this, to my knowledge, is the last group to 
attend here while the present member for Regina Elphinstone is 
the member, and I am sitting in for the member for Elphinstone in 
this. So please join me in welcoming the people from the Cancer 
Patient Lodge here in Regina. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to other 
members of the Assembly, 16 students from the Federal Republic 
of Germany in Bonn who are visiting here as exchange students 
with Luther College. I would ask them to stand. 
 
They are accompanied by Pastor Don King, who is the principal of 
Luther College; Mr. Behrla and Ms. Hagena, who are their 
German teachers who are with them; also with chaperons Lynn 
Youck, Randi Kennedy, Marg Tiefenback, and Penny Wingert. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them 
today. We will be having refreshments. They are on a tour of the 
legislature. We'll be having pictures taken later, and I hope that all 
members would help welcome these guests from the Federal 
Republic of Germany today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
your permission I would like to follow the member from 
Rosemont to also welcome the group from Germany in their 
native tongue, if I may. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm sure all hon. 
members of the House will recognize the very familiar face sitting 
behind the bar on the opposition side,  

and I would invite all hon. members to welcome back to the 
Chamber a former member of this Assembly, Mr. Wilf Gardiner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Task Force on Health 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. My first words must be thanks to the government side for 
what I'm sure will be the last round of applause that I get from 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct my question to the Premier, if I 
might. Mr. Premier, given what many people in Saskatchewan 
have concluded is a pretty atrocious record by your government in 
the question of health care — I won't document the details of that 
— you can appreciate why many are sceptical about what the real 
purpose might be behind yesterday's Speech from the Throne 
announcement respecting the task force on health. Some think that 
it's like the fox guarding the chicken coop, to use the old saying. 
 
We would like specifics, sir, and I direct your attention 
specifically to the proposed mandate of the task force. My 
question is this: isn't it correct to say that the real purpose of the 
government in this task force is to try to show — wrongly, I would 
submit — that the cost of health care in Saskatchewan is way out 
of line, and this in this way to justify your government's policy for 
further privatization of Saskatchewan's health care system, and 
even the imposition of deterrent fees some time in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health will be 
announcing the details of the task force and the members of the 
task force in the near future, and the guide-lines and the objectives 
of that task force as it tours the province of Saskatchewan. It will 
be holding public hearings with professionals and members of the 
public to gather their views on what a blueprint for health care into 
the next century would look like for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would add one other point, Mr. Speaker, that health care 
expenditures and our commitment to health care is 63 per cent 
higher than it was when we took office, which is relatively 
significant because it's now $1.2 billion and growing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 
Premier who, as the members of the House will know, has not 
answered my question. And I must preface the supplementary by 
pointing out that in the Leader-Post of December 22 . . . I'll ask a 
new question, Mr. Speaker, with your permission, but in the 
Leader-Post of December 22, 1987 . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'm afraid I cannot allow 
  



 
March 22, 1988 

6 
 

the member to rise on a supplementary and then switch to a new 
question for the sake of a quotation. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I then shall ask a 
new question, because my first question was not answered. On 
December 22, 1987, the Regina Leader-Post carried the following 
headline covering the Progressive Conservative Party convention 
in Saskatoon. The headline says: "PC resolution calls for user fees 
for medicare." The body of the story quotes the following which is 
a preface to the question: 
 

"The delegates seem to be suggesting that it would be a good 
idea if there was a certain form of payment (on the people) so 
that the people would be more conscious of the costs of health 
care," says PC president Dr. Peter Matthews of Saskatoon. 

 
My question to the Premier is this: is it not correct to say that this 
task force on health care that you announced yesterday in the 
Speech from the Throne is really going to be the basis to justify 
your government imposing your party's resolution of deterrent fees 
and cut-backs and privatization of health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have congratulated the new 
Leader of the Opposition before, and I will congratulate him again 
today on the position, but I must say I'm a little disappointed that 
the old line is already his first sentence as a new leader. I mean he 
is now saying, despite the fact that we've increased expenditures in 
health by 63 per cent and we have created 1,741 new nursing-bed 
homes here . . . or position beds in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and he is still saying the same thing he said in '82 and '86, that 
there will be no money allocated to health care, and the fact that 
we will privatize health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say we have made a major commitment 
to health care. This task force is to ask the people of Saskatchewan 
and the professionals about their guidance with respect to a new 
blueprint for health care into the future. And, Mr. Speaker, if that's 
all that there is in the opposition side with respect to their advice is 
to — as they did in '75 and they did in '78 and '82 and '86 and 
they're still doing — is to frighten people, I would say, Mr. 
speaker, that we will see constructive development of health care 
from this side of the House and not much but rhetoric over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. If 
the Premier feels that I, as Leader of the Opposition, and this side 
of the House are trying to frighten the people, there's one very 
simple, easy way to put that fear to rest. My question to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and Mr. Premier, is simply this: why don't you put that 
fear to rest and tell the people of Saskatchewan now that this task 
force is not going to be intended to privatize further our health 
care and impose deterrent fees. Put that fear to rest, and give the 
assurance today that you're not going to impose deterrent fees. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have said to the hon. member 
that the task force will be announced and its objectives announced 
to clearly build a blueprint, a new blueprint for the province of 
Saskatchewan in health care. And the minister will be announcing 
that in the next few days. 
 
Rest assured, Mr. Speaker, all of the public knows that the 
opposition will say that we are going to tear it down and close 
hospitals, and we are going to frighten people, and we're going to 
charge them — and all of that is not true, Mr. speaker, and the 
opposition's members know it. The Leader of the Opposition 
knows it, and if it's his claim to fame to run about trying to 
frighten people, fair enough. I think he's starting off on the wrong 
foot, but we'll clearly see after the task force is finished and 
completed with his recommendations to the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. The Premier 
will know that the Speech from the Throne was probably the most 
vague of all Speeches from the Throne, certainly in my years of 
experience, and therefore I'd like to get some further details on this 
important question of health care — to which the Premier says 
we're trying to frighten people, and to which I say the very 
existence of the task force frightens the people of Saskatchewan, 
given your record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question is this, Mr. Speaker. From the 
fact that newspaper reports indicate that almost nobody in the 
health care professional field has been consulted with respect to 
this health care task force, nobody knows of the details of the 
composition — the Deputy Premier laughs at that. 
 
My question to the Premier perhaps will clarify this question: will 
the Premier specifically advise the House who it is that will sit on 
the task force report? Will it be a cross-section of interested and 
informed Saskatchewan citizens, or will it be like your other task 
forces that you've established in the past, mainly made up of a 
committee of back-bench hack PCers or hack PC members? Is 
there going to be a legitimate task force or one used to propagate 
your privatization policy in health? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the 
Minister of Health will be announcing the task force members and 
their guide-lines and the objectives, and he will see, as the public 
will see, these will be men and women of quality and substance 
and excellence, very knowledgeable in the question of health care. 
I frankly don't refer to members of the legislature sitting on the 
back benches over there as "hacks," and I don't think that he would 
recommend that we get into that name-calling so early in the 
legislature. 
 
Clearly when the minister announces the task force, then 
  



 
March 22, 1988 

7 
 

the hon. member will be able to look at their qualifications and 
look at the reputation of the men and women that will serve in this 
public capacity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the use of the . . . 
new question. I withdraw the use of the word "hacks" of the 
back-benchers opposite. Perhaps I should use the word "somewhat 
compliant" members of the back bench in referring this. But my 
question, Mr. Speaker, the new question is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and I should hope the same, that's true, but we 
have a thinking party on this side, so I don't think we'll be quite as 
compliant as yours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Anyway, Mr. Speaker, my final question to 
the Premier is in this regard. Surely, Mr. Premier, there is 
something that your government must have thought about in 
announcing this task force in advance of making the 
announcement. Surely this wasn't an idea that was just pulled out 
of the air without any consultation from the health care 
professionals or anybody else. You haven't been able to tell us the 
composition; you haven't been able to tell us the mandate; you 
haven't been able to tell us the timetable. 
 
Can you tell us about the budget? Is this going to be a 
multi-million-dollar budget on the task force, and will it be spent 
to study the issues, or will it be spent to advertise your particular 
version of privatized health care like you've done in so many of 
the areas of free trade? What's the budget going to look like? Can 
you tell us that, at least? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, this is the best, frankly, the 
best promotion that we could expect for this new task force — the 
fact that the hon. members raises all the interests and raises all the 
questions. I can tell you, in the many meetings that I've been in 
with health care people and professionals they have asked for a 
blueprint on health care well into the next century so we can 
provide guidance, not only to Saskatchewan people, but indeed to 
the rest of the country. And I welcome all the questions from the 
Leader of the Opposition and all members, because I'm sure that 
the media will comment on it and raise the interest when the 
minister does announce it. We'll have wide public interest, and 
hopefully then wide public participation. 
 
So thank you for your questions, and we appreciate the hype and 
the interest. I'm sure we'll find that it's a very good task force and 
very interested public in terms of the recommendations in the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Restrictions on Assiniboia Ambulance Services 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Minister of Health, to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. As 
the minister knows, there is  

tremendous public anxiety in and around Assiniboia respecting the 
operations of the local ambulance service, Wald Ambulance Ltd. 
Recent restrictions have been imposed upon that service, and 
Wald Ambulance is no longer allowed to undertake the broad 
range of procedures which it used to provide, and provide, I might 
say, Mr. Speaker, with much local praise and commendation from 
people in the Assiniboia district. 
 
I wonder if the minister would take the opportunity today to offer 
some specific reassurance to Wald Ambulance, and to the people 
of Assiniboia, by indicating precisely the source of the perceived 
problem that triggered the imposition of these restrictions on this 
ambulance service, and what is the minister doing personally and 
directly and immediately to get to the bottom of that situation and 
thereby relieve the anxiety that presently exists in very large 
measure in the Assiniboia district? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'm aware of the 
situation that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg outlines. 
The member brought it to my attention, I believe, a week or so 
ago, and we talked about it for some period of time then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation just very briefly is somewhat as the 
member outlines it. There is a protocol in the province as it relates 
to ambulance operators and paramedics or trained people who 
work within those ambulance units as to the types of drugs that 
may be administered by them during the course of their duties in 
remote areas, and so on. That protocol is very much in line with 
what is recommended by the College of Physicians and Surgeons 
in the province, as everyone can well imagine, that that would 
need to be the case in terms of the administration of drugs. 
 
It's a very complicated issue. What I would say to the member, in 
a very specific answer to his question in terms of what I'm doing, 
our people in the Department of Health are co-ordinating the 
reaction of the college of Physicians and Surgeons with the 
ambulance operator. I know that there's a concern among the 
public at Assiniboia. Some of that concern is certainly ill-founded, 
and I believe that there will be a satisfactory resolution to the 
problem fairly soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to hear the minister 
anticipates a solution fairly soon. But I would like to ask the 
minister specifically: will he be prepared in this ministerial 
capacity to work directly and closely with Wald Ambulance and 
with people locally in the Assiniboia district to restore to them a 
proper range of emergency ambulance services that are 
appropriate to a broad rural area some considerable distance from 
any urban centre and a service that would be properly within the 
bounds of reason and safety. I think it needs the minister's personal 
attention in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly what the 
people in the Department of Health and the ambulance division 
have been doing is to bring about ambulance service, the 
administration of drugs, the specific thing that I've talked about, 
and to bring all of that and that service to the people in that area 
within the bounds of reason and safety. That sort of fits what we 
try to  
 
  



 
March 22, 1988 

8 
 

do with all of our ambulance service across the province. 
 
I know there's a specific concern here, as I've said. As far as my 
becoming involved with the community or talking to individuals 
in the community and so on, at this stage I'm not sure that that's 
necessary, but if it becomes necessary, there's no question that I 
would be available to do something like that. Certainly people 
within the Department of Health are now working on bringing 
about a successful resolution to this and I believe, as I've said in 
my earlier answer, Mr. Speaker, that there will be a successful 
resolution to the problem, some of which is real, and some of 
which is perceived, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Farm Production Loan Program 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier in regards to the farm production loan program. 
 
Mr. Premier, in December of 1987 you announced changes to the 
production loan program which you gave farmers an option to 
extend the period of repayment at a higher interest rate and a tough 
new security agreement. In 1985 when he announced the program, 
your then minister of Agriculture called it hassle-free cash. And I 
quote, he said: 
 

We believe in our farmers, we have faith in our farmers, and we 
are not about to let them down. 

 
Mr. Premier, in 1985 you trusted Saskatchewan farmers. Why do 
you no longer have faith in our farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, at the request of farm families, 
the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and many groups, we extended the 
payment program from three years to 10 years at the request of 
people. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we made sure that the 
public and the farming area had the option of maintaining their 6 
per cent alternative, either on the three-year program or over the 
10-year program. And beyond that, Mr. Speaker, because it was 
10 years, we asked for security because 10 years obviously can go 
through two, possibly even three, different administrations, and to 
be fair to the taxpayers for $1.2 billion over several 
administrations we asked for security. 
 
There will be a release tomorrow or the next day, Mr. Speaker, if I 
could just add to the hon. member, that will outline to the public 
how successful the production loan program has been, how 
satisfactory the terms of the agreement are today by the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, and I'm sure the hon. member will be very 
interested in those results and that statistical evidence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, I'm sure farm 
families in Saskatchewan will be happy to hear that they asked for 
nine and three-quarter per cent interest and a tough security 
agreement. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Premier, are you aware that the agreement 
with the huge U.S. multinational corporation, Weyerhaeuser, 
stated that no payments on loans were required in years when 
there were insufficient profits? Mr. Premier, the farmers of this 
province are asking: why can't we get the same deal as 
Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting, and 
again I congratulate the new leader for his guidance in terms of the 
kinds of questions coming forward and the rhetoric we've heard 
for decades — the same old lines, Mr. Speaker, despite the new 
leader. I can only say to the hon. member . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, Order. We're 
having difficulty hearing the Premier's answer, and there's a little 
bit of noise on both sides of the House, so I'd ask hon. members to 
allow him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have addressed the debt 
and low income situation in several fashions, and I could offer to 
the hon. member with respect to the Weyerhaeuser question, one, 
is a large amount of money that's cash in the hands of farmers, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of cash advances at no interest rates at all that 
were not there before, and that's at no interest rates; and in the 
livestock sector they really appreciate that. 
 
Secondly, the very large amount of money that comes from the 
federal government that is indeed a gift, Mr. Speaker, direct cash, 
no pay-back. In fact, a very large per cent of the farm income now 
in western Canada is from the government, from the federal 
government — which happens to be Progressive Conservative — 
and from the provincial government, through cash advances — 
which happens to be Progress Conservative — that you will not 
find in neighbouring provinces that aren't the same political 
persuasion or, Mr. Speaker, in other federal governments that have 
the opportunity to help. 
 
So the combination of things that we have done provide very low 
interest loans well below what we've ever seen before, and even in 
terms of six per cent and nine and three-quarters, it averages about 
eight per cent, which is fixed and long-run, and the best in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the same old questions that brought 
you down 20 per cent in the polls and will take you right out of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you 
have said to Saskatchewan farmers that you have made an 
agreement with the banks in respect to the security provisions of 
the Ag Credit Corporation production loan. Mr. Minister, are the 
banks satisfied with that agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I believe the hon. member asked if  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

9 
 

he could see the agreement. The agreements will be published in 
the next day or two along with information with respect to the 
production loan program, and both the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, the credit unions and the financial 
institutions, the bank, agreed on the resolution of the problem with 
respect to security. So all parties agreed the farmers can now get 
operating capital well into the future, as they did before in the 
initial operation, in the initial agreement, and, Mr. Speaker, that 
will be public in the next day or two. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
obviously didn't understand or didn't hear my question. My 
question is, Mr. Speaker, are the banks satisfied with the 
agreement that you have made with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I said, Mr. Speaker, that all parties there 
signed the agreement; that is, the Agricultural Credit Corporation 
here in Saskatchewan, the credit unions and the financial 
institutions, like the banks. And they all signed it, Mr. Speaker, 
and they put their name on the dotted line so that farmers could 
have the capacity to have operating, and access to operating 
capital, as they did in the first instance. The farmers are very 
happy with that, Mr. Speaker, and all parties have signed it. 
 
As I said in public, Mr. Speaker, I signed it because I have the 
option as a farmer that you can pay the thing off without any 
penalty, and it gives you the 10-year flexibility that the wheat pool 
and SARM and others ask for — and that's precisely what you 
want — and still have access to operating capital. 
 
And the member opposite perhaps doesn't understand that, but we 
could take some time and explain it to him in some detail that 
farmers are responding, and they understand it, and they have 10 
years, and they have complete flexibility at fixed interest rates 
over 10 years, and they haven't had that any place in the country, 
and that is the best you'll find any place in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, if a farmer has the 
money, he has an option; if he has no money, he has no option. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, the banks are happy, obviously; the 
government’s happy; Weyerhaeuse’s happy. Mr. Minister, will 
you give the farmers the same deal that you gave to 
Weyerhaeuser? Would you please answer that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I am advised by people who 
know the financial institutions that on good legal advice the Bank 
of Nova Scotia has agreed to sign this. And they believe . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — They believe, Mr. Speaker, that the program 
that we have put together is an awful lot better  

than many of the other programs that some people have been 
working on with respect to saving farmers and foreclosing on 
farmers or helping them out. 
 
So I will say that, if it's any comfort to you at all, given the 
affiliation of the Bank of Nova Scotia with some of you there, they 
believe that it's reasonable. They believe that farmers will have an 
opportunity to pay back over 10 years with complete flexibility, 
Mr. Speaker, and at the same time, Mr. Speaker you can pay it off 
without penalty. 
 
Now at 8 per cent money fixed for 10 years, Mr. Speaker, you 
have every right for 3 years at 6 per cent; and moving into the 
10-year agreement, that is 8 per cent for 10 years, Mr. Speaker. It's 
as good as you're going to find any place in the nation. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the deal with Weyerhaeuser, which 
my question was about and the Premier obviously is skirting 
around, states that they have to make no payments until a certain 
level of profit has been reached. Last year the government saw fit 
simply to ask farmers to apply the interest. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell the farmers of this province whether 
they're going to be treated on the same basis as a multinational 
foreign corporation? Are you going to give them the same 
treatment, or are they going to be treated as lesser people in their 
own province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The members opposite said, Mr. Speaker, 
that the province would never see a new paper mill and 
Weyerhaeuser wouldn't be built. The members opposite locked the 
people of Saskatchewan into $91,000 a day loss — $370-some 
million, Mr. Speaker, and they said it could never be fixed. 
 
Let's just make the point, Mr. Speaker, that $240 million cash is 
coming back to the province of Saskatchewan, plus over $200 
million and a brand new paper mill — and the paper mill is 
opening August 1 to August 15 in the province of Saskatchewan, 
despite all the scare tactics of the NDP, which said it would never 
be built and the jobs weren't there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the new Leader of the Opposition, we have 
heard this same music for 15 years. I mean, is this all there is to 
the new leadership of the NDP party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And at the 
outset let me say that it is a comfortable feeling to be back behind 
my desk here, speaking once more on behalf of the constituents 
back at home. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to first  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

10 
 

of all welcome you back as well, sir, and certainly all the members 
of the legislature. I trust that the period of recess that we have had 
has been enjoyable and that it has been productive, and at the same 
time a trust that the new session that we are about to start now is 
also going to be productive for all of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I consider it one of the great privileges of my 
political career to move this address in reply to the Speech from 
the Throne. And before I begin my substantive remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to explain something to the young people of 
Saskatchewan and to some members of this House. 
 
The procedure that we are going through today is called the 
address in reply because in effect it is an address to Her Majesty 
through the Lieutenant Governor replying to the Speech from the 
Throne that she has laid before us. And this procedure, as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, is fundamental to our democracy and our 
system of government. It is based on the historic fact that the 
monarch receives the advice of her first minister, the Premier, and 
delivers through her Lieutenant Governor the plans for the 
legislature. 
 
Now we all know that those plans are drafted by the government, 
but this does not take away from the fundamental role that the 
monarchy plays in our way of life. I raise these things, Mr. 
Speaker, because we live in a system that embodies the principles 
of freedom and discipline, each supporting the other, and the 
whole package delivered in a format of dignity and respect. 
 
I suggest that all those characteristics are vital to the effective 
functioning of our democracy, and indeed to the successful 
conduct of the business of this Assembly. Freedom and discipline. 
Dignity and respect. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that all 
members will consider those important elements as this session 
unfolds; that they will duly exercise the freedoms that they enjoy, 
guaranteed by the sovereign; that in the exercise of those freedoms 
they will conduct themselves with a discipline that is becoming a 
member of this Legislative Assembly and which is embodied in 
the very person of Her Majesty and her agent, the Lieutenant 
Governor; that they will present themselves with dignity and not 
fall prey to the expediencies of fear mongering which we heard 
during question period this afternoon — the disruption and 
disregard for this institution. And finally, Mr. Speaker, that they 
will provide that respect not only to this Assembly, but to the 
people of our province, that both are entitled to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor said it well when he said 
that this is the time for hope and it is a time of commitment, of 
commitment to the land and to the people that we love. 
 
Let me briefly review, Mr. Speaker, the nature of commitment that 
I believe is reflected in the throne speech and which has been 
demonstrated by this government. The sources of prosperity of our 
province have been subject to the worst disruptions since the Great 
Depression. Indeed we have come through drought and dust bowls 
very reminiscent of those dark days. 
 
The prices we have been able to obtain on the rural  

market for all of our commodities have declined, in some cases to 
the point of disaster. We've had to face a crisis in our potash 
industry, and a threatened crisis in our uranium industry. The 
international market in high technology has been under severe 
pressure. The oil and gas industry has seen, at best, tenuous 
recoveries, only to be faced with renewed price erosions. And 
most compelling of all, Mr. Speaker, we have had to face the 
serious situations involving every farm family in this province. 
 
With the many other financial crunches that have taken place, this 
government was left in a situation where government revenues 
were dropping rapidly while the cost for all of our most basic 
programs continued to escalate out of control. This has been a 
reality, Mr. Speaker, a reality that no matter how much we may 
not want to accept it, ignore it, it would be the ruin of all we hold 
dear and all we have built over so many generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this context of turmoil, economic crisis and, 
indeed, personal tragedy for many, in this context a very amazing 
thing has happened — this province grew; our economy continued 
to expand; the economic base continued to be diversified; our 
most important services to the people continued to be delivered, 
and in some cases even expanded. This province grew. 
 
A member of this Assembly was asked what would happen if the 
price for grain and the price for potash and the price for oil all 
went down at the same time. He was asked this at a time when the 
treasury was full and the government was buying up the very 
assets being the land bank with borrowed money; it was buying 
companies with more borrowed money; and it was buying 
uranium mines even with more borrowed money. And so the 
question was asked: what if the prices for all of those things fall at 
the same time? And the hon. gentleman replied that the idea was 
ridiculous; it was uncontemplatable. But he said, but it if were to 
happen, if in a million chances it really occurred, the result, he 
said, would be disastrous; it would be a disaster. 
 
The gentleman that had that discussion, Mr. Speaker, was the past 
premier, the member for Elphinstone. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, history has proved him right, at least in part. It was not 
such an unlikely event as he thought it would be, so in that he was 
not right, but he was right about the disaster. It has been a disaster. 
And the amazing thing, the truly incredible fact is that this 
government took that disaster and still made this province grow. 
And that very fact, Mr. Speaker, is the hardest evidence possible 
about the commitment of this government to the people of this 
province and to the future generations of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — The courage and the wisdom to take some hard 
decisions, the responsiveness to put it in place, and some of those 
difficult policies and the determination to preserve the protections 
afforded our people — these things, Mr. Speaker, are the marks of 
commitment. 
  



 
March 22, 1988 

11 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if any member of this House is not aware of 
the plight of farm families in this province, they ought to acquaint 
themselves of the facts very quickly. And when I began my 
remarks with a plea for respect for the people, I especially would 
ask those who wish to discuss the agriculture policy of the 
government, or the situation of farm families, to show some 
respect for those families. 
 
It cannot be called respectful, Mr. Speaker, when some politician 
uses economic difficulties to terrorize people for purely political 
purposes. It is not respectful to pretend to care but to have no 
solutions or even suggestions. It is not respectful, Mr. Speaker, to 
be dishonest. I think of a person, Mr. Speaker, who has for the past 
number of weeks been saying at every opportunity that he will 
fight day and night for agriculture; a person has been saying that 
he would get on his knees for the farmers; a person who has been 
saying that he will spend the rest of his political life trying to save 
the family farm, and a person, Mr. Speaker, who in his report to 
his membership in his own political newspaper set out an agenda 
that did not once — not once, Mr. Speaker — mention farm 
families or agriculture — nothing at all. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is certainly one that does not 
follow that kind of disrespectful course. Farm families are front 
and centre throughout the document, as it should be, and the 
government is to be commended for pursuing consistent and 
vigorous policies to come to the aid of farm families, both in 
domestic policies and of bringing all of its resources to bear on 
foreign governments, and even our own federal government when 
the need has been there. And that, Mr. Speaker, demonstrates 
unequivocably the commitment of this government. 
 
Let me just remind members of the situation at the opening of the 
last session. The agricultural situation was at its worst; farm 
families were experiencing the height of the crisis. In that 
environment the throne speech was delivered, and the NDP critic 
for agriculture sat uncomfortably on his hands throughout the 
entire debate, and the Leader of the Opposition said not a word 
about possible solutions to the problems. The opposition ignored 
our most important industry and our most dramatic economic 
challenge. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we immediately had a budget debate. 
Again the NDP critic sat on his hands; again he was silent; and 
again, Mr. Speaker, the NDP had no options to offer, no 
alternatives to suggest, no policy — no policy on the most 
fundamental issue this province faces. And that is the kind of 
respect those people offer our farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well I hope they have changed their ways. I 
hope the ag critic across the floor does enter this debate this time, 
and I hope that he does have some alternatives to offer, and I hope, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition will do more than 
condemn, criticize, and hearken back to the good old days when 

price of wheat was high. I hope that the switching of seats has 
given him some ideas to offer farm families; that it was more than 
just a public relations act of musical chairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke earlier of the market disruptions in resources. 
You will recall the dramatic and serious threat that was posed to 
our potash industry by the political machinations of a few potash 
companies in America. In a pre-election period for the United 
States, such threats are to be taken as most serious. 
 
This government acted quickly, decisively, and with a degree of 
commitment that can only be characterized as impressive. Some 
were saying, don't interfere directly, take them to court, go the 
political process. Those were the alternatives offered by the 
member for Riversdale — take them to court, make more money 
for lawyers — that was the alternative. But the fact was, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people in the industry, the workers at Lanigan, at 
Patience Lake, at Cory, at Esterhazy, and all the other mine sites 
— these people could not wait for years, years that such a process 
would take. So the government did intervene directly, and the 
result was a solution, not over a period of years, but over a period 
of weeks. And that, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, is commitment. 
 
The potash crisis pointed up, as eloquently as anything could, the 
reliance we have on trade and the need to ensure trade peace with 
our major trading partner. It is a simple fact, Mr. Speaker, that if 
we did not have access to the U.S. market, our potash mines 
would close down, and the families that depend on the these mines 
would find themselves without sources of income that they've 
worked so hard for. 
 
Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, whether the person is a member of 
the union or a management employee, if he or she works in the 
potash industry, free trade with the United States must be a 
fundamental objective. It has been seen, if nothing else, as a 
simple protection, a protection as basic as unemployment 
insurance, because without the trade, unemployment is a certainty. 
 
We face a similar need for open and freed trade with the United 
States in every area of our economy, Mr. Speaker. And while I do 
not intend to make a trade speech here, if there is to be a line 
drawn in this House, then let that line be on the issue of free trade 
agreement with the Americans. That line, Mr. Speaker, has been 
drawn, and there is no room for points in between. It is black and 
white, no shades of grey. If you "ain't fer it, y'er agin it." It's that 
simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And I make that point, Mr. Speaker, for the 
member of Assiniboia, because I'm not sure he has a full 
understanding of the issue. I did read that he said that he saw 
himself, and I quote, "the skunk at the garden party." Those are his 
words — the skunk at the garden party — when it comes to free 
trade with the Americans. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he can come to the party in the garden, or he can 
head out to left field with other members of the opposition who 
oppose the agreement. What he cannot do, when his riding 
contains hundreds of farm families of  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

12 
 

cattlemen and women, of people who rely for their daily bread 
upon trade with our neighbours to the South — what he cannot do, 
Mr. Speaker, is leave them without any representation on this vital 
issue. Obviously the garden party is going forward, and we'll be 
serving up Saskatchewan pork, Saskatchewan beef, and 
Saskatchewan bread, and we'll be burning Saskatchewan propane 
in Saskatchewan barbecues, and the invitations will go out with a 
Saskatchewan computer program on fine Saskatchewan paper. 
 
And I just want that member to know that he is invited to join us at 
the party and celebrate the new deal for western Canada and the 
growth and prosperity that is in store for our particular province. 
And I would ask him: why not work for your constituents? Why 
not work for the people of Saskatchewan? Come on board! 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne also reaffirmed the 
government's policy of public participation and reviewed a bit 
how much has already been accomplished. Let me say how 
pleased I am that the Leader of the Opposition has indicated he 
can be supportive of our initiatives, including the direct 
privatization of Crowns. 
 
It was with some surprise and great satisfaction that I listened to 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana, the critic for public 
participation — and I notice that I have her interest. I heard her 
state that the NDP was not opposed to Intercontinental Packers as 
the kind of privatization they agree with. She said, "The economic 
and social reasons for holding those shares were no longer there." 
Well I congratulate her and her leader for coming around, Mr. 
Speaker. I hope that as they see the facts they will realize that the 
course the government is taking is precisely the course that they 
have prescribed. 
 
I also expect that the member for Saskatoon University would be 
well pleased at the announcement that the province will no longer 
own the uranium mines, Mr. Speaker. And I say this because 
when his government was considering buying into those mines, he 
made some very eloquent arguments against government 
ownership at the time. He argued, quite correctly, that the price of 
uranium fluctuates, and if the government bought up all those 
mines, well when there was a downturn in the world market, the 
public would be left holding the bag. History proved him right. 
And from his example we are pursuing the advice that he offered 
his own NDP government, the advice to say out of the ownership 
business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these are just a couple of examples of how we 
can be united in this Assembly in public participation 
undertakings, because the prospects for economic development 
and diversification, for direct public input, for enhanced public 
accountability through a genuine relationship of regulator to 
producer, for expanded competitiveness and greater innovation, 
for better employee morale through ownership, and for the many 
other proven benefits — these prospects, Mr. Speaker, are simply 
awesome. 
 
I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to speak to some employees of 
SaskCOMP — obviously I can't identify  

them, but it was a group of three — and they told me, Mr. 
Speaker, that they were very excited at the prospect of their firm 
going private. They were very eager — eager for a public share 
offering so that they could become a direct part of the company. 
And in fact the one fellow said that he would be willing to go out 
and borrow money so that he would be able to purchase shares. 
 
These three people — and they were not management — no, no 
— these three employees are convinced that once they are freed 
from the constraints of government ownership, that they will be 
one of the top companies in North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what? They 
directly addressed the link to the free trade agreement, saying that 
they believe SaskCOMP could compete with the best of them in 
the U.S. market. 
 
Now I'm not an expert in the computer field or computers or 
computer services, Mr. Speaker, but I have to take the word of the 
three people so directly and personally affected by the policy. And 
quite simply, they loved it. That is what public participation is all 
about. It is about reinvigorating the employees, empowering them, 
if you will, to affect the creativity and direction of their firm. It is 
about energizing the economy with a whole new set of 
shareholders eager to take on the future. It is about providing the 
trigger for the biggest vision and the greatest horizons of 
opportunity for all of our people. And that, in a phrase, Mr. 
Speaker, is what public participation is all about — three greatest 
horizons of opportunity. And I want to say how proud I am to be 
part of that process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech laid out in some detail part of this 
government's agenda of commitment to education in this province. 
Now I will not repeat every initiative announced in His Honour's 
remarks, but I do think that a few of his remarks bear recording 
and restating. 
 
The last session of this Assembly witnessed one of the most 
significant undertakings in the province's education history. The 
crafting of a unique comprehensive technical and regional college 
system that will serve with excellence every corner of this 
province has to be greeted with optimism and pride, Mr. Speaker. 
We will not only have quality education in Regina and in 
Saskatoon, we will have it available in our rural communities. And 
ultimately, as the distance education policies develop and the 
resources needed are mustered, we will have the highest quality 
education, including university, available right in the homes, on 
the farms across Saskatchewan. 
 
This province was also provided with a tool to enhance and 
modernize its basic education system with the introduction of the 
education development fund, a fund consisting of entirely new 
money, a fund that was never even considered a possibility by 
previous governments. And it is encouraging to see members 
opposite standing up to defend this PC initiative, and as I'm sure 
that we will see them do once more as they enter this debate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is true — it is true that the fund has  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

13 
 

been extended to ten years from five. It is not true, as some 
members across the floor have stated, that the education 
development fund has been cut. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, part 
of the rationale for the extended life of the EDF (education 
development fund). There was significant concern in some 
quarters that the fund intended — the developmental fund, and so 
named — that this fund should have a short planning horizon. 
Some people suggested that in the haste to put together eligible 
programs before the five years ran out, detailed consideration and 
planning would not be possible and the true developmental 
objectives of the fund would be impeded. A longer planning 
horizon is completely consistent and appropriate with the nature of 
the fund, and that should be clear to all. 
 
(15:00) 
 
What is more, Mr. Speaker, it is true that the extension is 
consistent with the fiscal necessities of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I think it is silly to expect an apology for that. 
 
The fact is that under intense financial pressure we did not do as 
the NDP did with their program of nursing homes. As an example, 
we did not put a moratorium on the fund and effectively cut it off. 
What the government did was to look at the base objectives of the 
fund and see how those objectives could be consistently met 
within the financial realities of the day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say congratulations to the Minister of 
Education for his clear and unequivocal demonstration of 
commitment to education. I say congratulations to the government 
that had the innovation and the will to come up with such a fund in 
the first place. And I ask members opposite who are so doggedly 
defending this government's EDF initiative: where was it when 
you held power — where was it when you held power? As with 
nursing homes and hospitals and schools, it was all the same. 
 
The NDP member for Elphinstone put it succinctly when he 
answered a question about government revenues and said, I quote: 
"the purpose was to take money and invest it." Like Saskoil, in 
potash, in uranium mines. It was not the belief that the money 
would be there in cash to build hospitals or nursing homes or 
schools, for that matter, Mr. Speaker. And that is what they did 
when they had money. They didn't build schools or hospitals or 
nursing homes. Instead, they bought potash mines. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has a different approach, an 
approach to the commitment to the people, commitment to the 
future of our children. And in the toughest physical circumstances 
possible, it has built schools; it has created a development fund; it 
has created a world-class technical education system, and it has 
created a new and modern core curriculum. And the throne 
speech, Mr. Speaker, has indicated how that agenda of 
commitment will be continued to be built upon. 
 
Now the members opposite like to get into the collective 
bargaining process wherever possible, and that is something I 
don't think that politicians should do. But  

without addressing the issues of the teacher bargaining situation, I 
would ask the Leader of the Opposition to come clean with the 
teachers of this province and the people of the province. It's all 
find and good to say that teacher should have an increase in their 
salary, but tell us how much. tell us how much you, as premier, 
would be prepared to give; or should I say, as heir apparent, are 
prepared to promise. 
 
And while he is at it, Mr. Speaker, I want to know from him, how 
much? Twenty per cent? Thirty per cent? How much are you 
promising? How much are you prepared to give the workers as 
SaskPower? How much is he promising nurses, doctors, 
third-party organizations, and his friends, the union bosses? 
Because you know, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member likes to talk 
about my friends in the business community, and I assure him that 
I continue to value those friendships, but he's amazingly reluctant 
to discuss his friends among the union bosses. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that here we have a clear case of conflict 
of interest. And I say to those people across the floor, you're job is 
to stay out of the collective bargaining process and not to foment it 
into strife. And if you're going to promise more of everything to 
everyone, then you have a clear obligation to tell the people 
exactly how much more is it that you are promising, and where is 
that money going to come from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Because, Mr. Speaker, while there are basically 
an unlimited number of worthwhile and worthy demands for more 
money, there is not an unlimited supply of money. And that 
simple fact means governments must achieve a fair balance 
between the competing demands and needs of all groups in 
society, even recognizing that a great many of those demands are 
indeed worthy ones. 
 
And in closing that subject, Mr. Speaker, just let me say that as a 
teacher I greatly sympathize with our educators. And of course I 
support a fair compensation package, but it is the nature of 
collective bargaining to decide what is fair through bargaining, 
and accounting the constraints each side faces. It is not in the 
nature of collective bargaining to use political pressure to obtain 
your ends. And that, I suggest, is an abuse of the process, and one 
that is unavailable to all except public employees. 
 
I am completely confident that a satisfactory resolution will be 
arrived at by the two sides, and again we can get on with the 
business of rebuilding the education system that the NDP allowed 
to so seriously decay. 
 
Let me turn now, Mr. Speaker, to an issue of fundamental 
importance, an issue of a special significance to me — health care. 
In welcoming the Leader of the Opposition into his new seat, I 
want to thank him for the recognition he has given in the past to 
the great difficulties governments face in the health care cost 
crisis. 
 
I was especially impressed, Mr. Speaker, when the gentleman 
spoke to the Canadian Hospital Association in Toronto in 1985. 
The PC Party was the government at the  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

14 
 

time in Saskatchewan, and the Leader of the Opposition had some 
advice to offer our government. Firstly, he noted that he had 
studied the issue and had come to a profound conclusion — and 
let me just quote the member for Riversdale verbatim — and I 
quote: 
 

Underfunding in the sense of failure to fund efficacious 
treatment has not been substantiated. In deed, there is the 
evidence of significant remaining inefficient and ineffective 
care, suggesting that the underfunding, privatization argument is 
primarily aimed at increasing physicians' incomes and 
expanding their access to publicly funded capital equipment. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, while I do not entirely agree with the NDP 
leader's remarks about doctors, I am pleased that he was honest 
enough to announce that this government was not underfunding 
medicare. In fact, Mr. Speaker, at the same convention the Leader 
of the Opposition recognized the cost crisis and described it as 
such. His first solution was to quit building hospitals and other 
health care facilities. And a second solution was to impose a 
rationing system for medical technology. And perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, that entire speech should be tabled so that his caucus 
could illuminate themselves on the serious challenges that we face. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, this government does not agree with the 
NDP solution of refusing to build hospitals, and our program of 
hospital construction has been the largest in history. For example, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon still has the City Hospital on stream, and I 
am sure that the people of Saskatoon Eastview would not want us 
to accept the NDP leader's stated policy and cancel the 
construction of that hospital. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I must say that, in government or out, I 
will fight before I allow some politician to be the decisive voice 
whether or my father or my mother or my children will have 
access to life-saving medical technology. These are the NDP 
solutions of the state abdicating responsibility for providing 
fundamental services but imposing its will, rationing what is, in 
the end, life itself. 
 
So I strongly oppose him on his medicare policies, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I commend him on recognizing the problem. I hope 
that when the task force is established and going through its 
hearings, he will bring policies forward to it and see if maybe he 
can be convinced to modify them to support the more moderate 
stand of our government, because we oppose those kinds of NDP 
solutions. And let no one forget that they had an opportunity to 
impose them once, and impose them they did with their 
moratorium on nursing homes. 
 
Because we oppose them, we have been able to maintain the 
highest standard of health care anywhere. At the same time we 
have been under tremendous pressure as a province and a people 
to cope with the escalating costs. The old structures and old 
principles introduced by the Leader of the Opposition and his 
colleagues failed to take account of the ultimate impact, and more 
of the same old tired solutions won't cut it today. 

So let me thank the government, and let me particularly express to 
the Premier my support for his Minister of Health. I am grateful 
for the courage that this government has had on those many issues. 
I am grateful for the single-mindedness with which they have 
pursued the only course which will ensure the survival of quality 
care for all of our citizens without such Draconian measures as 
closing hospitals and refusing people access to medical 
technology. 
 
And I congratulate the government for going to the people to seek 
new and innovative solutions to the crisis through the task force 
that has just been announced. Mr. Speaker, we are on the threshold 
of many very exciting and rewarding opportunities. 
 
Oh, there's no question we have many, many challenges ahead of 
us. But the throne speech was accurate when it says that we can 
look with optimism and strength toward those challenges after 
having come out of such a struggle as we have just experienced. 
We can look forward to renewal and growth, to expanded trade 
and prosperity, to the most dynamic education and health systems 
in the country. The only one thing, Mr. Speaker, that we need is 
the continued commitment of our people, the best people on earth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm deeply proud to be a member of this 
caucus. The men and the women I sit with are reflective of the 
people of our Saskatchewan. They have deep compassion for their 
fellow man. They are proud of hard work, and work hard to justify 
the pride of their people. They are innovators and doers. They are 
dedicated, enthusiastic and prepared to sacrifice much so that their 
community will be better than it was. These people, Mr. Speaker, 
these people are the people of Saskatchewan — not the pessimists, 
the whiners, the habitual critics with little moral fibre. That is not 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And yes, these people are people of 
moral convictions without apology — people who believe in the 
great traditions of this province, people who believe in the family 
and in the inherent value of life, people who have a strong and 
enduring connection to the land from which our spirits arise and 
grow. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with pride in this people, with pride in the 
people of my province, and as a loyal servant of my monarch, I 
move, and seconded by the member for Moosomin: 
 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan as 
follows: 

 
May it please Your Honour: 
 

We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan in session assembled, humbly thank 
Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your Honour has 
been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present 
session. 

  



 
March 22, 1988 

15 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We, as members of the 
Legislative Assembly, are gathered here today to open a new 
session of the legislature. Today marks the start of another chapter 
in the ongoing history of Saskatchewan. As this legislative session 
begins, we have the same confidence in the future of our province 
that our pioneer forefathers did. 
 
The Speech from the Throne symbolizes the commitment of the 
government to keep on building Saskatchewan as we head into the 
last decade of this century. As an individual member of this 
Legislative Assembly, I am honoured today to second the motion 
in support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not ordinary times in the history of 
Saskatchewan. These are times that require leadership and vision. 
And I can say with confidence and pride that the Speech from the 
Throne is representative of the leadership and vision of the 
Premier of Saskatchewan and the government that he leads in this 
Assembly. 
 
As we begin the second session of the twenty-first legislature, I 
wish to express my high regard and confidence in the leadership of 
the Premier of Saskatchewan. The Premier of our province is truly 
a leader. He has the courage and the wisdom to be a strong 
defender of the family and traditional values. Our Premier is a man 
of solid moral fibre who has the conviction to do what is right. 
Saskatchewan can be proud that we have a Premier of such 
nationally respected stature who is known for his leadership in 
building Saskatchewan. That leadership, Mr. Speaker, is 
demonstrated in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
The Speech from the Throne contains the agenda for the 
Government of Saskatchewan in the months and years ahead. It 
shows leadership and economic development, agriculture, 
education, health care, and other policies that are of vital 
importance to the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a day like today I feel it is a time for all of us to 
reflect on the future of our fair province — where we are, where 
we have been, and where we are going. 
 
The Progressive Conservative government of this province 
believes that our greatest days are ahead. Saskatchewan has 
achieved greatness as a province, but ahead of us lies the 
opportunity to be a shining star in confederation. 
 
The people of this province have always been our greatest 
resource. The people of Saskatchewan have a great affinity for this 
province. Like their government, the people of Saskatchewan 
believe in the great potential of our province. That belief and 
confidence is expressed in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this spring will mark six years since that historic day 
in April of 1982 when the people of Saskatchewan elected a 
Progressive Conservative government. Since that time they have 
renewed their  

confidence in this government. The Speech from the Throne 
reaffirms a special bond between the people and their government. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne, it was stated that this government 
remains firmly committed to the belief that no institutions is more 
important than the family. Mr. Speaker, the pioneer families were 
the original founders of what we proudly call Saskatchewan. No 
institution can ever substitute for the family. Every family in this 
province can take hear that this government recognizes the value 
of the family. Mr. Speaker, I believe that strong families mean a 
strong wholesome society. 
 
This government is proud of its record of programs to protect the 
family, and in future, government programs will continue to meet 
the changing needs of a family life. To meet the changing needs of 
our society, this government recognizes there are important issues 
that must be addressed. The Speech from the throne addresses 
those important issues facing we, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I agree with the Speech from the Throne. Agriculture remains the 
backbone of Saskatchewan. Agriculture is the mainstay of our 
economy. Nobody understands farming more than the Premier of 
our province who serves as the Minister of Agriculture. All of us 
in this Assembly recognize how difficult the past couple of years 
have been for farmers. International subsidies, depressed grain 
prices, and protectionism have all hurt the farming community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a record of programs for the 
protection of farmers, and agriculture will remain on top of the 
priority list. The throne speech expresses the government's 
commitment to the protection of those who live in rural 
Saskatchewan. The rural way of life in this province will be 
preserved, and that means greater protection for rural families 
when times are difficult. Our past record is an excellent indicator 
of our future commitment to farmers. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has spared no effort to help the agricultural sector. We 
will continue to build, diversity, and strengthen the farming 
community. In the past, farmers knew they could count on this 
government, and the Speech from the Throne is a pledge that then 
can count on us in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to now turn to another priority of 
Saskatchewan people — good, quality health care. We in 
Saskatchewan are proud of the fact that our province was the first 
in Canada to establish medicare. There was a special pride in our 
province in the heritage of people like Tommy Douglas and John 
George Diefenbaker who put politics aside to work together to 
give us medicare. Let there be no doubt about it, good, quality and 
first class health care is priority of this government and the people 
of this province. 
 
Since this government came into effect in office in 1982, health 
care spending has increased by historic leaps and bounds. Since 
1982, health care spending in our province has increased by 63 per 
cent. Last year alone the $1.2 billion health care budget was the 
highest in the province's history and the second largest per capita 
in all of Canada. 
  



 
March 22, 1988 

16 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to 1982 Chief Justice Emmett Hall's 
medicare report found that this province had a health care system 
that was the third worst in all of Canada. It had been neglected. 
This government corrected the situation. We set out to build a 
health care system to where today it is considered to be one of the 
best in North America. You will recall that prior to 1982 there was 
extra billing for health care. Those people who could not afford it, 
especially senior citizens, had to pay extra dollars out of their own 
pocket for certain health care procedures. The previous 
administration refused to take off extra billing. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it was this government, a Progressive Conservative 
government, that removed extra billing on health care, and we are 
proud of that fact. 
 
I should like to remind this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
from 1976 to 1982 there was a total lack of nursing home 
construction. A freeze had been put on nursing home construction. 
To correct that neglect, it was this Progressive Conservative 
government that has since 1982 approved for construction about 
2,000 special care home beds in this province. Our commitment to 
health care is genuine and has been stated in the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
With respect to health care, this Speech from the Throne states a 
commitment to the fact that Saskatchewan has a first-rate health 
care system. In the past, we have invested over one-third of the 
provincial budget each year since 1982 to building the health care 
system that we have today. 
 
That has meant a 157 per cent increase for ambulance services and 
90 per cent increase in funding for alcohol and drug abuse. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we recognize that alcohol and drug abuse are a 
threat to the stability of family life. The new $1.5 million youth 
drug and alcohol treatment centre at Whitespruce is the first of its 
kind in all of Canada. Not only has this government said no to 
drugs, we have made a commitment to protect families and help 
those who need help, through modern and compassionate 
programs. 
 
I wish to reaffirm the commitment of this government to meet the 
changing health needs of our province and our goal to ensure that 
Saskatchewan continues to have the best health care system in all 
of Canada. Mr. Deputy Speaker, while a healthy public is 
important to this government, so is a healthy economy. 
 
The Speech from the Throne states a number of solid fiscal and 
economic policies to build and diversify the economy of 
Saskatchewan. The free trade agreement between Canada and the 
United States is going to be a great boost to Saskatchewan's 
economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are a trading province. One in five jobs in 
this province depends on trade. We in Saskatchewan are Canada's 
largest per capita traders with the Americans. Our Premier is one 
of the strongest supporters of free trade because he has seen the 
vision that free trade will mean increased prosperity for all of us in 
this province. The Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement was signed 
on January 2, 1988, and I am confident that it  

will present many positive benefits to the people of this province. 
The free trade agreement is good for Canada, and it is good for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This historic free trade agreement will complement the plans of 
Saskatchewan's government do diversity our economy. Increased 
markets for Saskatchewan's products will mean more jobs. More 
jobs will be created in the agricultural, manufacturing, and 
resource sectors, and our ability to expand to a larger market will 
make Saskatchewan a more competitive and viable province in the 
Canadian confederation. In this session of the legislature, this 
government will reaffirm our belief in free trade. Free trade 
provides Saskatchewan and western Canada the opportunity to be 
on a solid economic footing in confederation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Speech from the Throne states that this 
government believes our future prosperity depends on trade. Trade 
is a very important contributor to our very standard of living. 
Access to the markets is critical for our province. The United 
States is the destination of approximately 40 per cent of all 
Saskatchewan exports. Free trade means a brighter and better 
future for our province and for our young people. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan has become 
recognized all over Canada and the United States as a leader in the 
efforts to make free trade a reality. For the record, I wish to 
commend the Premier for his leadership role in bringing about the 
free trade agreement. All of us in Saskatchewan are winners 
because of the free trade agreement. Free trade is part of a plan to 
build and diversity the Saskatchewan economy. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, so is public participation. 
 
The Speech from the Throne says that this government believes 
that all Saskatchewan people have a right to the opportunity of 
participating in the province's economic growth. That is the 
corner-stone of public participation. 
 
As stated in the Speech from the Throne, our province is about to 
embark on a full-scale program of public participation. Legislation 
will be introduced to create a new Department of Public 
Participation. I wish to state for the record that public participation 
is a method of getting the government either fully or partly out of 
commercial activities. 
 
It is very important to this government that all Saskatchewan 
people have the opportunity to invest or participate in the 
economy. The public participation process will help to build our 
economy. Mr. Deputy Speaker, public participation will give all 
employees in government commercial services a chance to run 
their own economies. At the same time, every Saskatchewan 
citizen will have the opportunity to buy shares as they did with 
Saskatchewan Power bonds. Public participation will contribute to 
the government's plan of economic diversification. Saskatchewan 
will become the first jurisdiction in North America to establish a 
Department of Public Participation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I commend the government for its  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

17 
 

leadership in developing a program of public participation that 
will be launched in this session of the legislature. 
 
Building a strong economy for Saskatchewan is an ongoing 
priority of this government. As we open this session of the 
legislature, I am pleased to not recent Canadian press reports 
which indicate Saskatchewan's economy is growing. Economists 
are of the opinion that Saskatchewan's economy is showing good 
signs and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, economic diversification is part of 
the reason why our economy is growing. 
 
The phrase "economic diversification" is not some mysterious 
50-cent term used by financiers and economists. Economic 
diversification is a way to shape Saskatchewan's economy so that 
all of us will prosper in the years ahead. 
 
This government has a plan of economic diversification. In 
building a new economic future for our province, there are new 
projects under way to expand our economy. These economic 
diversification projects include the construction of Canada's first 
heavy oil upgrader here in the city of Regina, a new paper mill at 
Prince Albert, a new processing plant in North Battleford. These 
are examples of what the Saskatchewan Builds program is all 
about. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, economic diversification will create new 
investment, new jobs, and new prosperity. With all the rapid 
changes in technology, our education system must keep up with 
the times. A Progressive Conservative government in this 
province has, since 1982, increased funding for education in a 
significant way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me give the Assembly some examples. 
Since 1982 government grants to school boards have gone up by 
56.8 per cent. At the same time there has been an increase of 60 
per cent in total grants per pupil, while the actual cost per pupil 
went up 34 per cent. 
 
This government believes we can build the future of 
Saskatchewan through diversifying our economy. In building 
Saskatchewan for the future, we must look upon education as an 
investment. Public education is a good investment indeed. This 
government believes that the training of minds is very important to 
the future prosperity of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne notes the value of 
education. The young people of Saskatchewan represent our 
future. They must be given every opportunity to develop their 
potential. Our education system can build character, skills, and 
abilities that will ensure that our youth can take advantage of 
opportunities in the Saskatchewan of tomorrow. 
 
This government has increased education funding, yet I am 
pleased to report that Saskatchewan ratepayers have, on average, 
enjoyed a significant reduction in the education portion of their tax 
bill. Government funding to our K to 12 and post-secondary 
system has increased by almost 260 million, or 48 per cent since 
1982. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan's education system is one of 
the best in Canada. We are building an education system that can 
and will meet the rapidly changing needs of society. As we look to 
the 1990s, we must provide our young people with a first-class 
education to prepare them for the work place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this session of the legislature we will 
continue to address the needs of our education system. The 
commitment to education is part of this government's plan to 
diversify the economy. 
 
Tourism is an example of that. Your government has established a 
tourism and hospitality institute. This institute will educate people 
to fill new jobs in the tourism industry. Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
you stop and consider that tourism generates over $320 million in 
revenue each year in Saskatchewan, you can see why tourism 
education is important. This is just one example of how our 
education system must keep right up to speed with changes in our 
economy. 
 
Technology, such as the computer industry, has meant many new 
jobs that did not exist 10 years ago. In fact, Saskatoon has become 
one of the leading high-tech cities in all of Canada. Time and time 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Premier has expressed a 
commitment to quality education. Our reforms in education will 
mean a brighter future for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hallmark of Saskatchewan's Progressive 
Conservative government is leadership. Leadership means a 
respect for traditions, an understanding of the present, and a vision 
of the future. Leadership means commitment to the people and not 
special interest groups. Leadership means having the courage to 
do what is right. The Premier and the Government of 
Saskatchewan provide effective and strong leadership. The Speech 
from the Throne is a reflection of that leadership. This government 
has shown leadership and support of free trade, and again the 
quality of leadership was demonstrated in this government's 
protection and programs for farmers. 
 
I could cite examples of leadership in the Progressive 
Conservative government's policies and programs in health care 
and education, and in two elections, in every city, town, village, 
and rural municipality the people of Saskatchewan have joined 
together to give this government a mandate to govern, a mandate 
to keep on building Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in opening this session of the 
legislature, we continue to agenda of the government. And I say 
with pride that much will be accomplished in this legislative 
session because of the contents of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Caring and compassion, a sense of fairness, protection of people 
— they are all part of this government's commitment to people. 
The school teacher in Davidson, the mechanic in Prince Albert, 
the home-maker in Maple Creek, the farmer new Swift Current, 
the student in Saskatoon, the senior in Tisdale, and people from all 
walks of life can count on this government to do what is right for 
Saskatchewan.  



 
March 22, 1988 

18 
 

Ultimately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people choose governments, 
and this government intends to listen to the people. The Speech 
from the Throne contains many policies and programs that 
resulted from the wishes of the people. 
 
People tell us that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is excellent. The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, the first of its kind in North America, 
was implemented by this government as a result of consultation 
with the people of this province. Keeping in touch with the people 
is important to this Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we begin this new session of the 
legislature, I would like to urge all members of this Assembly to 
remember the sacred trust all of us have with those who elected us. 
All over North America the public is getting disgusted with 
catcalling, juvenile behaviour, lack of decorum, and other antics 
that give those of us in public life a bad name. May I remind the 
members of the Assembly, our province has produced great 
Canadian parliamentarians like Tommy Douglas and John 
Diefenbaker. I would respectfully suggest that in this session of 
the Legislative Assembly all of us set a find example of excellence 
in our legislative conduct. This example would do honour to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is always a distinct personal honour for any 
member of the legislature to have the opportunity to second the 
Speech from the Throne. I wish to express to the Premier and this 
Assembly my feeling of pride in supporting the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is on the threshold on a new era, then 
it's history. Gone are the days of state ownership, state control, and 
state socialism. Today we are in a time of economic opportunity 
— free enterprise and government as a servant, not the master. We 
live in an exciting time in Saskatchewan's history. Mr. Speaker, I 
welcome all the members of this Assembly to this session. Let us 
get on with the business of this province. And in closing I am 
proud to second the motion in support of the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me pleasure, I think, and I'll tell you why I say I think, to enter into 
this debate on the Speech from the Throne. The pleasure is 
because it's a great honour to be elected to the Legislative 
Assembly in Saskatchewan, for that matter to any Legislative 
Assembly, and have the opportunity to discuss the important 
issues of the day. And to that extent it's a pleasure and an honour. 
 
And I must say also, if I might for the moment to make a personal 
comment, for me it's a great pleasure and honour, although 
somewhat intimidating, to rise in this debate on the Speech from 
the throne for the first time as the Leader of the Official 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, people say, well you 
have big shoes to fill, referring to the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, Mr. Blakeney. My answer is  

very simple: I can't fill his shoes; I just simply have my own. And 
with the co-operation of my caucus colleagues and the 
determination of my party and the support and the advice of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, I am determined — I'll 
scratch the words "I'm determined" — we're determined, Mr. 
Speaker, to present the most effective form of opposition, and 
positive, constructive proposals that any opposition party can give 
in this legislature and for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now normally that job would be made a little 
bit easier if we had a Speech from the Throne which would 
provide for the opposition some meat over which to chew, and to 
debate, and to engage the government into differences over 
ideology, or program, or policies. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, that even you would agree with me that 
yesterday's Speech from the Throne surely must go down in 
Saskatchewan history as one of the most lack-lustre, one of the 
most visionless — if there is such a word — purposeless speeches 
that I have ever heard in the province's — well certainly the years 
that I've been around in provincial political activity. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, here we have a crisis of immense 
proportions in Saskatchewan, by the government's own admission. 
We have farmers facing bankruptcy and facing the difficulties that 
they have over the last few years; farmers who worry whether or 
not they are going to be able to get the spring crop in, and if they 
do this year, what the situation is going to look like at harvest time 
or next spring. 
 
We have more unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan 
today than we've had in recent years. We've had young people 
who are now entering their last weeks and days of school, looking 
for graduation, and now looking for jobs — anxiously looking for 
jobs. And this process for young people has not just begun. It's 
been going for the last several weeks, and no jobs to be found. 
 
We see families at all stages — whether it's in the cities or in the 
farms — under tremendous stress financially, and under 
tremendous stress personally and emotionally as they see loved 
ones, sons and daughters, being forced to vacate the province as 
they see themselves struggling for survival with respect to the 
family farms, worried about whether or not that job is going to 
continue tomorrow or next month. In the midst of all of this crisis, 
Mr. Speaker, this government comes out with a Speech from the 
Throne which gives them no hope, no guidance, no vision. It is 
surely one of the most purposeless speeches ever in the history of 
the province of Saskatchewan, and this government should be 
condemned for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — To be sure, there is a litany of excuses.  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

19 
 

In the Speech from the throne the government blames everybody. 
There's a world crisis on its hands, they say, that they can't 
manage. To be fair, there are certain factors in the world which are 
obviously affecting the economic and social problems of all 
governments, including this one; one has to acknowledge that. 
 
But to hang all of the excuses for this government's inactivity, to 
try to blame away or to excuse away this government's 
contradictory and confusing policies — whether they're on 
social-style issues, life-style issues or whether they're on economic 
policy issues — to try to escape anything and everything, and to 
blame it exclusively on the world-dimension problems, Mr. 
Speaker, flies in the face of the fact that that is a government in 
control of the treasury, that is a government that has the power and 
the capacity to legislate, that is a government that can do 
something for ordinary people on the farms and the cities. But it's 
also a fact that that's a government that has refused to help the 
farmers and the working people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what is the reason for this 
government's bankruptcy of ideas — a bankruptcy of ideas which 
matches, in fact I would say even exceeds, the bankruptcy of the 
provincial treasury thanks to six years of mismanagement by the 
gentlemen and the ladies opposite. What is the excuse for this 
bankruptcy of ideas? What is the explanation for this morass, this 
state of despair and hopelessness that the current administration in 
Regina has placed us in? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that one can blame a lot of it on ideology. In 
my judgement most of it is ideological because this government 
wants to turn the clock back to another era in Saskatchewan's 
history. It wants to turn the clock back to the good old days prior 
to the Great Depression, just prior to the Great Depression. It 
wants to turn back the policies and the programs to some sort of 
notion of private enterprise and freedom and individual initiative, 
as they describe it, which of course is a double standard. There's 
freedom and there's private initiative if you've got the money and 
if you've got the position, but for everybody else of course there's 
misery and no jobs and no hope in security. 
 
They want to turn back the ideological clock to a time which we 
had once before in the province of Saskatchewan under the 
Anderson administration, the PC Anderson administration, in 
those values they are a backward-looking government who, I 
believe, in those same identical ideals and values, exactly the same 
ones. 
 
They're the ones who believe in the forces of the market-place. It 
is the same people who say that the free trade deal with the United 
States linking ourselves irrevocably with a country, the one 
country which is exclusively market driven, it is these people who 
say that the forces of market will decide and will improve the lot. 
The same thing as Anderson and the PCs of the 1930s did. 
 
It is these people who say that the outside companies, the 
Weyerhaeusers and the Pocklingtons and all of the big  

multinational corporations with whom they hob-nob, but the 
small-business people with whom they ignore and have forgotten, 
it's the same people who say that the Weyerhaeusers and the 
Pocklingtons will provide jobs for our young men and women. 
The same things as the Andersons and the PCs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is bankrupt of ideas. It is flat busted 
of ideas because the ideas that they got are bankrupt ideas and they 
have been proven to be bankrupt ideas in the 1930s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And there's more than just simply being old 
ideas, old bankrupt ideas which are now being rejected virtually 
everywhere in the free world — all of the Reaganism which is 
passing, the Thatcherism which is passing. I mean, here's a 
government, Mr. Speaker, if you can imagine, who's on a kick of 
privatization, or as my colleague from Moose Jaw describes it so 
accurately, not privatization, but piratization. 
 
This is a political party which says that it's a Saskatchewan 
political party. This government opposite says that it's a 
government of and for the people of Saskatchewan. And who do 
they bring in to tell them about piratization and privatization — a 
whole slug of advisers from the United Kingdom, from 
everywhere but Saskatchewan or Canada, to dismantle piece by 
piece, and sometimes not piece by piece, in a wholesale 
destruction of the very infrastructure that has built up this great 
province that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we have a Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan, there's no doubt about that, at least in 
name. Well let's make no mistake about it — the real premier of 
Saskatchewan is a man called Oliver Letwin, and he's from the 
United Kingdom and he wants to destroy Saskatchewan by 
privatization. That's the real premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So the bankruptcy of ideas is explained 
because the ideology has been proven to be old, to be out of touch. 
It never worked; it led to the Great Depression of the great 1930s, 
the Great Depression which caused so much misery. 
 
It's a kind of an ideology and philosophy which we're seeing now 
in the United States, and we're seeing here in Canada, being so 
zealously advocated by these zealots opposite, which has proven 
to create mercenary policies, and also proven to show that there is 
nothing but difficulties attached to the local people of this 
province of Saskatchewan. That is the advocacy of the old; that's 
why that Speech from the Throne was so barren of ideas. 
 
But there's another reason why it was barren of ideas too, Mr. 
Speaker. It was barren because not only is the ideology old, but 
this government is old and it's tired and it's given up. It has no 
vision. It can't govern, Mr. Speaker, and it must go. 
  



 
March 22, 1988 

20 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It's a government, Mr. Speaker, with no 
vitality. They've been in office for six years and they have been 
seduced by the powers and by the privileges of power. They have 
been so seduced by their big, large corporation friends that they 
think actually that they're going to be there for ever. 
 
That they're so confident in their world travel. I mean, the Premier 
travels all over the world, as the last speaker tells us about, in 
support of free trade. Everywhere he travels. It's to a Washington 
prayer breakfast, it's to Washington again, it's over to North 
Dakota. The Minister of Economic Development, he travels over 
to Argentina. 
 
I have nothing against the travel in the interests of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Nobody can complain about that, except that this 
government is more concerned about problems over which it can 
do nothing, and it's forgotten about those problems and needs right 
here at home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They don't see any merit in a government 
going around to the English to tell us how to set up a privatized 
society in London, England. Sure it's the Mother of Parliaments, 
but I don't think that there's very much that England can tell us 
about how to build a democracy. I don't think there's very much 
that Oliver Letwin, the shadow premier of this government, can 
tell us about how to build a mixed economy which heretofore has 
been healthy and based on positive developments by the private 
sector and the co-operative sector and by the government sector — 
not one iota. 
 
I'm actually ashamed to think that this Premier and this 
government is so bereft and so bankrupt of ideas that it has to rely 
on these kinds of authorities who apply solutions that might work 
— I underline the word — might work in the United Kingdom, 
apply the solutions in a far-away land, for far-away circumstances, 
that they have to depend upon these people to bring down the very 
infrastructure that our pioneers and our fathers and forefathers 
built. And we're not going to stand for it, Mr. Speaker, in 
opposition — not at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, it is an old government. It's 
an old government; it's old ideologically; it's an old Herbert 
Hoover-style government with the same rhetoric and the same 
kind of talk and the same kind of phraseology. It's an old ideology 
which hasn't worked, and it's an old, tired government which, in its 
pursuit of these fanciful ideas, has forgotten the people at home. 
It's forgotten the farmers at home. It's forgotten the 11,000 people 
who wait to get into a hospital bed in Saskatoon city — 11,000 
nothing for them. It's forgotten about the 5,000 who try to get into 
a hospital bed in Saskatoon, forgotten about the families here in 
Saskatchewan and in Regina and Saskatoon. It has bigger fish to 
fry. 

Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when and if the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan ever gets the courage to call 
by-elections in Eastview and Elphinstone, he's going to be taught a 
lesson that the people of this province want the Premier of this 
province to tend to the knitting of Saskatchewan's business, and 
not to be travelling the world over in pursuit of fanciful and pipe 
dreams. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have a Speech from the 
Throne which is old and busted of ideas as I've described it; a 
Speech from the Throne which concentrates on the problem of 
mad dogs travelling through the . . . in roaming packs through the 
cities of Saskatchewan; tells us about what it's going to do about 
the Jury Act, as important as it is, while in the meantime farmers 
and business people . . . By the way, hardly a word spoken about 
the small-business people in that Speech from the Throne. 
 
An Hon. Members: — Nothing, not one word. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — In fact my colleague says, not one world, and I 
think that's probably true — not one word, and that's what I'm 
hearing everywhere that I travel, speaking to small-business 
people. Tonight I'm going to be speaking to the medical society 
and to business people later on this evening. that's the message 
they've been telling me before. They'll tell me again. This 
government has forgotten it. 
 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, there's another dimension to the 
state of this government currently. And that is that it simply can't be 
believed any more in its pronouncements. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Dishonest. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The word is used, "dishonest." That's perhaps 
a little bit too harsh to use, but I'll use it in the context of political 
dishonesty, Mr. Speaker. There used to be a time in Saskatchewan 
politics when a leader, a premier, or a minister of the government, 
said what he or she meant and meant what was said. When a 
political leader makes a promise in an election or in the legislature, 
that was a bond with the people of the province, the voters. This 
government can't be believed any more. 
 
One could deliver a speech for the balance of the afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, to make my point. I start with the budget before October 
of 1986 — the Premier will know all about that — where the 
estimate was . . . and by the way, I almost shudder to think when I 
use the words "of a deficit of only $400 million approximately," 
— only $400 millions, and it turns out to be $1.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of two things you would have us to believe: 
either they didn't know the size of the deficit, in which case they 
are the worst managers in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan; or, Mr. Speaker, they knew full well what the 
deficit was but they were covering up from the people of the  
province of Saskatchewan or, putting it in plain old-fashioned 
English, they were dishonest with the people of the  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

21 
 

province of Saskatchewan.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Political dishonesty, Mr. Speaker, political 
dishonesty. This is not a minor error or even an error that can be 
accounted for by way of some fluctuation of an economic 
indicator, that kind of a budgetary mistake. This is a massive 
difference between the prediction and the reality which clearly 
was advanced because they know — the Premier knew, the 
Minister of Finance knew — that if the people of this province 
knew how badly bankrupt this province was, thanks to their 
administration, they would have lost the election on October of 
1986. And that's dishonesty, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about 
it, and there's a litany of that. 
 
How about the promise to reduce provincial income tax by 10 per 
cent, I ask the government benches over there. What happened to 
that promise — broken. What about the promise to eliminate the 
gas tax, Mr. Speaker — promise broken. And by the way, to 
eliminate it for good is the word. What about the promise to 
eliminate the province sales tax? That's gone up from 5 to 7 per 
cent. What about the promise never to attack medicare, Mr. 
Speaker, never to attack medicare and hospitalization? And I just 
want to say a word about that before I adjourn my remarks — 
adjourn the debate and continue tomorrow. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I want to say about medicare, after six years of administration by 
the PC government, Mr. Speaker, we have this sorry record in 
health: 11,000 people waiting to get into a hospital bed; we've got 
a pharmacare program which has been gutted; we've got a 
children's dental program which has been dismantled and the 
substitute program is nowhere around to be seen; we have doctors 
in revolution, almost, against this government's approach; we have 
nurses who are understaffed and overworked and they're tired and 
they're harassed and nobody listens to them, nobody over there 
listens to them. They're pleading for some additional assistance. 
We have a mess on our hands in the health care system, Mr. 
Speaker, purposefully and deliberately visited upon the people of 
the province by these antediluvian, 1930s free enterprise ethics 
advanced by the Premier and the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — After five years of putting this situation in a 
precarious situation, all of a sudden the Premier and the 
government gets up and they announce in the Speech from the 
Throne yesterday, they got a brand new idea — they're going to 
announce a task force to study health care after having taken a big 
chunk out of health care. After having gone a long way to 
dismantling this infrastructure which was built on civility and 
decency and humanity and on common sense, the government 
now says it's going to establish a task force on medicare and on 
hospitalization. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that's like shutting the barn  

door after all the horses or cows have left. That's like saying we're 
going to do something with medicare after we've hobbled it so 
badly that we have to have some new ideas, some new approaches 
for repair. That's not the direction they're going, Mr. Speaker. I tell 
you that this government's refusal to deny that this task force is 
going to be a cover for the establishment of a full-scale program 
for privatization of health care, or even the imposition of deterrent 
fees, stands as a further condemnation of this administration, and 
the people will not accept it; they want to reject it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'll have much more to say on 
this Speech from the Throne tomorrow, but I want to close by 
saying again, my opening them. 
 
This is a government by any objective observation, whether it's by 
the journalists who cover the proceedings in the legislature, 
whether it's those who watch — and I tell you by those in the back 
benches sitting behind the Premier supporting this fragile 
government — anybody who watches objectively knows the true 
state of affairs. The true state of affairs is that this government 
practises an ideology which is out of date and full of double 
standard. This government has grossly mismanaged the fiscal 
records and the fiscal position of the province of Saskatchewan. 
this government has lost touch with the people of the province. It's 
prepared to travel anywhere and everywhere, almost exclusively 
not paying attention to Saskatchewan business and to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And one last point before I take my place. It's a government which 
has betrayed this notion, which I never believed in in any event, 
this notion which it tried to propagate that somehow it was a 
political party of Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to cite this one example, and that's the production loan 
— the $25 per acre production loan. Mr. Speaker, in 1985 the 
Premier said that the fiscal position of farmers was so serious that 
6 per cent money at $25 per acre should be made available to 
farmers — promissory not, no security note. In 1988, when the 
farm crisis is worsened — greatly worsened — we now have a 
10-year security, with an interest rate going up from 6 per cent to 
nine and three-quarters per cent. And the Premier has done this 
without any consultation with farm organizations — he's done it 
with absolutely no consultation with individual farmers, and he 
has put the farmers yet even deeper in debt and deeper into a crisis 
situation. 
 
But look at the double standard by these free enterprise people 
opposite. When it comes to Weyerhaeuser, as was pointed out in 
question period today, if Weyerhaeuser makes not one cent in 
profit, it doesn't have to make certain payments pursuant to its 
agreement. But if the farmers don't make any profits, they pay not 
only 6 per cent, they pay nine and three-quarters per cent. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is an unacceptable double standard that the farmers 
of this province will not and cannot accept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 22, 1988 

22 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Money for Weyerhaeuser; nothing for the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. Money for Pocklington; 
nothing for those waiting for hospital beds. Mr. Speaker, this 
government is old, it's tired, it's bankrupt, it's bankrupted the 
province. It's time to get rid of it. I'll have much more to say about 
this tomorrow, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
would like to move: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the passing 
for a former member of the Assembly and expresses its 
grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Jacob Benson, who died in Victoria, British Columbia, 
on August 23, 1987, was a member of the Legislative 
Assembly representing the constituency of Last Mountain 
form 1929 to 1934 and again from 1938 to 1952. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Just for the sake of 
formality, it's a motion that requires leave, and I would just ask for 
leave from the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I have it moved and seconded by the Leader 
of the Opposition. It will only take a few moments. 
 

Mr. Benson came to Canada in 1903, married Hilda Ferris of 
Buckingham, Quebec in 1918. He was educated at Regina 
College and the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Benson 
lived in Semans and was a farmer and municipal councillor. 
He was a member of many farm organizations and the 
Progressive movement. 
 
As a member of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Benson 
regarded himself as a representative of many viewpoints. He 
began his long career in 1928 as an independent supporter of 
the Anderson government. He then ran unsuccessfully as a 
farm labour candidate in 1934. In 1938 he was returned to 
this House as a member of the CCF Party. He was re-elected 
in both the 1944 and 1948 elections. Mr. Benson failed in 
1952 to be re-elected as an independent. 

 
Mr. Benson liked to be remembered as a member who stood 
by his convictions, regardless of which side of the House he 
sat. 
 
Mr. Benson was predeceased by his wife who died in 1986. 
He is survived by a brother and many nieces and nephews. 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members 
of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I want to join with the Premier in recognizing 
the contribution of Jacob Benson to the work of this Legislature, 
and in extending our condolences to his family and his friends. 
 
Mr. Benson is remembered for his strong, independent voice on 
many public issues. I am advised that one of his main concerns 
during his time in this House was parliamentary procedure. He 
supported the dignity and the importance of the individual elected 
representative of the people. He was a man who cherished this 
Assembly as a form for free expression of ideas and principles. 
The morality, personal convictions, and responsible actions of the 
individual members of the legislature, I am informed, were to him 
a vital element of democratic government. His support of our 
democratic institutions therefore seemed unquestionable. 
 
Mr. Benson's strong sense of public duty was evident in his long 
representation of the constituency of Last Mountain. He worked 
hard for his constituents, and he worked hard for this province. 
 
Above all, Jacob Benson was a man who considered it a privilege 
to sit in this House and to be a representative of the people of this 
province, and more particularly his constituency. 
 
We join with the Premier and the members opposite in extending 
our sympathy to the family and friends of the late Mr. Benson. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to 
associate myself with the messages of condolences being extended 
today to the family of the late Mr. Jacob Benson, the former 
member of this Assembly for Last Mountain. 
 
Through the courtesy of the Clerk, Mr. Speaker, I have had the 
opportunity to review some of the remarks delivered by Mr. 
Benson in his speeches in this Assembly, going back to the 1950s 
and before. He was obviously a very remarkable speaker and a 
remarkable individual. 
 
During his career, Mr. Speaker, he was associated with the CCF, 
with the Progressive movement, as well as serving as an 
independent MLA in this Assembly. He obviously stood for what 
he believed in, and he spoke in this Assembly with conviction, and 
he also obviously pulled no punches when he had a point to make. 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, he made his contribution to the proper 
functioning of our democratic process, and particularly to this 
legislature, the central institution of our democratic process in 
Saskatchewan, and I would want to join with others in the 
Assembly today in extending our sincere sympathies to his 
bereaved family. 
 
Motion Agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move,  
  



 
March 22, 1988 

23 
 

seconded by the member from Riversdale: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript of 
oral tributes to the memory of the deceased member, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of the 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communications 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Health: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved by the 
Public Documents committee be referred as tabled to the 
Standing Committee on Communications. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year 
ended March 31, 1987 be referred as tabled to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(16:15) 
 

Referral of Report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library 
to Standing Committee on Communications 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Communications. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1987 be referred as tabled 
to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
With leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of By-laws and Amendments of the Professional 
Associations to Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the by-laws of the professional associations, and 
amendments thereto, be referred as tabled to the Special 
committee on Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Annual Reports and Financial Statements of 
Crown Corporations and Agencies to Standing  

Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the annual reports and financial statements of the 
various Crown corporations and related agencies be referred 
as tabled to the Standing committee on Crown Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Granting Leave of Absence to the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the hon. member for 
Rosetown-Elrose from Monday, March 21 to Monday, 
March 28, 1988, to attend on behalf of this Assembly the 
commonwealth Parliamentary Association executive 
committee meeting in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago. 

 
I move, seconded by the Minister of Health. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:20 p.m. 
 
 
 


