


















































June 6, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 6, 1988 
 

1843 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
my colleague, the member for Regina Wascana, I would like to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a group of 28 students from the St. 
Dominic School in Regina. These are grade 3 and 4 students 
who are seated in the west gallery. They are accompanied by 
their teacher Mrs. Johanne Rusnak, chaperons Audrey 
Schlosser, Val Sternig, Toby Mahoney, Ann Wingerter and 
Linda Bohn. 
 
These students, as I said, Mr. Speaker, are seated in the west 
gallery. I shall have the distinct pleasure on behalf of the 
member from Regina Wascana to meet with this group of 
students for pictures and drinks. On behalf of the member, I 
would like to welcome you all to the Legislative Assembly. I do 
hope that you have a wonderful stay here at the Assembly, and I 
hope the proceedings are enjoyable and informative to you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I welcome 15 students from the Cornwall 
Street Tutoring Project in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
accompanied by their teachers Judy Eichhorst and Barbara 
Olynuck. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the students at, I guess it’s 3 
o’clock, and we’ll have an opportunity then to discuss what 
you’ve seen and your impressions of it. I look forward to seeing 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure, 
on behalf of Minister of Education, to introduce to you 25 
students from the Corning Elementary School in Corning, 
Saskatchewan. They are made up of grades 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 
students. They are accompanied by two teachers Sharon 
McCarthy and Nancey Gilmour-McCarthy, and a chaperon Ken 
Wickenheiser who, I believe, is also their bus driver. 
 
I’d like to welcome you to the legislature, and I hope your visit 
to Regina is educational and informative. I hope you enjoy your 
stay here with us in the legislature, and I look forward, on 
behalf of the Minister of Education, to meet with you later for 
pictures and refreshments. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to join my colleague from Regina Centre in welcoming the 
students from Cornwall Tutoring. I would like to point out to 
the members of the legislature that I was the principal of Radius 
Tutoring Project in Saskatoon, which is Cornwall’s counterpart. 

One of the reasons I decided to get involved in politics was to 
ensure that there were alternate ways of delivering education to 
Saskatchewan students. So I enjoy seeing the students from 
Cornwall here, and I would ask all members to once again 
welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Assistance for Cattle Producers 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
absence of the Premier I’ll go to the Acting Premier. 
 
A few days ago my colleagues and I spent a number of days 
touring the drought area of the province, in the south-west and 
western sides, and we found that many of the livestock 
producers were on the verge of devastation. 
 
Mr. Minister, they have to haul cattle to feed, they have to haul 
feed to cattle, and as of yet they have no indication what your 
government, or what the federal government is going to do to 
assist them to do this. At this late date in time, there’s still no 
indication. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell them today what kind of assistance 
they can expect for hauling feed to cattle, or cattle to feed, or 
for hauling water? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a few days ago all 
western premiers met with the federal Minister of Agriculture in 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and they talked at that time about the 
kind of assistance that was available for water and well 
development, and so on. And members opposite don’t seem to 
understand that cattle need water as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time it was agreed that they would monitor 
and consult. That happens to be going on at this very moment, 
Mr. Speaker. The Premier is in Moose Jaw at this very day at 
the stock growers’ convention in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. And 
I expect that when the Premier has finished those consultations 
and taken his message to Ottawa, he will either be announcing 
something that Saskatchewan will be supporting, or something 
that will come jointly from Saskatchewan and Ottawa, or jointly 
from the western government and Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that’s reasonable, and I think it’s what the stock producers 
in the province expect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
your government has discussed this for months; the federal 
government says they’re discussing it for months. You’ve had 
meetings in Calgary and Ottawa and on a yacht. Maybe if you 
took some of your caucus members out to meet these people 
who are hard pressed by this problem, that you’ll have some 
energies to do something about it. You continue to discuss and 
talk about it, and we see no action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1844 
 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I ask you this: will you make a 
commitment today that your government will stand good for the 
costs, whatever they are, for those hard pressed farmers and 
ranchers that have to move their grain, or move their cattle to 
feed, or move the feed to cattle, or move water by truck? Will 
you make that commitment to those farmers right now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, our record in dealing with 
the agricultural community in Saskatchewan is second to none, 
Mr. Speaker, second to none. The farmers of Saskatchewan 
know, the farmers of Saskatchewan know that this government 
stands behind them four-square. The farmers of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, know that in their time of need this government 
will be there four-square. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The farmers of Saskatchewan tell me, 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan tell me, in all parts 
of the province that I visit, Mr. Speaker, is, for Heaven’s sakes, 
don’t bring in a messed up program like the former minister of 
Agriculture MacMurchy brought in; bring one in that will 
satisfy our emergency situation and one, Mr. Speaker, that can 
be supported by agricultural people, urban people — one that 
can be made in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
farmers that we talked to have to make decisions. They have to 
make good business decisions. And how are they, Mr. Minister, 
supposed to make good business decisions when they’re hard 
strapped for cash, and your government stands idly by and does 
not let them know what programs will be in place? How do they 
make those decisions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, there 
have been several things done over the last few weeks, 
including the announcement by my colleague, the minister 
responsible for crop insurance, that provided for winter crops to 
go into forage or grazing. There has been the announcement 
relative to water well development, Mr. Speaker — not 
insignificant announcements. And in co-operation, Mr. Speaker, 
with the livestock community, policies are being developed that 
will, I’m sure, satisfy the vast majority of the livestock people 
in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when those announcements are ready — and 
I hope it’s very soon, because the problem is real, Mr. Speaker 
— but when those announcements are ready, the Premier . . . or 
the Minister of Agriculture will make all members aware, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Crop Insurance Coverage 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to address my question to the Minister of rural affairs and the 
minister in charge of crop insurance. 
 
As we tour the south-west corner of the province, Mr. Minister, 
there is a major crisis with drought, affecting cattlemen and 
affecting also grain producers. There are many ideas that 
farmers are prepared to put forward, but no one in government 
is listening. And I ask you . . . this is the problem that some of 
the farmers indicated to us, that it’s so dry they have not even 
turned a wheel to sow a see, because to turn it and to work the 
soil would mean that it would blow away; the seed will not 
grow — soil erosion. 
 
They have tried to contact the crop insurance office, the 
Premier’s office, with this suggestion: rather than us to sow that 
seed with the guarantee that there will be no crop, it is possible 
for the government to amend The Crop Insurance Act so that 
they can pay at least a portion of what the farmer would get if 
he sowed and got no crop. Would you consider an amendment 
to The Crop Insurance Act so that farmers who do not sow a 
crop but preserve their soil will get some coverage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I think I can honestly say 
I’ve met with more farmers and R.M. councils in the last two 
months than probably anybody in this Legislative Chamber. 
I’ve been out in the are, and I’ve talked to — I’ve been in 
Rockglen, in Outlook, in Kyle, and have been talking about 
what we can do in regards to whether they should seed or not 
seed. 
 
There’s two things that you’ve got to look at: one, it’s all of 
Saskatchewan. How do you apply an insurance program all 
across Saskatchewan. Drought does not only occur in the 
south-west. The Nipawin area has a great deal of drought; into 
the Melfort area it’s extended now, so it’s sort of all across 
Saskatchewan. So how do you apply it across Saskatchewan. 
 
Second, under good soil conservation — good soil conservation 
— you must maintain and should maintain some kind of a 
growth base there. so if there is the opportunity, at least seed 
something to hold the soil in place, then it is probably good soil 
conservation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure the farmers will be delighted at that 
answer that you gave to them, but that doesn’t address the 
problem. Here they have a situation that even where they have 
already planted seed for three weeks; not a single kernel has 
sprouted. And the farmers have indicated that they have 
checked the seed and it has burst, but there is insufficient 
moisture for it to come even it rains come. 
 
The choice that they have to make now is, should they continue 
to seed just to harvest the crop insurance program, or will you 
put a program into place to give them a benefit of payment for 
properly managing their soil and not seeding, because they’re 
not going to get a crop anyway? That’s the question they’re 
asking. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1845 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s irony that they ask 
these questions, because today the crop insurance president is 
meeting with a group of farm folks in here in regards to drought 
and what we can do with crop insurance within the parameters 
of the legislation and regulations. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker, up till June 20 is the last date that 
reseeding can be done. There is lots of opportunities probably 
yet to seed or even reseed. We are giving serious consideration 
to where reseeding would not be required to get an established 
benefit. In other words, if you don’t reseed you will not . . . 
you’ll still be allowed a summerfallow status. Now we’re 
giving that serious consideration, but it takes federal agreement 
as well as provincial agreement to do it. 
 
So those two things are already in the progress . . . or program 
that we’re looking at. We’re looking at about seven other things 
that can be done under crop insurance, and I’m sure that within 
the next week or two that we’ll make those announcements. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement. Mr. Speaker, you indicated 
again that you’re considering; that it has to depend upon the 
federal government. I ask you, have you made representations 
in respect to the problems that are coming from the farmers 
themselves? They want to know whether they can use soil 
conservation rather than seeding a crop and have the soil blow 
away and not get any crop — use up their seed, use up their 
chemicals at a time when it doesn’t make sense. 
 
If the corporation would pay even 50 per cent of what they 
would . . . if a crop was sown and failed, you would be ahead, 
the farmer would be ahead. Can’t you see that? the farmers are 
saying that. And I’m asking you, have you contacted the federal 
government, and when can we expect a decision on it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it was last Tuesday 
that the Premier met with Mr. Wise, and a lot of crop insurance 
issues were discussed at that time, at which time we had the 
president of crop insurance present. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, we’ve looked at all the different things, 
alternatives, that you can do within crop insurance, and how 
you pay out . . . how you would pay out a seeding or a benefit 
without actually seeing the crop or putting in is two things: one, 
it is not good soil conservation; and two, how would you pay it 
out is the real problem. It’s like how can you establish what 
crops . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, it is very hard to tell what 
crops you . . . what crops would have been seeded and would 
not have been seeded. We are looking seriously at summer 
fallow. Summer fallow that hasn’t been seeded is one of the 
areas that we could give serious  

consideration to, because if you did summer fallow it last year, 
you certainly have every intention of seeding it this year. 
 
If you’re talking about stubble — I can think of myself firstly 
— I was going to see another 150 acres of stubble which I’m 
not going to do now because it is dry. There’s other . . . you 
know, so it’s pretty hard to say what you would or would not 
have done. So just to clarify it, we’re looking at all the 
alternatives, and I’m sure within the next couple of weeks we’ll 
make some announcements. 
 

Long-Term Strategy for Disaster Situations 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Deputy Premier, in the absence of the Premier and the Minister 
of Agriculture, and it deals as well with the drought which has 
devastated literally hundreds of miles of farm land in 
Saskatchewan as well as in Alberta. Mr. Speaker, you will 
realize, and many others will have seen The Journal and the 
devastation which was shown on TV on Friday night in the 
Ponteix area. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, deals with the lack of 
a long-term strategy which was promised back in 1985. You 
will remember at that time you and your government and the 
government in Ottawa and the minister, John Wise, were 
talking about a full-fledged, long-term announcement for 
disasters such as drought. I’m wondering if you can now release 
that to the public, having had three years to study, meet, and 
analyse that kind of a problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to have the 
Premier deal with this specific question as it relates to the 
long-term strategy. 
 
I can remember, Mr. Speaker, back in 1975, and when I first 
came to this House and the member of Elphinstone first came to 
this House, and in subsequent years we had some rather serious 
drought situations. There was some money spent late in the 
year, late in the year to provide for fencing or community wells 
or so on. And at that time we were saying what we need is a 
long-term water management strategy, one that will 
drought-proof large sections of our province, Mr. Speaker, 
through irrigation and water management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people have just, at every opportunity, 
kicked the Rafferty-Alameda project, Mr. Speaker, that can 
provide for feed and forage for our livestock industry, Mr. 
Speaker. we are moving, I think it’s a hundred million dollar 
agreement with the federal government to do irrigation projects 
in the drought-stricken areas of this province. Not one word of 
support from members opposite, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the 
opposite is true. 
 
Now we have a drought upon us, and people can feel the  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1846 
 
 

real impact of the absence of this kind of work before — the 
real impact of that, Mr. Speaker. And what do they do; what do 
they do? They stand in the road of every water management 
project that we initiate, Mr. Speaker. They can’t have it both 
ways; they can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I urge the members opposite to stand in their place and say, 
government, get on with that Rafferty project; manage our 
water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the Deputy 
Premier, and it deals with the promise back in 1985 that there 
would be a drought assistance program developed for the long 
term. And I would like to get the minister, if I could, back to the 
issue of the 1988 drought if we could. 
 
I have here a letter signed by the Premier of the province and 
the Minister of Agriculture, and I’d like to just quote from it. 
But it says in fact . . . back in 1985 this letter was sent out to all 
the farmers in the province. It says: 
 

Your government recognizes the short-term effect 
provided through this type of ad hoc program (referring to 
his 1985 program). Such an approach does not necessarily 
provide a lasting solution, and ad hoc programs are by 
nature expensive and very difficult to administer. 

 
Now that was three years ago when that promise was made. 
And I would ask the minister now to outline the program that 
you have had three years to develop, because that’s what the 
farmers are asking us when we tour the province. Where is the 
long-term program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, without getting into the 
detail of the program because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — There are none. Where is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well let me spend some time then, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The minister is attempting to answer, 
and I think that if we allow him to do so without interruption, 
he will get on with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member opposite suggests that 
what we should have is an insurance program that is somehow 
convoluted to become a simple aid program, Mr. Speaker — to 
pay out insurance where no crop has been planted. Well I think 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly 
what he said. That’s exactly what he said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite are looking for some long-term 
strategy. There has been quite a bit done, Mr. Speaker, with the 
crop insurance people for extended periods of drought or 
natural disaster. Pay-outs are adjusted differently than was the 
case in the past, and my colleague has all the detail on that if 
you’d like to address  

a question to him. 
 
Long-term strategies, as it relates to drought proofing in the 
south-west, include irrigation projects, include storing water. In 
the south-east, Mr. Speaker, it’s the Rafferty and the Alameda 
dam — all of these things that members opposite are against, 
Mr. Speaker; all of those things that members opposite are 
against; all of these things, Mr. Speaker, that are part of a 
long-term strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hazard — I would shudder to think of the 
situation in Saskatchewan agricultural community today if we 
were living in the days of the . . . the dark days of the NDP and 
the efforts that they put into drought-proofing Saskatchewan. I 
mean, Mr. Speaker, it was a terrible, terrible history of the NDP 
and their support for agriculture in this province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The final supplementary to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, you have announced a program. Your long-term 
strategy to date is $12 million, cost-shared by the federal 
government for western Canada, to dig dug-outs. I want to tell 
you that we drove 400 miles, saw literally hundreds of dug-outs 
empty, and I want to ask you if digging more dug-outs is a 
solution to the problem in 1988 in Saskatchewan for the 
drought that farmers are facing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You see, Mr. Speaker, the mentality of 
the members opposite. They would go dig a dug-out in the 
middle of a slough with six feet of water in it, you know. I 
mean, it makes very little sense. You dig the dug-out, Mr. 
Speaker, you dig the dug-out so in the event of a good run-off 
you can capture and store the water for years like this, Mr. 
Speaker. They never did that; they never did that, Mr. Speaker, 
so we are, in co-operation with the federal government. He 
sneezes, he sneezes at $12 million. We put in a like sum, so the 
total is about double that, Mr. Speaker, and he says, no water. 
But there’s a pumping program and there are other things. 
 
Now what he would have us do. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, is 
move a glacier from the mountains, move the glacier from a 
mountain and set it down in Cypress Hills so his farm would be 
looked after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing what is realistically possible. We are 
doing it, Mr. Speaker, with the support and consultation of the 
agricultural, particularly the livestock community in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we are there, we are there 
behind the agricultural community in Saskatchewan. We have 
demonstrated that in the past with things like cash advances for 
our livestock community; with things like . . . well they don’t 
want to hear it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Suffice to say that this government stands four-square behind 
agricultural communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contract to California Company 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1847 
 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the minister responsible for SGI. Mr. Minister, 
you will recall on May 12 I asked you a series of questions 
about the California based firm Autotrak, which SGI now uses 
to develop its pay-outs to persons whose vehicles have been 
written off here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you today provide this House with the answers to the 
questions I asked on May 12? Specifically, can you confirm the 
contract? Can you confirm the price and the fact that it was not 
tendered; that figures generated by the Autotrak computer base 
are treated as non-negotiable by your adjusters; and that 
because of this system, arbitrations on awards for written-off 
vehicles are far higher in Saskatchewan than in other 
jurisdictions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would confirm that 
we have entered into a contract with Autotrak data processing. 
We did this after a nine-month pilot project, and it’s a contract 
for one year. 
 
The cost of the contract was the second question that the 
member asked, I believe, is in the neighbourhood of $480,000. 
 
The question was, would this be the sole criteria upon which 
settlements are made? No, it would be a guide that we use 
because the other way is just negotiation. And I suppose the 
people who are the better negotiators will get the better 
settlement. This will give a more equal guide to the people in 
settlements of claim. 
 
And also, would there be an increase, I think that was the next 
question that the member asked, was there an increase in the 
number of arbitrations? And the answer to that — no, very, very 
slight increase. If anything, approximately 2 per cent of the 
cases, which is about — 66 went to arbitration; that was 2 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. So I think those are the answers to the 
question that the member had asked regarding the Autotrak. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I just want to help you with the 
understanding of the situation. I have an example here of a 
recent case where a 1984 Volkswagen Rabbit was written off. 
Even though the person who had his car written off had at least 
two car dealers provide a letter saying that they would sell that 
vehicle off their lot for 8,000 to 8,500, SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), using the Autotrak system, offered 
only 6,790 and said that no other offers could be made. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is not the negotiating point, it is the final offer. I 
would ask you to justify to this legislature why a computer data 
base developed in California and not the local market-place 
should tell our residents what their cars are worth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I should point that we had a pilot 
project on this before entering into the contract, and I should 
also point out to the Assembly and people here that we’re 
attempting to develop that expertise right  

within Saskatchewan now to have the contract, the next contract 
be done here in Saskatchewan. That expertise was not available 
here at the time, or else it would have had a Saskatchewan 
contract. 
 
In the case of the Volkswagen Rabbit, I have long since learned 
to not take everything the member opposite says as the absolute 
fact. But if you would like to provide me after question period 
with the facts pertaining to this, as you see them, I’d be more 
than pleased to have my officials look into that case. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 75  An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Federation 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Teachers’ Federation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 78  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 
Contributory) Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
A Bill respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain 
Acts resulting from the enactment of Certain Acts and the 

Passing of Certain Orders and Regulations pursuant to The 
Government Organization Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of Certain Acts and the Passing of 
Certain Orders and Regulations pursuant to The Government 
Organization Act. 
 
The division bells having rung from 2:35 p.m. until 2:44 p.m.: 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have had a request to defer the division, but 
before so doing I wish to read to the House rule 33(2),  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1848 
 
 

which reads as follows: 
 

When the Speaker or the Chairman of Committee of the 
Whole or Committee of Finance has put the question on a 
debatable motion and a recorded division is requested 
under rule 33(1), while the members are being called in 
either chief Government Whip or the chief Opposition 
Whip may approach the Speaker or Chairman to request 
that the division be deferred, in which case the Speaker or 
Chairman, after both Whips have indicated that the bells 
may be turned off, shall announce that the said division has 
been deferred until a specific time but in any case, not later 
than before Orders of the Day on the second sitting day 
thereafter. 

 
Therefore according to that particular rule, the division will take 
place at this time on Wednesday. 
 
(1445) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who made the request? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The request was at the . . . the ruling was at 
the request of the Deputy Premier, the government House 
Leader. 
 
The House Leader has asked for the division, or for the deferral 
of the division, and on that basis the rule is . . . Order, order. 
Order. 
 
I’ve just read the rule. If somebody wishes to say something, 
they may rise on a point of order, but we certainly don’t need a 
whole lot of questions from hon. members’ seats. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. It 
seems to me that if I heard clearly what you are saying, it is at 
the request of the whip that a deferred vote can be taken, 
government or opposition — in this case the Government 
House Leader, and not the whip — and you read the rules 
clearly into the House that it would have to be at the request of 
the whip. 
 
In light of that, Mr. Speaker, because that was not the request 
that was made, I Submit to you, sir, that the vote has to be taken 
at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member did indicate that the rule 
does say the whip, it’s of the responsibility of the whip, and 
therefore I rule that if the whip indicates that request, that is all 
that’s required. 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, I request the vote be stacked. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the provision in the rule 
states that when there is a call for a standing vote, the bells may 
ring. And in order for the vote to be stacked there has to be a 
request from the whip, in this case the Government Whip, for 
the vote to be stacked. At that time, the bells may stop ringing 
at the agreement of both  

sides of the House. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, the deputy whip, or the whip, did not 
make the request; the bells have stopped ringing; the doors have 
closed; there is no rule in this House that can be applied 
retroactively. In this case, if you now allow the whip to make 
that request, it’s an application of the rules retroactively. I 
believe, and I submit to you, there is no other alternative for 
you to decide, other than to allow the vote to be taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think the rules say, Mr. Speaker, that 
the request for stacking must be done prior to the vote. That’s 
been done. Having said that, and you may argue that 
technicality, Mr. Speaker, but let’s look at this in a practical 
sense, and the first application . . . the first application of the 
rule . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
Allow the hon. member to speak on the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On the first opportunity to apply this 
rule, Mr. Speaker, they get in a big tiff about whether or not it’s 
absolutely, you know, in order. I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that if the member for Quill Lakes was out with his drought 
committee today and they wanted to stack the vote, who would 
act in his stead? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The House Leader is always 
paramount; the House Leader is the chief whip, Mr. Speaker. 
The House Leader is always the chief whip, and that’s always 
the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, let’s take a look . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Order. Order. 
Order. The hon. member has a right to speak to the point of 
order, and I recognize him now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Let’s take a look at what we’re voting 
on, Mr. Speaker. What we’re voting on, Mr. Speaker, is the first 
reading of a Bill that is necessary to come before this House as 
a result of Bill 5 of the last session — one that they fought 
against at length because there would be no opportunity to 
debate those changes in the House. Now they have an 
opportunity and they don’t want to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point to be made, Mr. Speaker, is that the House Leader on 
either side of the House is always the chief whip, and that has 
for ever been that way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe that I’ve heard the 
arguments clearly from each side, and I don’t know if it would 
serve any further purpose to have further debate on the issue. 
 
I’ve heard the argument from the member from the North East, 
and I’ve also heard the response of the Deputy  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1849 
 
 

Premier, and I have given the matter considerable consideration 
under the circumstances. And I believe that the intent of the 
deferral of the vote was clearly evident, and therefore I rule that 
the deferral is in order and we will go to the next . . . (inaudible) 
. . . 
 

Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I 
wonder if you could have leave of the Assembly for an 
introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a legendary figure in the field of folk music in North 
America. Bruce Phillips, who’s sitting in your gallery, 
otherwise known as Utah Phillips, is well known throughout the 
artistic community in North America for continuing a singing 
tradition carried on by people like Woody Guthrie and Pete 
Seeger and other noted performers — people who sing of the 
songs of the people, songs of toil and struggle, and songs of 
their countries. 
 
Mr. Phillips will be performing at the Regina Folk Festival and 
other places in the province. I might say that Mr. Phillips is also 
a . . . takes a keen interest in politics; he was a former 
vice-presidential candidate in the 1968 election. He stood with 
the Peace and Freedom Party in 1968 and received, I think, the 
third highest number of votes in that election for the position of 
vice-president. 
 
I’d like all members of the legislature to welcome Mr. Phillips 
here, and I know he enjoyed the goings-on of a few moments 
ago and takes a keen interest in that kind of activity. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 44 — An Act to 
amend The Department of Finance Act, 1983 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’re dealing with item 
no. 1. It was so noisy over on the other side because  

of the . . . (inaudible) . . . but it’s Bill No. 44, and I want just to 
make a couple of comments in respect to it. 
 
A couple of my colleagues spoke on it the other day when I was 
out discussing the crisis with the drought in south-western 
Saskatchewan, and not a lot more needs to be said in respect to 
this amendment to the finance Act, only to say clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, that if this government, if this government respected 
this institution, if this government respected the legislation 
governing them, then we would have no problem with this 
modest amendment because in essence it has been followed in 
the past. 
 
But I just want to say that the auditor’s report . . . and as the 
opposition has been clearly indicating throughout, that this 
government and indeed the Minister of Finance, which 
represents one of the highest offices in that government, has 
indicated no respect either for the legislature, for the office of 
the auditor, and for the people of this province. And I think that 
to amend the Act so that there will be no special warrants being 
reported in respect to an interim supply Bill is a retrograde, 
having regard to the actions of this government. 
 
And indeed we never know when a finance Bill . . . the Minister 
of Finance is likely to bring down his budget. One year it may 
be in the middle of June; next year, if it strikes him, he may 
bring it down in the end of March. Whenever it tickles his fancy 
or it seems to satisfy the political aspirations of his party, then 
he will proceed. 
 
But I therefore indicate that if this government was up front, 
respected the people of this province, followed the traditions of 
providing a budget in a meaningful time of the year rather than 
at their own timetable, that we would go along with this 
particular amendment. 
 
But in view of the fact and the actions of the government, while 
it’s not a major change, I just want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, 
that we are not prepared to support the amendment. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 50 — An Act 
respecting the Control of Distribution and the Consumption 
of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 
the outset of my remarks I would like to indicate that I am 
pleased to enter the debate on this piece of legislation, Bill 50. I 
have read the Bill with some care, and I have noticed the 
minister’s remarks on introduction and I’m pleased to have the 
opportunity to respond to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, Bill 50, I 
believe fails in two major areas. The first are of concern to 
members of the opposition is the central policy that allows for 
the privatization of Saskatchewan’s liquor stores. And the 
second concern that members on this side of the House have, 
Mr. Speaker, is the fact that it uses an excessive amount of 
regulations, taking out of statute  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1850 
 
 

regulations that could be and we believe should be debated in 
this legislature, and moving them to the cabinet in the Executive 
Council. 
 
(1500) 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not uncommon for this 
government, and hasn’t been uncommon for this government in 
any legislation that they’ve been introducing, or the majority of 
it, certainly the vast majority — to move from statute to 
regulation. 
 
And I want to say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve talked 
with a number of people throughout this province who will be 
affected by this new Bill. I’ve spoken with people who work in 
the industry. I’ve spoken with hoteliers, small-business people 
in this province, who have some concerns with this kind of 
legislation; and I’ve spoken as well with the people of the 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) who are 
employed by the liquor stores. 
 
I said before that two areas of concern we have is, one, that it 
refers to franchising, which is just another word for 
privatization, and the excessive use of regulation. And I would 
like to deal, if I could, with franchising first. 
 
And we see some problems with this legislation in terms of 
privatization of the liquor stores. And I will be asking the 
minister in some detail when this Bill is in third reading, as we 
go through it clause by clause, just what the ramifications of the 
Bill are, because I’m afraid in some cases it’s very unclear as to 
just what will be the outcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my concern is that privatization may mean loss of 
government revenues. And as I go through the list of pay-outs 
from the Liquor Board that have gone to revenue in the 
province since 1982, we see consistent profits. In ’82, 49 
million; in ’83, 110 million; in ’84, $79 million; in ’85, $71 
million’ in ’86, 84, and so on up until 1988 the pay-out was 
122.5 million — a total of $805 million since 1982. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m going to be asking of 
the minister with this privatization move or franchising, as the 
Bill refers to it, how they’re going to involve one more person 
in this retail transaction, allow this person to make a particular 
gross margin of profit, which all businesses have to make, how 
they’re going to involve this extra person and still maintain the 
revenue levels that . . . I know we are a little tender about it, all 
of us, but the fact is that revenue from liquor stores does go into 
general revenue, and is turned into doing some very worthwhile 
things in this province. 
 
And I want to know from the minister how he’s going to inject 
this new person in and still maintain the revenue levels. I don’t 
think it’s clear because, Mr. Speaker, business people are in the 
business to make money, and the way they make money is by 
upcharging on what their cost is. Different businesses, of 
course, have different gross margins of profit — we all 
understand that — but I think the minister has a responsibility 
to indicate how you inject this other person in and maintain the 
same retail price you have. 

Or are you going to work at it from the other end? And that’s 
what I’d like to ask the minister. Is it going to be on the backs 
of the working people once again that these privatization moves 
are thrust? There are some very worthwhile jobs in the liquor 
stores, and people are feeding their families and buying homes 
and buying cars, and I think for the most part, they’re making 
reasonable salaries. 
 
And my question to the minister will be, Mr. Speaker: are we 
going to be looking at $4.50 an hour part-time jobs? Is that 
where this profit will come from? Because you see, the 
members on this side of the House aren’t clear just where this 
revenue’s going to come from. 
 
The money certainly won’t just jump out of a hat or out of the 
air. It’s going to have to come from profits for these new 
business people or wherever they come from — we’re not sure 
of that. And it’s going to have to be gained somewhere, and I 
think the minister has a responsibility to indicate where that 
might come from. 
 
What I think concerns me as much as anything, Mr. Speaker, is 
the fact that it’s another ideologically motivated move, and I’m 
afraid it’ll not only cost the people of this province hundreds of 
millions of dollars — it certainly has the potential to — but I’m 
also afraid that it’s going to impose more hurt on Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, as I go through the list and the litany of 
privatization in this province since this government has 
embarked on that particular plan, I’ve seen the hurt of 
Saskatchewan families and I’ve seen the loss of revenue 
opportunities. I’ve seen the loss of job opportunities for 
Saskatchewan’s people. And I’ve seen this government embark 
upon these privatization moves, caring little about the 
province’s future or the people who live in it. 
 
And in speaking to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to cite some 
examples of privatization we’ve seen. The privatization of the 
school-based dental plan has cost hundreds of jobs for 
Saskatchewan people and a lot of hurt on their families. 
 
The privatization of SED Systems — some 70 jobs gone, just 
disappeared. And I don’t think that those are forms of 
privatization, frankly, that this government or the members on 
that side of the House would want to be proud of. 
 
The privatization of SaskPower has caused sharp utility 
increases and will in the future cause more. And that’s not a 
record of privatization that they should be proud of either. 
 
Privatization of our provincial parks has caused increased rates. 
Service is no longer uniform as they might have been; caused 
people to stay out of our province because of the increased 
rates, caused our lower income people to stay at home because 
they can’t afford to utilize our own resources in this province. 
Another form of privatization that I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
the members on this side of the House deplore. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1851 
 
 

And it’s going to be questions of this nature that I will be asking 
the minister. And I would want to say there should be answers 
available to these questions as well. 
 
The privatization of Sask Minerals, a little company, a little 
Saskatchewan company that made money every year since 
1946; generated revenue that we used to build our schools and 
our hospitals and our roads — sold, gone. Profits now go to 
Ontario and Quebec. Another form of privatization this Bill 
refers to as franchising. But frankly, Mr. Speaker, it’s little 
more than this Tory government’s ideological bent towards 
unloading the assets of this province to whoever, whenever, and 
for how much ever. 
 
I’ll cite another example. SaskCOMP — past five years, 16 
million profit — privatized. Piratized, my colleague, the 
member from Moose Jaw says. But where did it go? Where did 
it go, Mr. Speaker? To friend of this government, friends of this 
govern. Yet another example of friends of the PC Party lining 
their pockets at the expense of Saskatchewan’s people. 
 
It makes it awfully difficult to support legislation put forth by 
this government when you know full well it’s going to hurt 
Saskatchewan people and future Saskatchewan generations. 
 
I can cite more examples, and the list goes on. It’s difficult, 
indeed I would say it’s almost impossible to find one form of 
privatization that has been a benefit to the people of this 
province. Saskoil, within six months, six months of 
privatization or piratization or franchization or whatever you 
want to term it, within six months, Mr. Speaker, 25 per cent of 
the work-force of that company were no longer working in 
Saskatchewan, at least not for Saskoil. 
 
The Highways department, since 1982, has lost 300 people — 
300 people that served our province by building roads. Gone — 
$40 million worth of Highways equipment privatized. Aha, but 
a good deal, they may say. The Finance minister may be able to 
come up with a rationale for calling this a good deal. I’m afraid 
I can’t, because when you unload $40 million worth of 
equipment for $6 million, it tells me that that form of 
privatization isn’t proper. 
 
SaskPower, privatization, drag-lines, coal-mines, gas reserves, 
all of the profit side of the company privatized — gone, 
finished, done. What happens to utility rates? Massive increases 
like we’ve never seen in this province. This form of 
government, Mr. Speaker, and this form of privatization and 
this form of piratization and this form of legislation can’t be 
accepted in this province. 
 
It’s enough that we lose the asset base, but the lost jobs and the 
effect on our economy of those good paying jobs has been 
devastating. The small business community knows the effects, 
knows the feeling of people with no disposable income in their 
communities. They know what it’s like to have what used to be 
a good customer come in and perhaps buy a car every three 
years, walk by and look at the cars, kick the tires, but that’s all 
they can afford because they’ve run through their 
unemployment insurance and they’re now on social assistance. 
And they know those hurts, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, my due apologies to the 
member from Prince Albert. I would beg leave to introduce 
some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the 
legislature, 21 students from the Rama School in Rama, grades 
2, 3 and 4. They are located in your gallery. They are 
accompanied by teacher, Mrs. Prychak; chaperons Christine 
Dyky, Bev Prychak, Darlene Shewchuk, and their bus driver, 
Lydia Sliva. 
 
I would just like to inform the students that we are now in 
second reading debate of Bill No. 50, and the opposition is 
expressing some of their concerns about the Bill. This is all part 
of the process in passing legislation. 
 
I would like to welcome you to Regina. I hope your visit to 
Regina is interesting and educational. I hope your bus ride in 
wasn’t too hot, and I look forward to meeting with you later 
after your visit, for some refreshments and pictures. Welcome 
to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
welcome the students to the legislature and I hope their 
afternoon is enjoyable. It’s cooler in here than it is out here, I 
know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was speaking about the effects on the families, 
of many different examples of privatization in the province. 
And if we look around ourselves, I ask you, is that the kind of a 
society we want? Do we want a Saskatchewan that’s based on 
$4.50 an hour part-time wages? 
 
And I ask any member on that side if that’s why they would 
want for their families. I ask if they would like that standard of 
living and that kind of life-style. Because, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 
will allow for many Saskatchewan families who are now 
employed in those liquor stores to be working for $4.50 an 
hour. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in my conversations with 
them, they are asking the New Democrat caucus on this side of 
the House to oppose this form of privatization, this franchising 
that this government has so blindly embarked upon. But why, 
Mr. Speaker, why this privatization, why this franchising? 
 
Well look at the record of this government. Who benefits by 
privatization under their hands? Who are the  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1852 
 
 

benefactors of liquidating government assets to their private 
sectors? Who’s been benefitting? You can ask yourself, and it’s 
easy to answer. 
 
There’s a small few people in Saskatchewan, and many other 
people outside of the boundaries of this province, who have 
benefitted economically to the tune of millions and hundreds of 
millions of dollars of Saskatchewan’s hard-earned, hard-earned, 
hard-earned money. Loyalty to the PC Party is what dictates 
who benefits by privatization. Loyalty to the PC Party dictates 
how much they benefit. And the examples can be cited from 
one end of this province to the other, from former presidents of 
the PC Party to former cabinet ministers. That’s the litany that 
they’ve left and that’s why people are so sceptical of 
privatization and franchization or whatever you want to call it 
in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because people aren’t expecting that the Executive Council of 
this government will allow fair and open and honest tendering 
and fair pricing, and the ministers are well aware of that. The 
back-benchers are well aware of that because I know when they 
go home they get the same kind of flack and the same kind of 
comments that members on this side of the House hear, that 
there is no fair tendering in Saskatchewan any longer, that it’s 
based on who you are and who you know and how long you’ve 
been a member of the PC Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the patronage in Saskatchewan, under this 
administration, has been unmatched in Canada and I want to say 
that the fear is that this is just another example of this 
government creating an opportunity for their friends to put their 
noses in the trough. Hiring practices — the same. And this 
privatization or franchization will allow nothing but an 
opportunity for yet more Tory hacks to have their nose in the 
trough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to another issue raised in this Bill. 
I’ve spoken with a number of rural hoteliers who are having a 
very difficult time economically. They’re having a tough time 
staying in business and they’ve come to the government with 
suggestions as to how you can alleviate their financial 
difficulties. They’ve talked with the opposition members and 
they’ve talked with the government side as well. 
 
But I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill does little to 
dispel the fears that they have. The aspects and the areas that 
they wanted some movement on have either not been addressed 
or they’ve been moved to regulation where the minister, at his 
own particular whim, can make changes that will either benefit 
or be of detriment to the rural hoteliers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they wanted population ratios maintained, so that 
their already marginal businesses could go on, and so that they 
wouldn’t be competing with business after business after 
business. 
 
And they wanted guest-room requirements maintained. Over 
the years they’ve kept guest-rooms in some areas as a 
prerequisite to having a liquor licence in a small town, and 
those room ratios have cost them lots of money and lots of 
profits over the years. And now with the whim of this cabinet 
and the whim of this minister, you want to  

wipe all of that out, open up competition so that there’s liquor 
licences and liquor retailers in every corner, and all at the 
expense of the rural hoteliers. And they ask you, Mr. Speaker, 
they ask this government for a system of off-sale in which the 
price of beer in hotels and liquor stores were the same. That, I 
believe, has been addressed, but I want to say to you, it’s not 
enough, because they’re looking for a system that would 
guarantee them the vast majority of off-sale beer in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What have you done? You’ve eliminated the population ratios, 
which was one of their fears; gotten rid of the guest-room 
requirements; removed the limit on the number of licence 
issued from the Act — where it was in statute and where, if it 
was going to be changed, would have to be done in this forum 
— you’ve moved that into regulation where it can be changed 
by the whim of a dozen cabinet ministers around a table. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I believe a lot of the 
hoteliers in rural Saskatchewan feel betrayed. You’ve unbridled 
the competition, and I say that some of these small hoteliers 
can’t afford that. they can’t afford yet more competition. There 
have been so many changes in rural Saskatchewan, in terms of 
the make-up of the small communities; and the hub of those 
small communities, in lots of cases, was the local hotel. Instead 
of looking at a liquor Act that would tend to repopulate rural 
Saskatchewan, where has this government gone? Where has this 
minister gone? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are going to do; drag them back to 
small towns . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — He’s gone to a system that will create 
depopulation of rural Saskatchewan. And the Deputy Premier 
says, what are we going to do, drag people to rural 
Saskatchewan? No, you don’t drag people to rural 
Saskatchewan. You create policies and program, and you 
design a vision so that people will be able to make their livings 
in rural Saskatchewan in those small hotels, and in those small 
towns. 
 
And I’d like to as well, Mr. Speaker, turn to another issue which 
is raised by this Act. The Bill is an example of the government 
saying one thing and doing another. There was much fanfare 
about the Whitespruce treatment centre, and on this initiative, I 
would indicate that I applaud this government’s actions because 
there is a need for that kind of a facility in Saskatchewan. On 
that side, you talk about the family and the Saskatchewan 
family and this Tory government being the protectors of the 
Saskatchewan family, but when you look at the other side of 
that Tory mouth, you see Bill 50. 
 
And what does Bill 50 do? Privatizing liquor stores, which is 
inevitably going to cause more liquor advertising, and 
inevitably retailers will get into price wars. And there’s going to 
be competition to decrease the price of alcohol, and they’re 
going to be scrapping to get their share of what is a shrinking 
market and what we all hope is a shrinking market. So on one 
side you have a treatment centre for drug and alcohol abuse, and 
in Bill 50 what are you doing? You’re setting up competition. 
You’re setting up a scenario for more advertising. You’re 
setting up a scenario for more young people abusing or using 
alcohol. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1853 
 
 

This government has a problem with credibility, and this kind 
of legislation does nothing but enhance that. The effect of this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, clearly shows to Saskatchewan people that 
this government’s rhetoric about the importance of the family is 
nothing but empty words. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I know some of the 
members on that side of the House agree with me and agree 
with my party and agree with my analysis of what privatization 
of liquor stores is going to do. And I know who they are. And 
I’ve got a question to those members. Are they going to vote 
with their conscience, or are they going to vote with this 
government? 
 
I know they went through this problem one time before when 
this government allowed liquor advertising in this province, but 
you’re not only talking selling liquor through the media right 
now — and print. What you’re telling is . . . what you’re saying 
to the people of this province is that you’re going to open up the 
number of retail outlets for booze. What you’re saying is you’re 
going to create a situation where the competition is going to 
decrease the price. What you’re saying is that there is going to 
be more availability to young people to consume and purchase 
alcohol in this province. 
 
And I’m asking the members on that side of the House if 
they’re going to vote with their conscience or if they’re going to 
vote with this caucus, because those are their choices. You vote 
for the PC Party and the members of this caucus or you vote for 
what you know is right, you vote against this Bill. 
 
And I’m challenging the member for Moosomin and 
Rosetown-Elrose, and the member from Rosthern. And I want 
to ask the member from Rosthern specifically where he’s going 
to be on this Bill, because my community borders his, and I 
know the background of a lot of people in that particular 
constituency. I know how they’re feeling about this kind of 
legislation, and I want to know if he’s going to vote with his 
church, with his conscience, or if he’s going to vote with his 
party. 
 
And I’m going to be asking it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll 
mention them again. The member for Moosomin, you’ve got a 
responsibility. Is it going to be your conscience you vote with 
or is it going to be this corrupt and misled government? 
 
And the member in cabinet, the member from Rosetown-Elrose 
— who are you going to support, Mr. Minister? And what are 
you going to say to your friends and to your neighbours and the 
people that I know you associate with at home? Who are you 
going to be supporting? Are you going to be supporting lower 
liquor prices, more outlets, competition, more advertising of 
alcoholic beverages? Or are you going to support what you 
know in your heart is right? Are you going to vote against this 
legislation that will enhance all the opportunities in the world 
for young people to consume alcohol and have it more and 
more available? On one hand you applaud this government, and 
I do too, for setting up a drug and alcohol rehabilitation centre. 
But the same week you open it up, are you going to be  

supporting this kind of legislation? 
 
I know these are difficult questions for you, and legislators face 
difficult questions sometime. But if you’ve got any effect on 
what goes on, and if there’s any chance for this minister to 
propose some amendments that may make this new liquor Act 
for palatable to you, I’m asking you to do it. If you find that that 
can’t happen, and that minister is hell-bent on putting this Bill 
50 through as it is now, then I’m asking you to vote against this 
Bill with the NDP caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I say to those members that this Bill is 
going to indicate what you stand for. And I’m telling you that 
they aren’t going to accept you ducking out and not voting on 
this Bill; they’re going to expect you to be in here and taking a 
stand. And you’re going to be counted, and you’re going to be 
recognized by members of this side of the House and by your 
colleagues and by the people of this province. The people of 
your church and the people of your communities, they’ll be 
recognizing your position. 
 
And I say to you that you’ve got two options: you either vote 
for this legislation and against your people and against your 
constituents, or you support the New Democrats on this side of 
the House. 
 
And there’s another reason that I would want to say that all 
members, not only the ones I’ve singled out, but all members of 
this caucus should be voting against this legislation, and it’s 
because they’re circumventing the role of this legislature by 
moving statutory pieces of legislation that were in the old Act. 
And I’m not saying there shouldn’t have been some 
amendments, but you can’t govern by regulation and you can’t 
govern by cabinet. 
 
(1530) 
 
The British parliamentary system allows for an inner cabinet — 
we know that — but it also allows for members from each 
constituency in every jurisdiction in every corner of this 
province, to carry the feelings of the people of their ridings into 
this legislature and debate them open and fairly. But in this Bill 
you’re moving everything out of this place. You’re moving it 
into the cabinet table and into the cabinet room, and I say it’s 
not healthy. And I’m not only saying that because it’s a PC 
government. That kind of legislation isn’t healthy for anybody 
to govern with in a democracy. 
 
And I say to you, if the members on that side of the House 
believe in democracy and fairness and accountability — which 
are all of the things I heard them campaign on in 1982 — if 
they believe in those things, then they’ll say, as well, we can’t 
support this legislation. 
 
I say, by moving all of these regulations into legislation . . . all 
these statutes into regulation, it’s just another indication of an 
undemocratic power grab by an uncaring and an old and a 
worn-out PC government because they’re afraid to face this 
forum. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1854 
 
 

Why would you want, Mr. Speaker, and why would the minister 
want to move all of these statutes into legislation? Is he afraid 
to make some changes without bringing them to the House? 
What are the changes? What are the motives? Where does he 
want to go with this Act? How much power does he have to 
consolidate to cabinet in order to be satisfied? 
 
You can go through the end of this particular Bill on pages 56 
and 57, and there’s things that they’ve put into regulation that I 
have no idea what they might mean. And I would suggest to 
you that many legal minds wouldn’t know what the intent are. 
And I say, it’s frightening; it’s a frightening piece of work. 
 
I believed when the outset of this debate started that I would be 
able to sit down with people affected — the employees, the 
people who own small hotels — and then I’d be able to sit 
down with this minister and share with him the concerns that 
they have. And I thought that this government would be decent 
enough to address the concerns and to care about the workers 
and to care about Saskatchewan’s young people as they 
introduce this new liquor Act. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was wrong on every 
count — wrong on every count because this government is 
worn, they’re tired, they’re afraid to listen to the people. 
They’re out of touch. They’re uncaring, and it’s a sad 
commentary on what should be a fairly young government. 
Governments don’t normally get old in five or six years as 
yours has done. But this one is worn out; it’s tired. It’s time for 
a change. It’s time for a new Premier, a new cabinet that will 
develop some decent policies for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the introduction of 
this Bill, Bill 50, shows that the government is afraid to have its 
actions examined. They can’t bring things to the forefront as a 
good government, a decent government should, but instead they 
slither behind closed cabinet doors allowing themselves the 
power to do just basically whatever they want. 
 
When they get into a little bit of a problem and they know 
there’s some legislation that needs changing, oh, you throw in a 
Bill. All the things that are in statute, that normally would 
concern a decent government, are put in statute so that they can 
be brought to the House, and if amended they’re done in the 
House — not this government, not this crew. 
 
When I go through the list of regulations, I’ve come upon a half 
a dozen here that are just vitally important to either a good piece 
of legislation, or a total, absolute power grab through these, I 
want to say to the minister, and if he was here I’d tell him. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: Order. Members aren’t to make reference 
to members’ absence or . . . absent or present in the House. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to  

apologize. I understand that rule and I apologize to the member. 
But he’ll be here a long time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
we’re going to be going through this clause by clause. And he’ll 
have plenty of opportunity to spend with me as we go through 
these, and I ask them what the results are going to be to this 
particular regulation, what he’s going to implement in terms of 
this regulation. 
 
I want to ask him if he’s consulted, and I want to know what the 
response has been from the working people. I want to know 
what the response has been from the church groups. I want to 
know what the response has been from the hotel association. 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this Bill isn’t 
going to pass until we’re satisfied with all of the answers that 
I’ve just asked here. 
 
And the minister will know that we’re very serious about 
controlling this Bill 50 because it’s a devastating piece of 
legislation for the young people, and I believe it can be 
devastating piece of work for the families of Saskatchewan. I 
believe it can be a devastating piece of work for the workers 
and those in the industry, the small hoteliers. And unless we get 
the answers that’ll satisfy us on this side of the House, we’ll be 
asking questions for an awful long time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said before, I would like to support 
this legislation, but this kind of work we can’t. And in its 
present form I couldn’t support it on second reading nor on 
third. 
 
And I’ll be asking that my colleagues will be allowed to make 
some comments on this Bill. And if the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley is willing to make some amendments that will 
satisfy the needs and the concerns of the families of this 
province, and the business people and the working people, then 
perhaps we’ll be able to support it in its final reading. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, as it stands now, it’s unacceptable 
to members on this side of the House, and I believe it’s 
unacceptable to the general public of this province, and for that 
reason, as it is, I’ll be opposing this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hesitated in standing. I 
assumed a government member would be standing to address 
second reading of this Bill, to at least address the many 
concerns that have just been raised by my colleague from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
I am surprised that no government member rose to speak in this 
debate. That indicates something to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
ought to indicate something to the people of Saskatchewan 
when no member of this government will stand in this House 
and defend this piece of legislation. We want to know why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We want to know why. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my intention this afternoon is to bring a 
few brief remarks to this debate and then ask leave of the House 
to adjourn the debate because there are a  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1855 
 
 

great many people in Saskatchewan who will be concerned 
about this legislation and who will want sufficient time to 
consider it and its implications, particularly the implication of 
the franchising, the privatization of liquor sales in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can very quickly identify, very 
quickly identify 800 to at least 1,000 people who have some 
real concerns about this. They were people that gathered north 
of Yorkton just a week ago. 
 
I find it rather ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the very week 
this government opens the Whitespruce youth Drug and 
Alcohol Treatment Centre, the very same week that 
Whitespruce is given its grand opening, it introduces in this 
House this piece of liquor legislation. I find that very ironic, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And according to reports we’ve read, there were 800 to a 
thousand people at the opening of Whitespruce. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, those are people that are concerned not just 
about the use of alcohol in this province, but its abuse, and they 
were there that day because they were concerned. And in people 
that I met at that gathering, when I indicated that this 
government was about to privatize and franchise out liquor 
sales in this province, I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were 
very concerned, and they want to know what’s going on. They 
want a chance to think about this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are we here talking about a liquor outlet 
on every street corner in Saskatchewan? Is that what we’re 
talking about? Are we going to see off-sale in pizza parlours? 
Are we going to see off-sale on the corner confectionery? Is that 
what we’re going to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Are we going to 
see a liquor outlet on every street corner in Saskatchewan? This 
is the government that consistently claims to be the defender of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you well know and I well know that one 
of the issues of greatest concern to Saskatchewan families is 
drug and alcohol abuse — particularly, in our province, alcohol 
abuse. It affects Saskatchewan young people; it affects their 
parents. 
 
The Premier of our province at the opening of Whitespruce said 
to the assembled guests that he considered alcohol and drug 
abuse in this province to be in comparison with the current 
drought situation. He said that’s the extent of the problem in our 
province. There are few things on which the Premier and I 
agree, but on this we may well agree. There are few things that 
this government has done that I would congratulate them for, 
one of the exceptions being the Whitespruce treatment centre. 
 
The very same week we opened Whitespruce, we get liquor 
legislation in this House that’ll just open it wide up across the 
province. A liquor store on ever corner — is that what we’re 
going to have? Is that what we’re headed for, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Well that’s what Saskatchewan people are asking — 
people concerned about alcohol abuse in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to ensure that there is  

some time for people involved with PRIDE (Parent Resources 
Institute for Drug Education) and SADD (Students Against 
Drinking and Driving), people involved with the prevention and 
treatment of alcohol abuse, for people involved in the churches 
who have traditionally had a concern in this regard. I want them 
to have time to consider this legislation, to reflect on it, and to 
have their concerns be raised. 
 
And so with that in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would beg 
leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 41 — An Act 
to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 62 — An Act 
respecting Securities in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, this piece of legislation 
that’s come before us, An Act respecting Securities in 
Saskatchewan, is 165 pages long. It’s a very big Bill, a very 
technical Bill. It’s a Bill that we discussed, members of the 
opposition discussed, with the members of the Securities 
Commission in an overview the other day. We were promised 
in writing an explanation of the legislation, and I’m hoping that 
that explanation will come to us prior to discussing this further 
in Committee of the Whole, because it is a technical Bill, and 
also because it’s a Bill that has behind it the concerns of many 
people in Saskatchewan who have been investors in securities 
in this province. 
 
It is a Bill which repeals The Investment Contracts Act, a piece 
of legislation that came under great scrutiny here in the 
legislature last session with the collapse of Principal Group and 
the problems that came to the depositors of First Investors and 
Associated Investors. Six thousand seven hundred people in 
Saskatchewan lost, very often, their life savings with the 
collapse of those two companies, and so there are many people 
who will be watching to see what this legislation says in terms 
of providing security for the future so that that sort of collapse 
can’t happen again. And I’m afraid, if they’re looking for that 
sort of security, this kind of legislation doesn’t offer it, and I 
will explain this in more detail in my remarks that are . . . that I 
have many points I want to make on it. 
 
I do want to emphasize, though, that we were told that there 
were between 3,000 and 4,000 people affected by the collapse 
of First Investors and Associated Investors. It is 6,700 people. 
 
(1545) 
 
This is a particular kind of legislation that affects the buyers and 
the sellers of investments. It’s like The  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1856 
 
 

Residential Tenancies Act, which affects landlords and tenants. 
It’s not a piece of legislation, as my colleague from Regina 
Centre said, that’s going to be fought up and down this province 
because it affects a majority of people all over the place, but it 
does affect people in a very specific way. And because it affects 
people who invest their life savings, their financial support, 
their financial securities, it is a piece of legislation that I think 
we have to take some time to discuss. 
 
Now there’s several points that I wanted to make, as I’ve said. 
One of the things that this piece of legislation proposes to do, 
according to the minister who introduced it yesterday, was, it’s 
the goal of the securities regulators to protect the members of 
the public who invest in securities, and hence through a 
legislative framework create a market-place in which the public 
has confidence. 
 
Well those are good words, Mr. Speaker, but they are words 
that have to be supported with substantive regulations and 
substantive support for the securities commission which 
administers this kind of legislation. 
 
We can talk about protecting the public good; we can talk about 
being concerned about the investors, but unless we put in place 
legislation that’s going to be strong, with a system of 
administration that’s going to be strong, we will end up with a 
lot of hot air and rhetoric — which is fairly typical of the 
government opposite — but without the substantive 
enforcement mechanisms that is necessary in order to see that 
such legislation is enforced. 
 
It’s also a piece of legislation, as I’ve said earlier, that tries to 
balance between the buyers and the sellers of these investment 
contracts — protection of the public and protection of the 
investors. Now if you’re talking about investors with a whole 
lot of money, you’re talking about people who know their way 
around the market-place. But the securities are very often 
offered to people who, as I’ve said already, have a small 
amount of money or who have their life savings — they’ve sold 
their farm, and they want to put it into something that’s going to 
get an ongoing return for their money — but that money is their 
livelihood. That is their total amount of money that they own. 
 
And from the letters that I received when I was critic of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, I know that from First 
Investors and Associated Investors there were many people who 
lost everything. These were people . . . I have one member in 
my constituency who cleaned buildings for 30 years — and I’ve 
mentioned this in the House before. She managed to save 
$11,000, and she’s lost it, except for a third that she got back. 
But the rest of it is gone, and she’s heartsick. 
 
I have a pensioner, a woman who came from England, who 
brought with her the money that she was left from her 
husband’s estate. She invested that in Principal Group, and 
when we found her situation, she was living on just $30 left of 
all her money that she had remaining to her. 
 
It’s these kinds of people who deserve strong protection, Mr. 
Speaker. They deserve legislation that’s going to  

really ensure security. A lot of words won’t do it. A lot of 
rhetoric won’t do it. A large technical Bill, even if it doesn’t . . . 
if it doesn’t have the support behind it in terms of staff and 
investigators, will not do it. And my concern is that the 
securities commission will not have the staff and the resources 
to oversee this Bill. 
 
Now one of my reasons for my concern is that when we met 
with the securities commission staff and the chairman of 
securities commission, he admitted to me that this legislation in 
his office would be regulating, in detail, the securities that are 
started up in Saskatchewan, that are Saskatchewan based. 
 
But when we look at securities that are nationally offered, or 
offered from other provinces, the chairman of the securities 
commission admitted that in the past, and even with this 
legislation, the securities commission will be doing no more 
than rubber-stamping them because they don’t have the 
resources to research the legislation, but they approve them 
anyway. 
 
Now that’s what we had with First Investors and Associated 
Investors. Their primary jurisdiction was Alberta. Alberta said 
that they could sell in Alberta, and Saskatchewan apparently 
rubber-stamped them, even though in The Investment Contracts 
Act they were to be supervised by the Superintendent of 
Insurance, and people from the department were to look at it in 
detail and make sure, for example, that financial reports were 
submitted annually, and that those financial reports actually said 
what they said they were doing. They should have been read by 
the Superintendent of Insurance, and they should have been 
understood by the Superintendent of Insurance. 
 
But there’s an admission . . . first of all, The Investment 
Contracts Act is now out. It’s all under the securities 
commission, and there’s an admission from the securities 
commission that they don’t have the resources, that what they’ll 
be doing is rubber-stamping anything from another jurisdiction. 
That has to remain a primary concern because securities will be 
sold in this province that are questionable, that need to be really 
looked at in detail by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now one of the purposes for this Act is to bring it in line with 
the securities Acts of other province. And again, the chairman 
of the securities commission told us that this was to harmonize 
the legislation across the country. Now “harmonize” worries 
me, because we know the jurisdictions in other provinces run 
also by PC governments. 
 
There’s a bottom line in terms of protection of the public — a 
bottom line, a minimum amount that’s done, and a lot of 
exemptions and a lot of turning their backs on practices that 
may be questionable. And nothing demonstrates it more than 
the Principal Group inquiry going on in Alberta over these 
many months. It’s gone on far longer than initially it was 
expected to. It’s been well covered in The Globe and Mail and 
the Alberta papers. It’s now being covered here in 
Saskatchewan since the president of the company, Mr. Cormie, 
is on the stand, and we’re beginning to get more information 
about just how weak this particular company was and the way 
in  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1857 
 
 

which the government in Alberta was questioning it and being 
reassured that things would be fine and then the company being 
allowed to continue to sell securities. 
 
That’s the Alberta method of doing it. In Saskatchewan I would 
have hoped that we would have taken the concerns of our 
investors — our farmers that retire and want an ongoing income 
and were buying into investment contracts and other securities, 
people who were widowed and left a bit of money, other people 
who managed over the years to save up some money for their 
retirement, perhaps thinking that they would take early 
retirement. Again I have constituents who’ve done that; worked 
hard, put their money aside hoping that they could leave work 
early and, as they so eloquently expressed it to me, leave their 
jobs for someone who is younger, who could come in into their 
footsteps and take over the work that they were doing and they 
would have enough savings to take early retirement. 
 
These are the people who’ve been hurt. They were hurt by the 
way in which Alberta regulated their investment contracts and 
their securities. I’m afraid with the harmonizing across the 
country that there may be a bottom line, a very weak protection 
for the investors and for the consumers. And I haven’t had an 
opportunity to get in writing an explanation of the Bill. It’s 
technical, it’s long, it’s very difficult to read it when you’re a 
person without a law background as I am. But I’m a person 
who’s listened hard to the investors or depositors with First 
Investors and Associated Investors over the period of time that I 
was critic for Consumer and Commercial Affairs. I’ve been to 
many of their meetings and I know just how worried they are 
about the kinds of legislation that’s put in place and the way in 
which they’re protected. 
 
And I think that we have to recognize, as legislators, that people 
count on us to regulate carefully and that if they buy something 
that’s regulated by the government that they will be safe. And 
they have discovered, the 6,700 people who invested in FIC 
(First Investors Corporation) and AIC (Associated Investors of 
Canada), have discovered that the government is not to be 
trusted. That the government wasn’t looking after their best 
interests. And they have experienced tremendous hardship as a 
result of that. And when you see a big, thick piece of legislation 
like this piece of legislation, you think, well maybe the 
government is going to take hold of this issue and help the 
people. 
 
But one wonders, one has to ask questions. We have to go 
through this Bill carefully and we have to look at the way in 
which the government admits that it doesn’t have the resources 
to do research in other areas and is rubber-stamping securities, 
and we also have to look at how they are funding the Securities 
Commission and how much support people will have to monitor 
and to regulate. 
 
Now one of the things that this piece of legislation brings in, 
according to the Deputy Premier who introduced it, is a lot of 
exemptions — exemptions for people who have a lot of money 
or companies that have a lot of money or the government who 
wants to invest in something, they will be exempt. And as soon 
as we start having exemptions, we have to ask the questions 
about how will there be a  

vigilance that people who are exempt from the legislation are 
continuing to function in the way that they committed 
themselves to when they initially received that exemption. 
 
There has to be ongoing monitoring. There has to be good 
funding of the Securities Commission so that they can 
administer this sort of thing, and so that they can look out for 
the companies that have exemptions and make sure that they are 
continuing to function within the law, and to function in order 
to keep things safe for the consumers who are investing and 
trusting in the government to have provided for their security. 
 
One of the issues again that the chairman of the Securities 
Commission pointed out to us was that this legislation allows 
for buyers of securities to go to court if there’s a 
misrepresentation in the advertising of the securities. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, you may remember that misrepresentation 
in advertising was an issue for the people who invested in First 
Investors and Associated Investors, part of the Principal Group 
collapse. Many of them brought to me documents that showed 
that there was misrepresentation in advertising, that they had 
been misled by the sales people, and they wanted some 
restitution as a result of this misrepresentation. 
 
Now it’s not enough for legislation to bring in requirements that 
the buyer can sue either the sales people or the firm, because the 
buyers are very often people with not very much money, and 
taking a company to court is very, very costly. It seems to me 
that the government should put in some guarantee that if there’s 
misrepresentation in advertising they should be prepared to go 
to court on it. 
 
Now I know that there’s that legislation under the Consumer 
and Corporate Affairs federally, but I think that if the 
government is going to bring in legislation that says the buyer 
can go to court if there’s misrepresentation in advertising, then 
they should look at some way to provide that buyer with 
government support to take the company to court. They should 
be looking after, again, the small investors, the people who are 
most likely to get hurt, because that’s what this security 
legislation has to be about. It has to be about protecting the 
people who are going to lose the most. 
 
It doesn’t say anything either about class action. And class 
action, which is something that the former minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs said was available to the 
depositors or the investors in First Investors and Associated 
Investors — class action is something she said was available. 
It’s not available in Canada. It’s not easily available. So people 
can’t get together in a group and do a class action against a 
company very easily. 
 
In order to do a class action, they had to have all been victims 
of exactly the same misrepresentation. And when the people 
from First Investors and Associated Investors got together in 
these many meetings that they had, they witnessed to the fact 
that they had all sorts of different kinds of misrepresentation. 
Some people were told one thing, some were told another, some 
were not told what they needed to be told. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1858 
 
 

And if there’s an omission of information it’s supposedly 
covered in this new legislation. But an omission of information 
will still lead somebody to costly court costs if they feel 
grieved, and we have to get away from this business of thinking 
that people have thousands of dollars to go to court. They don’t, 
and it’s up to the government to provide some more protection. 
 
There was also the question with Principal Group of fraud being 
practised in the Saskatoon office. It was investigated by the 
Securities Commission in Saskatchewan, and they made 
representation in Alberta and said they thought something 
should be done about it. They put forward to the sales people 
and to the company managers the proposition that the sales 
people should have a code of ethics that they work by. 
 
Now that was a very weak way of enforcing a charge as serious 
as fraud. The Securities Commission found there was fraud in 
the Saskatoon office. Instead of saying that the company should 
not be selling securities any longer, they decided that the sales 
people should be operating under a code of ethics and tried to 
get the company to put in place a code of ethics. 
 
(1600) 
 
Well there’s no enforcement of a code of ethics; there’s no 
regulation that says that has to be done. It was proposed on a 
voluntary basis. And then the Securities Commission turned 
their back on the problem and let the office go ahead in 
Saskatoon, selling these investment contracts by a company that 
was already bankrupt. And there was already many, many 
problems with this particular situation — problems with the 
Securities Commission in not investigating the fraud 
thoroughly; problems with the company in being allowed to go 
forward; problems with the regulations that didn’t provide the 
consumer with any support. 
 
And those are serious issues for anyone thinking that they can 
put their money aside for future enjoyment. They have to have 
better protection than what’s been afforded by this legislation. 
 
When I’m thinking about the situation with the Principal Group, 
the fraud that went forward in the Saskatoon office and wasn’t 
followed up, the misrepresentation in the advertising, the way in 
which the company operated, skating very thin around the 
edges and probably really, when you look at what’s come 
forward in the Code inquiry, really getting into seriously illegal 
activities. 
 
I remember the day that I was there at the Code inquiry, Mr. 
Speaker, and I heard one of the sales people for Principal Group 
demonstrating how that company had got hold of a 
computer-based tax information network. What it was were 
people who’d come to a particular firm seeking advice about 
their income tax. They wanted the firm to go through their 
income tax forms with them and help them fill them out. Now 
that is an activity that people do when they have a lot of money 
and a lot of complicated investments. It’s also an activity that 
people do quite often if they’re of low income and need their 
returns back quickly, or if they are people who have  

trouble understanding the complicated income tax forms. 
 
Many of the people who use an income tax service are seniors, 
people who have again, maybe worked for wage work when 
they were working and had their income tax deducted from 
their pay cheques; people who were working on the farms and 
filled out their forms in a certain way, and then when they get 
older their income is coming in in a different form. It’s coming 
in through investments, coming in through pension plans, and 
they often seek the advice of an income tax firm to find out how 
their income tax should be filled out. 
 
While many people use this particular income tax company 
which was bought up by Principal Group, and with the 
deregulation of the financial industry, this is the sort of thing 
that can happen. A financial company now, a company offering 
securities, can also buy up an income tax firm or offer advice to 
people in terms of their income using this income tax 
information to get together a series of names of people that they 
could approach to buy their investments, their securities — First 
Investors and Associated Investors but also Principal Trust, a 
trust company, and also it could very well apply to any other 
securities. 
 
The sales people were going out hustling sales from the people, 
then they knew their base income, and many of them were 
seniors. And this salesman, the day I was there at the Code 
inquiry, was demonstrating his techniques of phoning up people 
and saying that he represented the Principal Group and he 
wanted to come and talk to them about the possibility of 
investing, and he showed how — he was demonstrating to other 
sales people — how you could manipulate people to letting you 
into their homes and getting their ear in terms of selling 
securities. 
 
And it was really a shock to many people at the Code inquiry 
that day to hear the tape of the sleazy presentation of the 
sales-person who was conning the seniors into looking at 
buying their investments. That was what it really was, was 
conning. 
 
Seniors are very vulnerable to that sort of activity because, as I 
say, they have a base of income and they have to invest it in 
order to get it back on a monthly basis. They can’t afford to 
spend it all at once. They have to invest it carefully; they have 
to know how much income they have coming in every month; 
they often have to pay high rents. They have to pay high costs 
of utilities going up, heating going up, as their income becomes 
more fixed. They are the most vulnerable people. 
 
They are the people who need to be protected by this kind of 
legislation. And I want to know whether they are, and I have 
great suspicions that they aren’t. I have great suspicions. 
Because the government comes forward with a lot of rhetoric 
about helping the public, but also rhetoric about exemptions, 
rhetoric about looking after the interests of the investors, 
rhetoric about letting the market-place adjust to itself in a sort 
of jungle individualist approach. 
 
The former minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs said 
that she believed in deregulation, and that’s what this  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1859 
 
 

is all about, is really deregulating the financial industries as 
much as possible. The exemptions will be broad I’m sure, when 
we look at them in detail. And it’s part of that tendency to put 
the onus back on the individual, on the buyer, on the person 
who really is counting on this kind of legislation to give them 
protection, and it’s getting nothing except a buyer beware. 
 
Now I know that the government opposite will say that there are 
securities in this regulation, securities for the investors. But 
again if we don’t have the staff to oversee that, if we don’t have 
the administrative staff to oversee it, we’re not going to find the 
protection that really is needed. 
 
We’ve got many examples also with Pioneer Trust, of the way 
in which the Securities Commission wasn’t able to protect the 
people adequately. And I’m absolutely convinced it’s because 
there’s not enough staff with the Securities Commission, and 
because the government opposite doesn’t take this issue of 
protecting the consumer seriously. 
 
So that’s why I wanted to raise it here, speaking to this Bill in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
I look forward to the discussion, clause by clause — very large 
Bill, a lot of sections to it. I know the people who invested in 
First Investors and Associated Investors, the 6,700 
Saskatchewan people, will be people who would want a new 
Securities Act to insure that they would be protected in the 
future, and people like them. I don’t trust this government 
opposite to come forward with legislation that will do that — 
not one bit. I would speak on their behalf, though, and hope that 
there would be protection, and look forward to the discussion in 
clause by clause of this huge legislation. 
 
But I do want to put on the record my concerns, having had that 
experience of talking to people and of looking at legislation that 
said it was protecting and then ended up doing nothing, partly 
because the staff wasn’t there to do it, partly because the will of 
the government wasn’t there to enforce the legislation. And 
there’s been a lot of copping out, even of the clauses that 
existed in The Investment Contracts Act to protect people. 
 
It’s a very serious charge, Mr. Speaker, on the government, to 
come forward with legislation that would protect people. The 
people I’m talking about — the seniors, the people . . . We 
haven’t seen it here in Saskatchewan, but I know in Alberta in 
some of the senior citizens’ centres there was a concern about 
some of the seniors even perhaps committing suicide because 
they were so distressed by the loss of their livelihood and of 
their investment of money that had been saved up for 
generations in their families. 
 
People wanting to invest here in Saskatchewan will have to be 
guaranteed a protection, certainly, and therefore I wait for the 
discussion in detail of this legislation, but I put forward my 
concerns very vehemently. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre has just indicated, this 
may or may not be good legislation. I  

certainly don’t have a legal background or securities 
background to make that kind of judgement. But it will be good 
legislation or bad legislation based on the government’s 
enforcement of it. That is the key question that this side of the 
House has with respect to Bill 62, An Act respecting (the) 
Securities in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have some 165 pages of security legislation. And I want 
to say to the people of Saskatchewan that this legislation in and 
of itself is no guarantee whatsoever that they will be protected, 
unless the government has a will and a resolve to protect the 
interests of Saskatchewan people by enforcing their own 
legislation and by issuing regulations that are consistent with 
the kinds of protections that are contained in Bill 62. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the financial sector is 
becoming increasingly complex, in part because of the growth 
in communications technologies, information exchanges. And 
we know that’s it’s no problem to have securities information 
and trading to take place virtually instantaneously with 
electronic orders being placed, such that when an issue falls to a 
certain dollar value, electronically an order is triggered for that 
particular stock to be traded. 
 
We also know that in Ottawa there are presently investigations 
into the financial sector; that the Progressive Conservative 
government, federally, certainly favours deregulation of the 
financial sector. And this is under a lot of debate across the 
country whether this in fact is the kind of measures that should 
be taken. 
 
Deregulation, we believe on this side of the House, is consistent 
with the PC Party’s belief in the free rein of unbridled 
capitalism. It’s consistent with the jungle mentality, the selfish 
ethic of the strong. And it puts consumers of financial services 
and of investment services really at the prey of predatory 
practices by people who are unscrupulous. 
 
And so the point comes back again with respect to this 
securities legislation: is it going to be enforced by a government 
that favours deregulation, and favours deregulation in a way 
that allows the big players and the high rollers in the investment 
community to profiteer off those people who invest at the 
bottom end of the financial community? And I’ll have a few 
examples of that to relate in a just a few minutes. 
 
We all know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the failure to enforce 
securities regulations and securities legislation can have 
devastating effects for Saskatchewan people; that deregulation 
means lack of protection. And we’ve certainly have seen this 
with respect to the Pioneer Trust affair, which my colleague 
from Saskatoon Centre has spent some time talking about. 
 
It was P.T. Barnum, the carnival king of some years ago, that 
said a sucker is born every minute. And I say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan doesn’t have to 
be party to encouraging the suckering of people and the ripping 
off of people by a lack of enforcement of securities regulations 
and an abandoning of investors to the forces of the unbridled 
market-place and the free enterprise economy. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1860 
 
 

The second thing I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
best legislation in the world means nothing if it isn’t enforced. 
It means absolutely nothing. And this securities legislation 
affords no security if it isn’t enforced. 
 
An example in hand concerns the company LICO that was 
charged just last June, a year ago, with violating The 
Saskatchewan Securities Act and The Business Corporations 
Act. The president of LICO Resources, one Lawrence Nesis, is 
also president of Technigen Platinum Corporation which owns 
the Joytec (Equities Incorporated) corporation, which has been 
the subject of considerable investigation here in this legislature. 
 
So we have the principal behind Technigen and Joytec now 
involved in a firm called LICO, charged as president of 
Technigen and president of LICO, charged with 21 counts of 
violating The (Saskatchewan) Securities Act — 21 counts of 
violating The (Saskatchewan) Securities Act last June, along 
with violations of The Business Corporations Act as well. 
 
(1615) 
 
Basically what had happened is that LICO had salesmen going 
across Saskatchewan selling shares in LICO Resources Inc. 
without these sales-persons being licensed sellers. In addition, 
they had not filed a prospectus with the Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission. And so what happened? They were 
charged with 21 counts of violating the Saskatchewan securities 
legislation, and after a number of court hearings and a number 
of out-of-court negotiations between lawyers, lo and behold! the 
charges are dropped. 
 
Now the dropping of those charges may or may not be in the 
best interests of Saskatchewan consumers and those people who 
were sold shares in LICO Resources Inc., but one thing we do 
know for sure, that the dropping of those charges was certainly 
in the interest of LICO corporation and Lawrence Nesis and 
Joytec corporation and Technigen corporation, by implication. 
 
And this was the Saskatchewan Securities Commission, the 
very agency that we’re talking about this afternoon with respect 
to Bill 62, An Act respecting Securities in Saskatchewan. And 
so the question is, will this legislation be enforced or will the 
government choose not to enforce its own legislation? 
 
Now the minister who introduced this legislation on June 3 
made reference to the fact that one of the objectives of this 
legislation was to protect the public and to maintain confidence 
in the market-place, indicating that persons taking undue 
advantage of the investing public should be held to account. 
And yet that isn’t what this Progressive Conservative 
government has done in the past historically in terms of 
administration of The Securities Act — far from it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This Progressive Conservative government has not 
protected the public and has not established confidence in the 
market-place even though they have a self-professed admiration 
for the operation of the free enterprise economy and the 
unbridled capitalism of the market-place; far from protecting 
Saskatchewan people, as I’ve just indicated,  

with the LICO incidents. They’ve really ignored their own 
legislation and made adjustments for people who make 
violations. 
 
I note also that the enforcement of this securities legislation is 
very important, given the amount of public money put into 
companies like Joytec and Supercart and Ambrosia food 
ventures and other venture capital corporations that have bilked 
Saskatchewan taxpayers these last couple of years. 
 
So that the one issue, on the one side, is the protection of 
individual investors from unscrupulous business practices with 
the trading of security. The whole other side of the issue when it 
comes to venture capital corporations, for example, is the 
protection of the Saskatchewan taxpayer who’s putting massive 
amounts of money into venture capital corporations. For those 
people who are listening and aren’t aware of some of the 
provisions of the venture capital financing scheme, individuals 
who invest in venture capital corporations are given a 30 per 
cent tax credit — a 30 per cent tax credit for their investment. 
 
And what this has meant, last year for example, with total 
investments of $9 million for the year ’87-88, total investments 
of $9 million into venture capital corporations, the Government 
of Saskatchewan lost $2.8 million in revenue, in potential 
revenue, by the issuing of this 30 per cent tax credit. 
 
For the year 1986-87, there was a net investment pool of $32.9 
million invested by Saskatchewan people in venture capital 
corporations and a corresponding $11 million issued in tax 
credit — $11 million less in the provincial treasury, by virtue of 
it having been offered to individuals for their tax credit. And 
similarly for the year ’85-86, there was an investment pool of 
$33.9 million, with a corresponding tax credit issued for $11.3 
million. 
 
So what we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a total of more than 
$20 million in tax credits committed through the venture capital 
program, issued to individual Saskatchewan taxpayers, with 
companies like Joytec and Supercart and Ambrosia bilking the 
Saskatchewan public; promising jobs but seeing the jobs go to 
Japan; having a Joytec golf simulator provide a joy-ride for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers into Never Never Land. 
 
And while there’s talk that the company will now be producing 
it in Japan, the royalty expected from the Marubeni corporation 
in this year, 1988, is only a paltry $200,000 — hardly a return 
to justify the investment of $1.125 million in Joytec 
corporation, by Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
And I think that when it comes to the enforcement of securities 
regulations and the provisions that pertain to venture capital 
corporations, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to hold 
the government accountable for a full and proper administration 
of this securities legislation that in fact protects individual 
investors and protects the public investment in these venture 
capital corporations as well, to ensure that we have something 
to show for them. 
 
Now in the case of Ambrosia food products — this is a  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1861 
 
 

restaurant that went bankrupt in Saskatoon in July of 1987 — 
some of the investors there, according to press reports, certainly 
questioned the role that the Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission played in scrutinizing the propriety of what was 
going on. 
 
One of them indicated in a press report: 
 

One has to look at approval of the value and say, did they 
(meaning the Saskatchewan Securities Commission) really 
look into the potential investors by having some value 
there that they could issue in shares? As it turns out, there 
wasn’t much value there. 

 
The Saskatchewan taxpayers are taking risks, expecting the 
Securities Commission to monitor the investment and business 
transactions of a venture capital corporation such as Ambrosia. 
And yet they see funds going into nebulous things like 
placement fees with Ambrosia for $70,000; opening and 
starting-up costs for $90,000; working capital projections of 
$125,000; professional fees of $15,000. 
 
And the Securities Commission just looks at that information 
and doesn’t pass any judgement on it. It looks at it and allows 
Ambrosia to go ahead and offer their share offering and bilk 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, and not only that, but bilk the public 
purse in the process. 
 
So this issue, while it may seem to be the realm of lawyers and 
securities’ experts, really touches the ground financially for 
many Saskatchewan people when it comes to protecting their 
investments, their savings, when it comes to Principal Trust and 
the like, or when it comes to venture capital corporations. 
 
This legislation is very basic. And the basic question behind it 
is, will it be enforced? Is there a resolve and a will on the part 
of this government to protect Saskatchewan people, or to leave 
them to the wolves? The best legislation in the world means 
nothing if it isn’t enforced. And when it comes to securities 
legislation, securities legislation affords no security if it isn’t 
enforced by the government. 
 
And this government will not enforce it. We’ve seen this time 
and time again. When it comes to Associated Investors (of 
Canada) and First Investors Corporation — and incidentally, I 
might add, that likely tonight this subject will be talked about if 
the Consumer and Commercial Affairs estimates come up; I 
won’t spend too much time on it right now — but with the 
whole Principal Trust affair, Associated Investors and First 
Investors, Saskatchewan saw 6,700 people taken to the cleaners 
because their own government refused to administer their own 
security laws governing and regulating the financial affairs of 
First Investors and Associated Investors. 
 
This PC government won’t administer its own legislation. If it 
had, 6,700 Saskatchewan investors in Associated Investors and 
First Investors corporations would not have lost their entire life 
savings. And all it took, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all it took was for 
the regulators, for the government regulators responsible and 
answerable to the public, all it took was for them to read 
financial  

statements that showed that these companies were in trouble, in 
big trouble — in big enough trouble to take away the savings of 
6,700 Saskatchewan people if the government didn’t start doing 
its job and regulating and call for a proper accounting. But this 
PC government didn’t do it. It couldn’t be bothered. It was too 
much of a task. Responsible for three companies under The 
Investment Contracts Act — three companies, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it was two companies too many, and 6,700 
Saskatchewan people see their life savings go down the drain. 
 
So when it comes to this Bill 62, An Act respecting Securities 
in Saskatchewan, it’s important to know, and for the people of 
Saskatchewan to know that this legislation isn’t going to make a 
difference. It isn’t going to make a hoot of difference if it’s not 
going to be enforced. And this government has no resolve to 
enforce it. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan realize the importance of 
regulation and legislation. That’s why we are here this 
afternoon. That’s why, when people go to the corner store to 
buy a carton of milk, they’re guaranteed that that milk is 
processed, and that it is homogenized and pasturized and 
bacterially safe for consumption. And nowadays people don’t 
even give a second thought about going to the corner store and 
buying a carton of milk because they know that the government 
is active in the regulation of milk processing so that they can 
feel confident in the consumption of that milk. 
 
And the same ought to apply when it comes to securities 
legislation and investment contracts and venture capital 
corporations and share issuings of all sorts of different 
investment contract companies across Saskatchewan. People in 
Saskatchewan ought to be able to trust their government, ought 
to be able to assume that the government is doing its job and 
regulating these companies. And how much more important this 
task of government is seen to be when we see the failure, as I 
said, with respect to Principal Trust. 
 
(1630) 
 
People in Saskatchewan have government precisely to do the 
jobs that they can’t do for themselves. It’s a rare individual 
nowadays, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a rare individual indeed who 
has the time, let alone the education or ability to penetrate 165 
pages of technical and financial legalese to understand whether 
they are properly protected under this proposed Securities Act. 
It’s a rare individual indeed who has that kind of understanding 
of the law and of the securities legislation. 
 
Perhaps the member from Fairview who is a lawyer might be 
one of the rare individuals who could really understand this 
legislation. But average Saskatchewan people by no means are 
in any position to understand the legislation, and that’s 
precisely why they pay out of their tax dollars to have 
regulators review the legislation and apply the legislation and 
enforce it. 
 
And this is a vital role for the provincial government. And it’s a 
valid expenditure from the public purse, if it effects protection 
for Saskatchewan people, if it provides for services that 
Saskatchewan people are unable to provide 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1862 
 
 

for themselves due to lack of education or complexity or the 
technicalities, as I’ve said. 
 
One of my concerns, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the disclosure 
provisions of this particular legislation. And I’m not sure that 
this particular legislation effects adequate disclosure of 
securities information as it presently stands. And for this reason, 
I would like to take some time to do some consultation with 
people who might have a better understanding of the matter to 
get at the issue of the disclosure provisions of this legislation. 
 
Given, as I said in my opening remarks, the complexity of 
financial regulation nowadays, it’s important when business 
transactions and the world economy is changing at an hourly, if 
not a daily or weekly rate, to have in place in the legislation 
respecting securities, adequate disclosure. Because information 
is of the essence for people to understand whether their 
investments are being properly monitored. And that means that 
the disclosure provisions of this legislation certainly need to be 
up to a standard that reflects the times that we live in so that 
there is timely disclosure, that there is full disclosure and 
appropriate disclosure of information. 
 
Part of the problem as we’ve seen with the Principal Trust affair 
is that many of the matters that are now coming out only in the 
Code investigation in Edmonton have come out far too late. 
And the government legislation in The Investment Contracts 
Act gave, in the estimation of some people, far too broad an 
authority for the regulators to simply pass judgement on 
materials in secret, without adequate public disclosure. And that 
is certainly an issue with respect to this Bill 62. 
 
Another concern of mine has to do with the question of insider 
trading when it comes to securities and other forms of 
investment materials. And this is certainly an issue, given the 
fact again that information is so vitally important in terms of 
economic control or profitability. And I want to make sure that 
this legislation has adequate constraints and safeguards against 
insider trading when it comes to securities or other forms of 
investments. And I’m not in the position to pass judgement on 
that at this present time. 
 
So in summary then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have legislation 
in Bill 62 that is vital to the interests of Saskatchewan people, 
that is important to the taxpayer when it comes to the issuing, 
for example, of venture capital tax credits, legislation that is 
vitally important that comes at a time when the PC government 
is committee to deregulation, to an open house when it comes to 
financial affairs and their regulation. And we need to make sure 
that this legislation is adequate to the task of protecting 
Saskatchewan people. That is the fundamental concern of this 
side of the House. 
 
And we say that we have seen time and time again, from the PC 
government opposite, the victimizing, the victimizing of 
Saskatchewan people by a lack of resolve to enforce their own 
legislation. And it simply can’t be countenanced. This side of 
the House will not countenance it. We will not accept it, and we 
will make sure that this legislation is proper, and we will press 
for it to be administered in proper form. 

So with those concluding remarks then, Mr. Speaker, I will 
adjourn debate on Bill 62. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 55 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased, as the 
privatization critic for the New Democratic Party, to enter into 
this debate on the Tory government’s privatization Bill, Bill 55, 
a sweeping omnibus Bill introduced last week by the minister 
of privatization. 
 
I reviewed with some interest the minister’s second reading 
remarks, and while I was not surprised by what he said, I was 
very interested and surprised by what he did not say. 
 
He did not, for example, admit that this PC government has 
tried to import this privatization ideology from Britain, with 
extensive help from the Rothschild banking firm. He did not try 
to explain to his own upset party members and back-benchers 
exactly how the privatization of the children’s dental plan is a 
fitting symbol for his government’s privatization policy. Nor 
did he try to explain, Mr. Speaker, exactly why he feels this 
omnibus Bill, with its unprecedented sweeping powers, is 
necessary. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, his speech was a lot like his 
privatization policy itself, more remarkable for the parts he left 
hidden and secret than for what he actually said in the public in 
this Chamber. 
 
Now all members will have noted, I’m sure, the curious and 
misleading version of Saskatchewan history that the minister 
tried to include in his speech. His argument is simple. He argues 
that the history of Saskatchewan has been characterized by 
private greed, private self-interest, and private profit as the 
supreme motivator of human activity. And nothing could be 
further from the truth. His version of history is simple, all right 
— simply wrong — dead wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In his desperate attempt to rewrite Saskatchewan history, the 
PC privatization version, the minister has grossly 
misunderstood the history and experience of Saskatchewan 
people working together, or he has deliberately tried to 
misrepresent that common experience that Saskatchewan people 
share, or both. The facts are these, and if any Tory member 
opposite disputes this version of the facts, the real history of the 
province, I invite him or her to check with his or her 
constituents, particularly those in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Our pioneers in Saskatchewan found themselves in an almost 
unbelievably vulnerable position within the world economy, 
separated by vast distances from their markets and from sources 
of manufactured goods. Even when farms and homesteads were 
much smaller, a quarter section, for instance, they were isolated 
and often separated from one another by significant distances. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1863 
 
 

These people found themselves in a rich and open land, blessed 
with nature’s bounty, but in return they had to endure the 
extreme hardships of a severe and unyielding climate. The 
centres of economic power were far away. They were aloof and 
alien and unresponsive to the needs of Saskatchewan pioneers 
and their families. 
 
The insensitive and hated railways, motivated by greed, not by 
the needs of Saskatchewan farm families, the Winnipeg Grain 
Exchange, dominated by private grain companies determined to 
maximize their private profits, and the big eastern banks were 
very successful in pursuing the private self-interest of their own 
shareholders but were unresponsive to the needs of 
Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
But from that adversity they developed courage, strength, 
resilience and vision. They know, and rightly so, that the blind 
forces of greed and the world market would not meet their 
needs and would not allow them to develop their vision. So they 
developed for themselves together with their neighbours, 
co-operatively, putting the common good above private greed, 
putting the community interest, the public interest above 
self-interest. 
 
And in their determination to pursue that Saskatchewan vision 
for themselves and their children, they sought to use all of the 
tools at the disposal of their community. They sought to use 
private business to be sure, and co-operatives and the public 
sector. And their determination and their courage and their hard 
work, Mr. Speaker, forged the Saskatchewan mixed economy, 
the unique made-in-Saskatchewan solution to the circumstances 
they faced. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a Saskatchewan response to the 
private grain industries on the grain exchange. Saskatchewan 
credit unions, developed and owned and controlled here in 
Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people as an alternative to the 
distant and insensitive eastern banks. 
 
The Consumers’ Co-op Refineries, here in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, the first co-operative refinery in the world. And when 
private greed, private self-interest, and big out-of-province 
investors failed to meet the needs of Saskatchewan families and 
communities, our pioneers decided to meet those needs 
themselves, using the public sector. 
 
We had rural telephone services, rural electrification, rural bus 
service provided by the public sector. We had basic car 
insurance at affordable rates provided by the public sector. And 
most important of all, Mr. Speaker, comprehensive 
hospitalization insurance and medicare developed by 
Saskatchewan people by using their public sector. 
 
And when Saskatchewan people realized the potential and the 
opportunities for economic growth and security that were 
afforded by our bountiful and valuable resources, they realized 
that in order for those resources to be developed in 
Saskatchewan’s interest, not some outside foreign corporation, 
they had to be developed  

here in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Was there a single foreign investor willing to develop our 
sodium sulphate resources? No. It took the public sector, 
through Saskatchewan Minerals. Was there any major oil 
company built in Saskatchewan by private greed? No, Mr. 
Speaker. It took the public sector to develop Saskatchewan oil. 
 
And was there any foreign corporation or non-Saskatchewan 
group of investors who were willing to establish a major potash 
corporation or hard rock mining corporation based here with its 
ownership and control here in Saskatchewan? No, Mr. Speaker. 
It took the determination and the courage and the vision of 
Saskatchewan people acting together through their own public 
sector to develop the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and 
the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to the example of Ipsco 
here in Regina. I think everyone will freely admit that the 
middle of the Regina plain, hundreds of miles from iron or coal, 
is a pretty unlikely place for a steel mill. First established by 
private investors as a pipe mill, it soon obtained public sector 
equity investment from the provincial government and became 
a sound and successful steel and pipe operation — another 
example of the Saskatchewan partnership, the Saskatchewan 
pragmatic approach, the Saskatchewan mixed economy. 
 
And in his haste to rewrite Saskatchewan history, in his second 
reading speech the other day, the minister of privatization 
grossly and unfairly misrepresented our shared and common 
experience as a province and as a people. He’s unwilling to 
admit, afraid to admit that the Saskatchewan tradition is the 
practical approach — the mixed economy; men and women 
working together in their communities for the common good, 
not merely personal, private gain, and for the future of their 
family and their children; for the public interests, not merely for 
private interest; the reality of the Saskatchewan mixed 
economy, not the myth of PC privatization. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that the minister knows his 
privatization ideology is based on myth. He knows that it runs 
counter to the actual daily experience of this province and its 
people, and he knows that his PC privatization is a betrayal of 
Saskatchewan. And he knows that his privatization policy is 
being opposed by Saskatchewan people regardless of how many 
polls he submits or he releases to the public. People know that 
this minister and this government is simply trying to manipulate 
the media and the public into believing that privatization is 
acceptable in this province. 
 
But with our history and our traditions and our values, we are 
not simply interested in private greed and we are not simply 
interested in our own personal self-interest. And that, for all of 
these reasons, is why the minister of privatization has difficulty 
explaining his privatization strategy. 
 
Now one of the most disturbing things about the  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1864 
 
 

government’s privatization Bill now before us, is the extent to 
which this Bill, like the PC policy, is based on their narrow and 
right-wing ideology. It’s no secret that they’ve turned to 
Margaret Thatcher’s Britain for their ideological inspiration, for 
the latest PC economic fad of privatization. They even sent the 
Premier’s principal secretary, his chief political adviser, to 
England before the last election to study the ideology and 
action, and that’s the privatization of British Telecom, which is 
similar to the Saskatchewan SaskTel. They’ve invited the 
right-wing professor of privatization, Dr. Madsen Pirie, to 
explain his ideology to Saskatchewan, and they’ve even hired a 
consultant, Oliver Letwin, from the British Merchant Bank, 
Rothschild and Sons, to bring that right-wing ideology to the 
Tory government of Saskatchewan. And they’ve hired that 
right-wing thinker, that Oliver Letwin at taxpayers’ expense to 
sell out and give away publicly owned assets created by the 
people of this province and owned by the people of this 
province. 
 
But while the Tory government opposite is all eager and 
enthusiastic about their latest Conservative fad of privatization, 
they refuse to acknowledge or admit that it is the same old Tory 
policy and philosophy that has been tried and tried and tried and 
failed and failed and failed in every western democratic 
industrialized nation in the world. 
 
And for once the minister of privatization was accurate and 
correct when he told the press last Thursday that privatization is 
the wave of the 1890s. That’s what your minister of 
privatization said — the wave of the 1890s. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister is about 100 years out of touch, and what 
Saskatchewan people need is a vision and a solution for the 
1990s. We don’t need the tired and rusted policies of the 
Conservative members opposite; not the minister’s frank 
admission that his privatization policy is geared toward the 
1890s. His PC privatization ideology is old and outdated — old 
and outdated and discredited. 
 
I’d like to just take a brief moment, Mr. Speaker, to examine the 
PC privatization ideology and their shallow economic 
philosophy. I believe it’s both fair and accurate, Mr. Speaker, to 
sum up the PC privatization ideology as being based on three 
simple principles. 
 
First, they assert that the ultimate motivators of human action 
are greed and self-interest and personal gain. 
 
And second, they assert that when private greed and 
self-interest are unleashed and unfettered, they will somehow 
automatically produce not only personal gain for the wealthy 
few but also benefits for the many as well as the trickle-down 
theory. I just want to talk about the trickle-down theory. John 
Galbraith refers to this. The theory goes like this: that if you 
feed enough oats to a horse, if you continue to feed enough oats 
to a horse, some day and some time the sparrow will reap the 
benefits. That’s the trickle-down theory that the members 
opposite subscribe to. 
 
And third, they assert that Saskatchewan should entrust its 
future to outside investors, outside corporations, foreign firms, 
and assert that they should not try to control our own lives, 
should not try to develop our own solutions to  

our own unique Saskatchewan circumstances. 
 
It’s a simple theory, Mr. Speaker, a simple theory, but a theory 
that’s absolutely wrong and wrong on every count, for greed 
and self-interest and single-minded pursuit of personal gain are 
not the primary motivators of human activity. That’s why their 
ideology, based on greed, misunderstands human experience, 
misunderstands human experience, and is an insult to the 
generations of Saskatchewan pioneers who worked together in 
co-operation to develop a unique and successful and civilized 
life in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that those members opposite come from 
Saskatchewan. I know that they have family members that were 
the pioneers of this Saskatchewan, and I know that they come 
out of some of the same traditions as the members opposite. 
And they have totally misunderstood our traditions and the 
ideology that drives the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve 
totally misread the situation. 
 
And their ideology, the sell at all costs, the appeal to private 
greed or personal greed, appeal to personal interests, is wrong. 
And thus the policy on which this Bill is based is wrong, and 
when they assert that public good comes from private greed, 
when they have seen the reality their ideology produces, the 
rich get richer, the poor get poorer, and the middle class gets 
squeezed and squeezed and squeezed relentlessly. 
 
Their ideology does not produce fair shares for all, but instead 
provides much to those who already have much and provides 
little to those who have nothing. And their ideology produces a 
society that is deeply divided, in which power, control, and 
opportunity are concentrated in the hands of only a very few. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, when their PC ideology asserts that 
they must rely on big business from abroad, that they must open 
for big business, they are betraying the people of Saskatchewan, 
the very people who elected them. The private shareholders in 
Toronto or New York or London, England, will understandably 
pursue their own financial interests and not the interests of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Saskatchewan people, men and women of our province, did not 
need out-of-province investors to develop the wheat pool, our 
credit unions, our telephone and power service. Those 
Saskatchewan families, those Saskatchewan communities did it 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. They are proud of those common 
achievements, and they feel betrayed by the PC government 
opposite. They feel betrayed by those members opposite. And 
they are betraying our province; they’re selling out 
Saskatchewan. They’re violating our traditions here in 
Saskatchewan. They’re violating the Saskatchewan tradition, 
and all in the name of a foreign, right-wing ideology of 
privatization. 
 
And this narrow and this right-wing Tory ideology seems to 
have been the government’s agenda ever since the last general 
election in 1986, Mr. Speaker. We see it every day over and 
over again — the ideological attack on medicare, their secret 
and private deals with foreign corporations and outside 
investors, their relentless pursuit of privatization and to sell 
their privatization  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1865 
 
 

ideology. 
 
To sell their myth, Mr. Speaker, they are using all of the 
gimmicks that they can come up with — the smooth and 
reassuring speeches, the expensive and self-serving advertising, 
the tax break gimmicks available to wealthy investors. All these 
gimmicks are being used, Mr. Speaker, as the minister’s speech 
last week on this Bill indicated, to defend and to justify and sell 
the PC ideology of privatization. 
 
And I want to speak about some examples of privatization. I 
noted with some interest, Mr. Speaker, that in his remarks on 
this privatization Bill the other day, the minister of privatization 
— who unfortunately isn’t here, I’d like him to listen to this — 
tried to use a couple of examples. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I know the hon. member probably just 
forgot, but just a reminder that we don’t refer to members who 
aren’t here. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I thought he would 
he here, but anyway, I’m sorry. Anyway, I want to refer to a 
couple of examples. 
 
I would like to have the same opportunity to cite some of the 
examples of PC privatization, and I will expand the list 
somewhat beyond the very few that the minister would admit to 
or justify. And I understand that at the end of this debate on this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, the minister will have the opportunity to 
close the debate, and I’d invite him to address the examples of 
privatization as well. 
 
Now the minister cited the example of the PC government’s 
sale of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) to Weyerhaeuser 
corporation. But in his eagerness to justify this particular 
privatization myth, he overlooked a few things. He forgot to 
mention that since the sale price was announced as $248 million 
by the Premier, it in fact has turned out to be only $236 million. 
That’s yet another gift to Weyerhaeuser of United States, this 
time a further gift of $12 million. 
 
And he forgot to mention that privatization of PAPCO was 
done in secret, with no public tendering and no public scrutiny 
of the deal before it was signed. and he forgot to mention that, 
despite his slogan of public participation, not one single 
Saskatchewan resident owns one single share of Weyerhaeuser 
(Canada Ltd.) — not one. And he failed to mention that in order 
to attract this foreign corporation of Saskatchewan, the PC 
government had to make a sweetheart deal entailing the 
following: they sold the assets at below market value; they sold 
the assets when the pulp prices were down and everybody in the 
industry said that they were on their way back up; they provided 
a provincial loan, a provincial government loan by the people of 
this province, the taxpayers of this province, to Weyerhaeuser 
in the amount of $248 million; and they also provided a further 
loan guarantee of $83 million to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
The minister didn’t mention that. He talked about 150 jobs, but 
he didn’t talk about the give-away of an asset, owned and 
controlled by the people of this province, to a foreign, large 
multinational corporation. He didn’t talk about a $248 million 
loan guarantee, when Weyerhaeuser has had millions and 
millions and millions of dollars worth of profits. He didn’t talk  

about the $83 million loan guarantee for Weyerhaeuser to build 
their addition to the P.A. Pulp and paper plant. No, the minister 
didn’t do that. And I would suggest the minister justify the 
Weyerhaeuser privatization in view of all of those facts — 
justify it. The major beneficiary of the Weyerhaeuser deal, the 
privatization of PAPCO, was not the people of Saskatchewan, 
but instead was the Weyerhaeuser corporation of the United 
States. 
 
And I noted, Mr. Speaker, that the minister made no mention of 
another little privatization deal, and that was the privatization of 
SaskPower assets to Manalta Coal of Alberta. And I’d invite the 
minister to explain to Saskatchewan business people and 
Saskatchewan taxpayers just how that privatization has been in 
the interest of Saskatchewan people. Let the minister explain 
why his PC government privatized SPC assets and sold a $45 
million drag-line to Manalta Coal of Alberta and then lent 
Manalta Coal the money to purchase the drag-line. Some deal. 
And why his Progressive Conservative government privatized 
the Saskatchewan Poplar River coal mine in yet another 
sweetheart deal with Manalta Coal. In the PC government’s 
own press release in 1984, announcing that particular 
privatization deal, the government admitted that the province 
had invested $129 million in the asset, that the sale price to 
Manalta was only $102 million, and that the province lent $89 
million to Manalta Coal to finance the deal. Now how has that 
created any new jobs? And how has that created any new 
revenue for the province of Saskatchewan? And how has that 
created further ownership and control of our own provincial 
economy? Hardly. 
 
And on top of all of this, on top of all of this the PC government 
entered into a 30-year coal supply contract with Manalta to 
repurchase the coal that we already own. Now these are the 
business people over here. These are the people who say they’re 
business people and they’ve had experience in this province 
running businesses, running car dealerships or running farms or 
running chemical stores or goodness knows what. But they 
wouldn’t know a good business deal if they saw it looking them 
in the eye. Your business deals, you can’t attract anything to 
this province unless you give away an asset owned and paid for 
by the people of this province. You give it away, or you have to 
put a little carrot out there, put some money out there to attract 
people. 
 
I’d like to see one business come to this province that hasn’t 
been given an asset or hasn’t been given money to come here. 
You people wouldn’t know a good business deal if it looked 
you straight in the face. And I say to you, with no disrespect to 
people who run popcorn stands, but you couldn’t even run a 
popcorn stand, members opposite. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that it’s close to five. I have many remarks 
that I want to continue with after supper, so I will call it 5 
o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1866 
 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
The date-line on the front cover of Hansard No. 52B Friday, 
June 3, 1988, 10 a.m. should read: 
 
No. 52A Friday, June 3, 1988, 10 a.m. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 


