


















































March 24, 1988 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 24, 1988 
 
 

55 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — I hereby advise the House that under rule 11(7) I have 
examined the following petition. I hereby lay it on the Table for 
reading and receiving. 
 

Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan, praying 
that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
Government of Saskatchewan to take immediate remedial 
action with respect to the problems at Old Wives Lake. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a group of 36 women from the constituency 
of Melfort. These women belong to the Melfort Progressive 
Conservative ladies’ organization or association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — They are seated in your gallery. They are 
accompanied by their bus driver, Mr. Alex Glanville, the only 
male in the crowd. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe I’ve had a higher honour while 
being a member as I am today, Mr. Speaker, being honoured by 
these guests from the constituency of Melfort. They are a fine 
group of women who I had the pleasure of having lunch with this 
afternoon. 
 
The women have a busy day scheduled ahead of them. They’re 
going to be here for question period and some of the debate this 
afternoon. They are going to be touring Government House, and 
they might even get in on a little bit of late night shopping tonight, 
I understand. 
 
So it is just my pleasure to introduce and welcome this group of 
fine women from the constituency of Melfort, and I again am 
deeply honoured to have you all here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Concerns of Groups Representing Non-Governmental 
Organizations 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, today a group of people who represent 
people who work for shelters for battered women, and day-care 
centres, and crisis intervention centres, and sheltered workshops, 
just to name a few, tried to meet you or representatives of your 
government to bring their concerns to your attention, and I will lay 
their brief on the Table at the appropriate time today. Mr. Premier, 
why did you and your government refuse to  

meet with these people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I agree to met with groups all 
the time as long as they will allow me just a little bit of lead time 
to set up an appointment. I was not in the city until noon today. I 
left at a quarter to nine, and whether it’s me or cabinet minister, 
some lead time is necessary. Secondly, I have met with many, 
many of these groups before, and people that are on that list that 
you want to table we have met with here in the legislature in 
Room 218, and we have gone over many, many of the issues. So I 
can say that, Mr. Speaker, we have met with them, we’ll continue 
to meet with them, but nobody can realistically expect to walk in 
and meet a cabinet minister without nay notice. It’s really pretty 
difficult, and it is for me as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Premier, with your countless numbers of ministers and 
legislative secretaries and staff people, you could have arranged to 
meet with someone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — These are the people who represent those 
who have to go to food banks and can’t afford essential 
medication, who wanted to speak to your government and you 
failed to give them the opportunity. On page 3 they make it clear 
that they disagree with your priorities and your policies. Now, Mr. 
Premier, is it that you’re afraid to meet with these people, or is it 
that in your new and arrogant way you refuse to meet with 
anybody who disagrees with you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. member 
that if individuals are serious about meeting with me or cabinet 
ministers or caucus members, then indeed we can arrange to meet. 
 
We had caucus this morning and the people were together going 
through, and even in some of the offices that these people went to 
see they didn’t even call for a meeting; they just left a brochure or 
left something else or a broken cookie as their invitation to meet, 
but they didn’t ask for a meeting. 
 
And so you stand in here in the legislature; you stand in here in the 
legislature and say that, well, any group that wants to walk in 
should be able to meet just like right now, any minute, any second, 
all the time, when we are, Mr. Speaker, working full time, and 
meet with them on a regular basis as long as we have any sort of 
lead time so that we can respond sincerely to requests to meet on 
any particular issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, that is just not true. These 
people tried to meet with you or representatives of your 
government, requested a meeting and you refused to meet with 
them. Mr. Premier, what are you afraid of? Are  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

56 
 
 

you afraid of the underprivileged and the poor and those who are 
handicapped that you will refuse to meet with these people to 
address their concerns as you, as a responsible Premier, ought to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think the whole country 
today knows that this side of the House works very hard for the 
poor. And this side of the House . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if you . . . I want the media to 
watch their reaction to this. Okay? You watch. This party and this 
side of the House defends the poor with pension programs and 
health care and nursing homes. I will say, Mr. Speaker, and I want 
to make it very, very clear — very, very clear — Mr. Speaker, this 
side of the House and the PC Party of Saskatchewan does not buy 
votes from the poor as the president of the NDP Party of 
Saskatchewan does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And I want the whole country . . . And I 
give a lot of credit to the people in the media who have been 
reporting it on the front page of the paper because it is not a 
national issue yet, but it will be a national issue, where the NDP 
president of Saskatchewan says it’s okay to cheat as long as 
they’re poor, and I will buy the votes of the poor. And then you 
turn around, Mr. Speaker, and the Leader of the NDP party says: 
and I will foreclose on the poor as long as I can get paid for it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, if you want to stand 
up and defend the poor, we’ll put our record on the line any single, 
solitary day in the next five years or the next 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regulations Regarding Use of Community Pastures 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also to 
the Premier, and I’m sure that for poor people of this province that 
will build their trust, I’m sure. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question is this, in relation to the community 
pastures. As of November 1 last year you changed the rules for 
community pasture patrons. They now have less service for more 
cost. Mr. Premier, this elimination of services seems to be an 
extension of your ideological run to privatizing everything in this 
province extending to the community pastures — and certainly 
this won’t benefit the patrons. 
 
Mr. Premier, is it your aim to remove community pastures from 
your government department eventually and privatize them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we have talked to the 
farmers and the ranchers who keep their livestock in community 
pastures. Some of the farmers and ranchers  

want to have their own breeding stock in there. We said we would 
accommodate that. It’s now about 70 per cent public breeding 
stock and about 30 per cent private. We said we’d be prepared to 
go to 50-50 on any of the community pastures where they wanted 
their own breeding stock, and it’s completely flexible. We will 
provide sufficient breeding stock for the small operators if they 
don’t have their own, but at the request of individuals we’re giving 
them the option if they want better breeding stock in their own, 
then we’ll provide them that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. In February, Mr. 
Premier, there was approximately 30 farmers and ranchers came 
into Regina. I met with them. The member from 
Kelvington-Wadena came over and met with them, and at the 
meeting he said, and I quote, “I guess the thing I learned from this 
is any time that we have change in a program it’s going to have to 
be laid out in point from.” 
 
Mr. Premier, do you agree that your government failed to properly 
advise producers on this policy change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will admit that I found out last night 
that you agree that the agriculture policies of Manitoba are going 
to defeat that government over there, and you were going on radio 
saying so, and particularly associated with the livestock industry. I 
was there with you announcing the expansion of PAMI (Prairie 
Agriculture Machinery Institute), and talking about the 
diversification of the livestock industry and research. Then you 
went on radio later and said, well when they lose in Manitoba, it 
will be a lot different trying to get along with the government over 
there. 
 
Well I will say to the hon. member, I know you’ve given up on 
terms of agriculture policy. The NDP in Manitoba are going to get 
wiped out in rural Manitoba because of NDP agriculture policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the suggestions that farmers want to have their own 
breeding stock never did fit well with the socialists, but if fits fine 
with people from the PC Party of Saskatchewan and of Canada. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, your 
secretary, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, at that meeting 
admitted that the government did not consult with the patrons of 
community pastures, but he promised it would never happen 
again. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, why should any farmer in this province, or 
anyone else for that matter, trust you and your government when 
you don’t consult with them; you won’t talk to the NGOs 
(non-governmental organizations). Why should they trust you? 
You haven’t talked to them on production loans or the drug plan 
or the dental plan or the gas tax, and it goes on and on. Why 
should they believe you, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that people  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

57 
 
 

on this side of the House don’t go out with memberships and buy 
the vote of farmers and buy the votes of the poor and then stand up 
and say it’s okay to do that as long as they’re poor, as long as 
they’re poor. It’s one thing, Mr. Speaker, to stand up here and say 
that you should help the farmers. They didn’t help them when they 
had 18 per cent, 20 per cent interest rates. They didn’t help them 
when they couldn’t get cash advances. They didn’t help them 
when they wanted deficiency payments. They didn’t help them at 
all. They just went out and bought their farm from the poor and 
took it from them and then said, we’ll sell it back to the kids at 
twice the price. That’s what they did, Mr. Speaker. And they can 
drop their heads because it’s the same policy over and over and 
over again — that’s why you have no support in rural 
Saskatchewan, and you’re going to get you nose cleaned in 
Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 
Premier was: why does he not consult with anyone in this 
province, including the farmers of this province, before they make 
an ideologically motivated decision? Obviously, he didn’t want to 
address that question. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, will you now in light of all the discussions and 
the complaints from farmers in the community pasture program, 
will you do the honourable thing and tell those farmers that you 
will withdraw your new policy, and if there’s any change to be 
made they will tell you, sir, because they’re the ones involved in it, 
if there should be any improvements to this program. Will you no 
withdraw this policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the policy is to allow the 
farmers flexibility to either have government breeding stock or 
their own, and we’re not going to withdraw that. They have asked 
for that flexibility. We will make sure there is sufficient number of 
public breeding stock there, and if they want their own we ill 
accommodate that as well, Mr. Speaker. They have asked it; we 
have responded. They wanted 10 years extensioMcLen on 
production loan; we have responded. They wanted cash advances; 
we responded. They wanted deficiency payments; we have 
responded. 
 
We spent a long time always listening to farmers and to the 
SARM Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and to 
the wheat pool and to many organizations. And they respect the 
fact that we have responded much more than the NDP ever did in 
the past, and certainly more than they can do now just whining 
about the fact that they’re not in power and wishing they’d have 
changed their mind in many of their policies of the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of School-Based Dental Program 
 

Mr. Anguish: — My question is to the Minister of Health, and in 
addition to the government’s bites dog section in the throne 
speech, we were surprised that there was no mention of plans for 
the dental program in rural areas of the province. Your own party 
convention last November stated that this government had made a 
mistake by privatizing the school-based children’s dental program, 
and the response to that was that the program would be reviewed. 
What are the results of the review, and when can we expect dental 
services to be restored in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s interesting, and as the member will 
know and as I have said on several occasions in this House in the 
past, the concern that is expressed about the lack of dental services 
in rural Saskatchewan by and large comes from urban 
Saskatchewan. Hear that clearly. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan in the communities that now have dentists’ 
offices or satellite dentists’ offices where no dentist has ever been 
before. Those are important and those are importation innovations 
in those communities — communities in this province that now 
have dental service that did not have dental services. 
 
People in those communities say: this is the kind of policy that we 
have because it addresses something larger. It addresses the 
enhancement of rural communities, and the enhancement of rural 
communities is an extremely important issue with members on 
this side of the House, and that encompasses many departments 
including the Department of Health. 
 
People in those communities want those services on the main 
street for the children, for the parents, for the grandparents, for all 
people in the community. So that’s the service. There are 
encouraging signs that there are more and more of these dental 
offices opening, and they will continue to open across rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — To the same minister, Mr. Speaker. The rhetoric 
of the government is starting to have some decay about it on this 
topic. Can the minister then confirm today that under the 
school-based dental program there was a 92 per cent utilization 
rate in the province of Saskatchewan, some 152,000 children that 
were eligible and took part in the program. Today, under your 
privatized program, there’s a 60 per cent utilization, down to about 
45,000 children who are actually utilizing the program. How does 
the minister reconcile this, and what are the plans to put the rest of 
the people back in their . . . mainly that come from rural 
Saskatchewan that aren’t getting the services as you put out in 
your rhetoric? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, another example of 
misinformation coming from that side of the House. They have 
said, and they said in the last session, there would not be 
registration by the children or the parents of those children across 
the province, that registration would not  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

58 
 
 

be there. Mr. Speaker, the facts are, as the member said, there was 
about 92 per cent of the children were registered under the former 
plan. About 87 per cent, just slightly more than 87 per cent of 
children that are eligible, are now registered in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Same minister, Mr. Speaker. We’d like to see 
those results because the information we have is that about 45,000 
people are enrolled in the program now as compared to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order. Order. Order. Does the minister 
have a . . . or the member have a new question, or a 
supplementary? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The figures that we 
have is that there’s now only 45,000 people registered in that 
program, compared to 152,000 before. Now will the minister tell 
us today what the plans are to restore those dental services, and 
will the people that were formerly employed in the dental 
program, the school-based dental program, be employed in this 
new, revised program that you’re planning for Saskatchewan and 
the dental services in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said, slightly over 
87 per cent of the eligible children in this province are now 
registered in the new dental plan — slightly over 87 per cent. I’m 
not surprised at the information put forward, or misinformation if I 
might say so, Mr. Speaker, from the members. It’s happened 
before. But all I will say is: the facts are, over 87 per cent are 
registered and more people are being registered as they take their 
children to the dentists, and as they’ll do that for the most part on 
an annual basis, so more people are being registered all the time. 
We’re very pleased with the response — 87 per cent. 
 
So what I will say to the member: while you will have your 
question, but if you base your questions on the wrong premise and 
facts which are not there, well then there is no validity to the 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the minister if playing 
of the terms of registration versus utilization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I would not doubt in the program that 87 per 
cent of the eligible people are registered in the program, but only 
about 60 per cent of that group are utilizing the program, because 
it’s inaccessible to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The program is inaccessible to people in 
Saskatchewan; therefore, they’re not utilizing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I hope you’ve gotten to the 
question because you are asking a supplementary and it was a 
rather long preamble. 

An Hon. Member: — Well he was just on the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, when the promise 
is going to be backed up of October last year to the people of 
Gravelbourg where your Premier promised them dental services, a 
clinic, something to improve the situation for dental services? 
We’re now way, way past October of ’87. Nothing’s happened. 
That’s why people can’t trust the Government of Saskatchewan, 
the Premier sitting there, because you don’t honour the promise 
that you make. It’s all rhetoric. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, two things, two things, Mr. 
Speaker, two or three things. First of all, Mr. Speaker, the 
registration is over 87 per cent, as I have said. The member 
suggests that utilization would be that everybody . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member . . . the 
Minister of Health cannot answer if he’s constantly interrupted. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What the member would suggest from his 
question, if you take it to its logical conclusion, he would suggest 
that as soon as they register, they would go to the dentist on the 
same day. Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. The people who are 
registered will use dental services, but they may not all use them in 
the first three months of the year — a point for you to understand. 
This is the month of March. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to Gravelbourg, I believe the 
member from Gravelbourg could tell you — I’m not sure if he 
could, but I believe he could — that the people in Gravelbourg, if 
you would take the interest in phoning the community or 
whatever, there is a dentist on his way into Gravelbourg. There 
will be a program in Gravelbourg. And I don’t know the exact 
date of when he’ll be there, but the arrangements are made. The 
arrangements are made in Gravelbourg, and the dentist will be in 
Gravelbourg, as I said before in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Application Fee for SIAST Students 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education, and it deals with the unfair tax that is being imposed on 
the youth of our province by this government. Mr. Minister, will 
you confirm that your department is now charging students who 
are applying at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology an application fee of $25, and will you confirm that 
this is over and above the normal tuition costs and that this fee is 
non-refundable, even if the course applied for is full? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, I am aware of a fee, the details of which I am 
not fully conversant on. I will take notice of  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

59 
 
 

the question and bring back the details, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would add a supplementary to 
the minister, a new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, I have 
in my hands a letter, which you have signed, in reply to the 
member from Regina North West on this very topic, and it deals 
with the regulations. And for your information, Mr. Minister, I 
would advise that the real problem is that you’ve cut back spaces, 
1,100 spaces, in the technical school, and now you’re imposing a 
deterrent fee so that there will not be so many applications. 
 
What I want to know, Mr. Minister, is: why is it, if the class is full, 
why can’t the fee be refunded? It just does not seem fair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said, Mr. Speaker, I’m aware 
of the fee; I’m not fully conversant with all the details and the 
rationale behind the fee. 
 
But the hon. member should remember that one of the major 
changes we made in this legislature at the last sitting, Mr. Speaker, 
was to allow our institutes, who were formerly run by the 
Department of Education head office, downtown Regina, are now 
autonomous and a separate institute — the Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology. 
 
And just as the board of governors runs and has some fair say in 
terms of running the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina, we are now moving to the same format with 
the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 
and they too have much say in how they shall run that new 
autonomous institute, Mr. Speaker. but I’ll bring back the details 
relative to the question. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — One more question, Mr. Speaker. . . 
(inaudible) . . . this particular form, and it is my understanding that 
we are now under the operation of an interim board which is 
chaired by your deputy minister, so I hardly call that arm’s length. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you break the tradition of your party — you 
did not consult with the farmers, you did not consult with the 
farmers, you did not consult with the people in the rural area on 
the dental program — will you break tradition and consult with the 
students the next time you’re going to review your program, 
which you’ve promised to do at the end of this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we have consulted with 
students, student bodies, whether they be institute students or 
university students, and in fact I would go so far as to say we’ve 
had excellent co-operation with them in putting together, for 
example, tuition fees and addressing tuition fee questions, student 
aid questions, all those kinds of issues that speak directly to the 
issue of accessibility for our young people to our post-secondary 
institutions across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — A Bill to amend The Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Act 

 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, because of the problems the 
government has caused with the farm production loan, I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Agricultural Credit Corporation 
Act of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I should like to read a 
brief statement. Yesterday before orders of the day, the member 
for Regina Victoria raised a point of order that the Minister of 
Health used quotations in his answers to supplementary questions. 
I deferred my ruling at that time. I have reviewed the verbatim 
record and find that the minister did use a direct quotation in 
answering a supplementary question. 
 
But before ruling, I would like to clarify the current practice of this 
House with regard to the use of quotations in all questions. The 
use of quotations to frame a question has been permitted in this 
House. 
 
Supplementaries, however, are an entirely different matter. I 
remind members that the purpose of a supplementary question is 
to seek specific clarification of the answer to the main question; in 
reality, it should be put without preamble. This precludes the use 
of quotations in supplementary questions. 
 
On the other hand, it is reasonable that if the initial answer 
requires clarification, then ministers may be permitted to add 
detail to their answer by using a quotation. For this reason, I rule 
that the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Having said that . . . Order. Order, please. Order. Order, order. 
Having said that, I should point out that where quotations are to be 
used, then they should be relevant to the question. 
 
Furthermore, at this early juncture in the session, I would like to 
point out that exhibits are strictly forbidden in this House. Upon 
reviewing the verbatim records, I find that the minister used a 
picture in the book he was quoting as an exhibit. I point out to all 
members that exhibits in any form are out of order. 
 
May I also make . . . May I also take . . . Order, order. May I also 
make one or two brief statements at this time. I would like to take 
the opportunity to do that. 
 
Since this is a new session, and as you are aware in the last 
session, generally speaking, members conducted themselves well 
and engaged in a spirited but high level of debate; however, there 
were two areas where I trust we will experience an improvement 
in this session. One area was the use of unparliamentary language, 
and the other  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

60 
 
 

was the use of unduly long preambles to questions and 
supplementaries combined with unduly long answers to questions 
and supplementaries. I trust that all hon. members will co-operate 
in working towards rectifying this area of concern in this House. 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we will move all questions 
put by members to Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 
Mr. Speaker: Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on Motions for Returns 
(Not Debatable) I would like to move to Motions for Returns 
(Debatable). 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I gave place 
in my remarks in order that we honour a man who’s been in this 
legislature for some 28 years, and I would like to resume where I 
left off. 
 
My comments were dealing in the field of agriculture and how the 
commitment of the Progressive Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan has helped agriculture here in our province. And 
when I say here in our province, Mr. Speaker, I mean here in our 
province. I don’t mean in southern Saskatchewan or northern 
Saskatchewan, I mean our entire province. I don’t just mean for 
people of one particular ancestry or another particular ancestry, I 
mean for all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Too often agriculture in Saskatchewan has been looked on as 
simply growing of wheat, raising of cattle. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Cumberland went on yesterday about how there was 
nothing in the throne speech, nothing at all for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan, especially those of Indian ancestry. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, that is just not quite the case. This government has 
shown its commitment to all people in Saskatchewan and the 
diversification of our agriculture situation, consistently. 
 
And I’ll go back to my theme of wild rice and the enhancement of 
that as a world-wide crop — a crop to be marketed in specialty 
markets, a crop to be marketed in ordinary supermarkets. I’ll talk 
about funding, federal government funding combined with 
provincial funding. Over a million dollars was put into that 
particular industry in the last year. 
 
Not only do we have wild rice, we have the  

Saskatchewan Indian agriculture program that we worked with in 
trying to address some of the concerns that the member for 
Cumberland was talking about yesterday. 
 
Yes, there are changing ways of life. Yes, there are problems. Yes, 
I will admit that the unemployment rate for people in the North is 
higher than it is other places. We’re trying to address that, Mr. 
Speaker. We trying desperately, but when the member for 
Cumberland will not admit that we have done anything at all, I 
take exception to that. 
 
I would also like to take exception to one other little thing he said. 
He said, and I paraphrase him, that this government cared more 
about mad dogs than it did about the native people in the North. 
 
I don’t care, Mr. Speaker, whether you happen to be from La 
Ronge or you happen to be from Assiniboia. I don’t care if you 
happen to have Hungarian or Ukrainian ancestry, English ancestry 
or Cree, what have you. I don’t care what it is, if you’re eighty 
years old and a mad dog attacks you, Mr. Speaker, I would 
suggest that the results are liable to be the same no matter what 
your ancestry was. I would suggest that if you are a little girl of 
seven years old and a mad dog or a vicious dog attacks you, Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest that the results are liable to be the same 
no matter who your parents were. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that you’ve just ruled that exhibits are not 
allowed in the House, and I came prepared today with a number of 
reports from various newspapers outlining the very serious 
problem we have of vicious dogs. And for a member opposite to 
make light of that, for members opposite to sit there and chortle 
and chuckle and snort and guffaw when the throne speech was 
being read is incomprehensible to me. 
 
They talk philosophy. They talk looking after poor people. They 
talk about defending the rights of the helpless and the innocent and 
yet, when a government has the courage to say: yes, we are going 
to deal with this; there is concern out there — life-styles have 
changed, attitudes changed; we’re going to deal with the problem 
of dogs, vicious dogs — they laugh. They laugh! They don’t care 
about seven-year-old girls that get mauled by vicious dogs. They 
don’t care about senior citizens who can’t go shopping without 
being attacked. And the member for Cumberland chuckles and 
laughs and all the rest of it — who yesterday so sanctimoniously 
sat there in his chair; pardon me, stood there in his place, and 
talked about the fact that we had forgotten about the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the case, that is not the case. In 
educational programs, we have tried to reach out to people. In our 
agriculture programs, which I am most familiar with, we’ve tried 
to reach out to people. And I might add, we’ve been successful, 
we’ve been successful. Many of the people who are operating wild 
rice leases today are very successful people, and it’s an expanding 
industry. 
 
I was up in La Ronge last summer speaking with people, asking 
them what they needed. They said we need some  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

61 
 
 

changes to some policies here that don’t let us carry on the type of 
traditional agriculture that we may be able to carry on. It’s kind of 
hard to explain, but we made some changes, and today we see 
wild berries, we see dried mushrooms — a very, very lucrative 
gourmet market is being utilized by these people; it’s being taken 
up. 
 
And the member from Cumberland sits there and says, yes, but 
you know you didn’t do anything for us, you didn’t do anything 
for the people of the North. At the same time he says, well, you 
know, since you didn’t, the best you can do is have a mad dog 
throne speech. He shows his total disregard for human compassion 
and understanding of the problems of the day, and I want all of 
Saskatchewan to know that. 
 
In the country, in agricultural land where I farm, we are able to 
take of a dog that’s mad and it’s stray and it comes onto our 
property. We have very simple manner of taking care of that, and 
It’s accepted and it’s understood. However the discharge of 
firearms in the city is not allowed. How are people to defend 
themselves if we don’t have laws regulating the vicious dogs — 
some of the wild, vicious attacks that have happened? I’ve deal on 
that for a while, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to go on to other 
agricultural programs that we have taken the initiative in. 
 
The ag credit corporation livestock cash advance program, Mr. 
Speaker, which other members will dwell on at length, I’m sure, 
has been a very good one and widely accepted by the people of the 
province. Livestock investment tax credit — why not get some of 
the money out of people who would like to invest and need a little 
bit of an incentive to help them invest in this industry instead of 
MURBs (multiple unit residential buildings). 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
hon. member to not continuously interrupt the speaker. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I have no problem with heckling 
from the opposite benches. I have come to expect it. It shows the 
level of their intelligence. 
 
The Saskatchewan beef market assurance programs, counselling 
and assistance for farmers, Mr. Speaker. Farmers are in trouble in 
Saskatchewan and we have come through with a program to help 
them, and it is not delivered by someone who doesn’t understand 
the daily needs of farmers; it’s delivered by a group of their peers. 
It’s well accepted and it’s helped thousands. 
 
The ag development fund — $200 million into agricultural 
research; some of that went into the North, Mr. Member for 
Cumberland, just so you’ve got it straight once and for all. 
 
The farm input price survey — we monitor the price of chemicals 
and fertilizer in the province. A good thing to do, I think to make 
sure that nobody’s gouging. We can put out a paper showing 
where the best prices can be had and a suggested price that looks 
fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but I’d just like to conclude my 
remarks on the throne speech by talking about PAMI, the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute.  

You heard the Premier allude to it today, and the member for 
Humboldt crawled away some place, I don’t know. he couldn’t 
take the answer, I guess. But . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Please sit down. Hon. members are aware that they’re not to refer 
to the absence of members in this House, and I draw that rule to 
the attention of the member. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t refer to him not being here 
any more. 
 
The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, Mr. Speaker, is an 
important pat of our testing procedures in our ag machinery, and 
it’s one that we endorse and we will continue to endorse. The 
Premier was there last evening, and I think a lot of the problems 
are worked out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only say that in agriculture alone I could talk 
for days on all the things that we have done and have put in place 
for the people of Saskatchewan — all of Saskatchewan. I will say 
that we will continue that commitment, and the throne speech 
backs me up. 
 
I will be supporting the motion by my hon. friend from Rosthern. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s indeed 
my pleasure to enter into this debate on the throne speech of the 
second session of the 21st legislature. And today, Mr. Speaker, I 
address you and members of the Legislative Assembly, not as 
Minister of Highways and Transportation and not as minister in 
charge of Indian and Native Affairs, but today, Mr. Speaker, as the 
MLA for the Melfort constituency. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
am indeed pleased and proud to represent the constituency of 
Melfort. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that the throne speech that we 
are speaking on today is a throne speech of very, very great 
importance and significance to the people of the Melfort 
constituency. That throne speech, Mr. Speaker, has a thrust of 
commitment — a thrust of commitment, Mr. Minister, that has 
been our tome since 1982. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the commitment that we have 
shown the people of Melfort constituency and the people of 
Saskatchewan since 1982 is a commitment that I believe is one 
that has gained the trust — gained the trust — of the people of the 
Melfort constituency. And that trust has been gained because of 
the consistency, the consistency of the actions and the consistency 
of the programs that we have initiated in this province. And today, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to demonstrate some of that consistency 
and some of the commitment that we have made to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That commitment, Mr. Speaker, is demonstrated in the 
commitment we have made to the people in rural Saskatchewan; a 
commitment that we have made to health care, Mr. Speaker; a 
commitment that will design a blueprint for the health care system 
in this province well  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

62 
 
 

into the year 2000; a commitment to the individuals, Mr. Speaker, 
the individuals in Saskatchewan; a commitment that those 
individuals can develop their own potential and go up that ladder 
just as far and as high as they may . . . as their abilities and their 
desires will take them. They are not stifled by big brother 
government, the big brother government mentality of the NDP in 
their prior years. 
 
We have a commitment, Mr. Speaker, to families, a commitment 
to family life. A commitment is demonstrated on trading, trading 
with our neighbours to the South especially, Mr. Speaker. This 
commitment is extended to public participation, commitment to 
diversify the economy, and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Specifically now I will turn to the commitment respecting health 
care. Health care, Mr. Speaker, is a very important subject to all 
people in Saskatchewan, a very important subject to the people in 
the Melfort constituency. 
 
Our health care system as a whole is some 25 years old, and I 
believe it is time that a prudent government examine health care in 
Saskatchewan. That system, being 25 years old, is in need of 
taking a good strong look at. It is a fine system. It has been 
working well. It has been serving the people of Saskatchewan 
very, very well over 25 years, but any government who would turn 
their face away from it and say, no, we don’t have to look at it, we 
don’t have to examine it, is not a government that is representative 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was distressed to see the other day, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members of the NDP Party said, no, you don’t need any task 
force; no, we don’t want any task force on health care; no, you 
don’t have to examine health care. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when 
you are spending a billion and one-quarter dollars on health care, 
when you are spending more than one-third of the provincial 
annual budget on health care, you bet you had better have a look at 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m not saying that a billion and one-quarter dollars per year, 
I’m not saying that more than $1,000 . . . $1,250 per man, woman, 
and child is too much to spend or not enough. What I’m saying, 
Mr. Speaker, is it bears a good look at where we are spending 
those dollars. Are we spending those health care dollars in the best 
priorities, Mr. Speaker? And, Mr. Speaker, that task force will 
examine those specific types of issues. 
 
I speak specifically about health care in the Melfort constituency. 
The record of health care in the Melfort constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, is one of which I am extremely proud. I go back to my 
home city of Melfort and I take a look at a new hospital built just a 
few years ago, some 7 to $8 million expended on it by this 
provincial government. And, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t think that I 
am proud to represent that constituency when I see that new 
addition to that hospital, you’re sadly mistaken, because I am a 
proud man, Mr. Speaker. And I will tell you that the people in 
Melfort, the people who were in the galleries today, the citizens of 
my city of Melfort and surrounding areas are indeed proud of that 
commitment to health care.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We have, Mr. Speaker, in the city of 
Melfort, one of the finest health care boards, I believe, in the 
whole province — an aggressive health care board with whom I 
have met time and time again. 
 
That health care board, Mr. Speaker, together with the provincial 
government, in that new hospital of ours has expanded the range 
of services. Today we have an ultrasound unit in the Melfort 
hospital. We have had for some time, I would say on e of the first 
ultrasound units to come into the province of Saskatchewan was 
put into the Melfort hospital. 
 
I would tell you further, Mr. Speaker, we have a full-time surgeon 
in the Melfort hospital, a full-time surgeon who is performing 
operations on a daily basis. When the people in the Melfort 
constituency are ill and they need to go to have surgery, well we 
have a surgeon back home that may not be able to perform every 
operation there is, but he can serve well the needs of the people in 
the Melfort constituency. 
 
We have other health care services in the Melfort constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, that I dearly would love to have, that I chat with the 
Minister of Health on many, many times. And I speak of such 
things with respect to the Melfort hospital as perhaps gaining 
regional status for the Melfort hospital. I have chatted long and 
hard with the Minister of Health on that, Mr. Speaker. It is a goal 
that we in the Melfort constituency have, to further expand the 
services that we can provide to the people in the Melfort 
constituency be gaining regional status. It is a goal we are working 
towards, Mr. Speaker, and, I feel firmly, a goal that we will attain. 
 
Other things that we would like in the Melfort Union Hospital 
include such tings as a drug and alcohol abuse centre. We in the 
north-east of Saskatchewan are no different than other areas of 
Saskatchewan. There are drug and alcohol problems. It is a goal, 
Mr. Speaker, of myself; it is a goal of this government; it is a goal 
of the Melfort Union Hospital Board at some time in the future to 
have a full drug and alcohol abuse centre within our Melfort 
hospital. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, and talk about all the other 
health care facilities we have in Melfort and Melfort constituency. 
We have level 2 and level 3 and level 4 homes in the city of 
Melfort, Mr. Speaker. I speak of the level 4 home called Nirvana, 
level 3 home, level 4 home called Nirvana, and the Parkland 
Hospital. These are tremendous facilities, Mr. Speaker, staffed by 
some of the best health care professional, I believe, any place 
across this country. And those types of facilities I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, I am extremely proud. 
 
I speak, Mr. Speaker, of nursing homes as well in other areas of 
the constituency, and I look at the fine community of St. Brieux, a 
French dominated community just some 20 miles to the 
south-west of Melfort. That constituency, or that area, Mr. 
Speaker, has been searching for a nursing home for I don’t know 
how long — I would expect some 20 years. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, over the years when we had 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

63 
 
 

 NDP governments they promised the residents of St. Brieux a 
nursing home this year and next year and next election. But did it 
come, Mr. Speaker? No, it didn’t come. What did the NDP do 
instead? They adopted a policy of moratorium on nursing homes 
in the year 1978 and they did not build nursing homes. They put a 
freeze on them and they said, that’s enough. And yet they 
continued, they continued, Mr. Speaker, to mislead the people of 
St. Brieux and say, we’ll build you a nursing home. At the same 
time they had, in written documents, a moratorium on building 
nursing homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will tell you that the citizens of St. Brieux will have 
a nursing home in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in St. 
Brieux a nursing home was to be built this year. I’m not certain 
that we can accomplish that. Nursing home projects, in some 
cases, have had to be deferred. But that nursing home, Mr. 
Speaker, will be built, and you can count on it and the residents of 
St. Brieux and the people in the Melfort constituency can count on 
it, and they know it is true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I turn now to something that is very close to my own 
hear, and that is the subject of agriculture. That is the subject of 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and my constituency is predominantly a 
rural constituency. And I look at the towns and villages, Mr. 
Speaker, and most of them are small. I look at St. Brieux and 
Gronlid and Star City and Beatty and Naicam, and those 
communities, Mr. Speaker, are predominantly agriculturally 
dominated. The people throughout those villages and towns in 
those area know the problems that are on the farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people know and they full well understand that 
when times are tough on the farm, times are tough in town. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we all know of the problems of agriculture, and the 
question becomes: is this government addressing the problems of 
agriculture? Does this government have a good record with 
respect to addressing the problems of agriculture? Mr. Speaker, I 
have no hesitation in walking any place in this province or 
throughout this country or any place in the world and defending 
the record of this Progressive Conservative government when it 
comes to agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The members of the NDP Party full well 
know and understand that they lack any agricultural policy 
whatsoever. The members of the NDP Party know full well, and it 
has been documented and it has been verbalized by the now 
Leader of the NDP Party, that they do not have an agricultural 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of the NDP, when I think of the Leader 
of the Opposition, and when I think of agricultural policies, do you 
want to know what the first thing is that pops into my mind? The 
first image or picture that I get is the now Leader of the 
Opposition, just a few years ago around election time, mimicking, 
making fun of farmers, and wearing a cowboy hat on backwards 
in his fancy three-piece suit and stating the words, “anything for 
the  

farm vote.” Mr. Speaker, that’s the first picture image that I get in 
my mind. 
 
The second picture image that I get in my mind is that same, is 
that same lawyer in those $800 three-piece suits going in and 
signing documents to foreclose on farmers who are currently in 
deep financial trouble. And it is a know fact throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan that that new Leader of the opposition 
is currently, currently employed just doing that — foreclosing on 
farmers. and he has the gall, he has the gall to suggest that they 
may some day have an agricultural policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know what the words are, the correct words are, that are 
deep in my heart when I think about that, and I dare not even say 
them, Mr. Speaker. But it is not right, and it is not fair, and the 
people of Saskatchewan will see through that man. The people of 
Saskatchewan will see through that party just as clear as looking 
through a freshly cleaned glass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I prefer not to be so negative, and I prefer now to 
concentrate on the programs and policies that this administration 
has adopted with respect to agriculture. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
need notes to talk about our agricultural policy. I don’t need a 
handbook or a whole bunch of briefing on this because, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s all at the forefront of my mind and, Mr. Speaker, 
down on the farm, the farmers as well have this type of 
information right at hand. 
 
They say, Mr. Speaker, that just two years ago, that when farmers 
were in desperate need of a deficiency payment, who was the 
single man who had the single most influence on the federal 
government in this country to gain a billion dollars in deficiency 
payments? Was it the current Leader of the Opposition? Was it the 
current member for Humboldt, one of two rural members in the 
NDP Party? No sir, Mr. Speaker, it was our Premier, our Premier 
from the constituency of Estevan, our current leader; a many who 
currently holds a permit book; a man who is currently the Premier 
of this province; and a many who went to Ottawa, and I won’t say 
single-handedly, but by golly he had an awful lot to do with 
getting a billion dollar deficiency payment in 1986 for the farmers 
of this province. And it is a man whom I am extremely proud to 
work with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I’ll speak, Mr. Speaker, of our interest rate 
protection for farmers, offering them 8 per cent money for young 
farmers as opposed to buying, nationalizing farm land to farmers. 
And you ask the people of Saskatchewan, you ask the farmers, or 
you ask anybody which program might be a little more 
representative of the true heart of Saskatchewan — buying land or 
offering some interest rate relief? Fairly easy to figure, Mr. 
Speaker, fairly easy to figure. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at our individual line 
service, private line telephones for farmers. Look at the 
underground power lines for farmers. Look at the interest-free 
cash advances for livestock, whether it’s hogs or whether it’s cattle 
or even horses, Mr. Speaker. Interest-free cash advances, a 
program started,  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

64 
 
 

administered, and currently in place by this Progressive 
Conservative administration, Mr. Speaker, and a program that I’m 
extremely proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I would talk at length, Mr. Speaker, on 
more farm policies, but our record does speak for itself. The lack 
of record, the lack of foresight, or the lack of policies by the NDP 
administration with respect to agriculture, as well, speaks for itself. 
 
I’d like to turn, Mr. Speaker, to another commitment made in that 
throne speech, and that is the commitment with respect to trading, 
trading with our partners to the South, the United States. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s strange to see that the members of the NDP Party 
currently aren’t talking much about free trade. They’re currently 
not talking much about it, Mr. Speaker, because they know they’re 
on the wrong side of the fence. Mr. Speaker, they know deep in 
their hearts that the only reason that they have opposed free trade, 
the only reason they have opposed free trade is one of pure, 
simple, unadulterated politics. They do not care abut what is good 
for the people of Saskatchewan. They do not care what is good for 
the economy of Saskatchewan. The only thing that they care 
about, Mr. Speaker, is power — is power, and they dream and 
they hope of the day that they may return to power. And they . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: And they chose the wrong track to power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Exactly. They were on the wrong track on 
this one, Mr. Speaker. Today we know, that the elected officials in 
the United States are in a very, very protectionistic mood. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, when that trade Bill is passed down in United 
States — it is what they call the omnibus trade Bill — that will 
shut out many of the trading partners that currently the United 
States has. Now we have the option, Mr. Speaker, of being with 
the Americans as a trading bloc, an economic bloc, or against 
them. 
 
(1500) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this free trade deal is a good deal for the people 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I could talk at length about all of 
the benefits on free trade. But let me sum it up to say that I was out 
having public town hall meetings, old-fashioned town hall 
meetings in the north-east of Saskatchewan, and we had very good 
representation of the grass roots people at those free trade 
meetings. And they were a little bit confused about free trade, they 
were a little bit scared about free trade, and so was I until I really 
got looking at it, till I really got examining the benefits of free 
trade. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the people in my 
constituency who came out to those meetings don’t have to be 
sold on free trade because they full well know and understand that 
a vast majority of the products that we produce in this country are 
exported, and we have to protect the access to those markets. The 
people who raise livestock know and understand that if we do not 
have access to sell our beef and our hogs down into the United 
 

States, we are in deep, deep trouble. The people of the Melfort 
constituency know and understand that we are the biggest potash 
producers in the whole wide world, and that if we do not have 
access to the United States market to sell that potash, this 
province, economically, is in deep, deep trouble. 
 
The people of the Melfort constituency, Mr. Speaker, know and 
understand that we are big producers of uranium, and that if we do 
not have access to the United States market we are in further deep, 
deep trouble. Mr. Speaker, the people of the Melfort constituency 
know and they understand that on their consumer purchases alone 
some 3 or $400 per year will be saved, perhaps on the cowboy 
boots that friends like the member from Redberry wears — 
probably save 30 or $40 on a pair of cowboy boots — or maybe 
it’s a refrigerator or maybe it’s a shirt or maybe it’s a television. 
Whatever the case is, Mr. Speaker, there are good economic 
benefits to free trade. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, once again the 
people of the Melfort constituency do not have to be sold any 
more on free trade. They know and understand that it’s a good 
arrangement for us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn now to an item that was in the throne 
speech, another item of commitment, and that is respecting public 
participation — public participation — allowing the residents of 
Saskatchewan to own, to develop, to encourage investment 
throughout this province. And I talk, Mr. Speaker, of such things 
as Saskatchewan Power bonds. I speak of such things, Mr. 
Speaker, as the Saskatchewan Oil issue shares that have been a 
good deal for people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our people want to invest in Saskatchewan. Our 
people have the confidence in the growth of the economy of 
Saskatchewan to the extent that they will put — they will put their 
hard-earned dollars into these types of secure investments. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this will involve some of what we call privatization. 
And I know the word “privatization” with the members of the 
NDP Party is not a friendly word. 
 
The mentality of the people in the NDP Party believe that only 
“big brother” government can provide services to the public. They 
feel that only government can provide these services that are so 
much needed to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that indeed there are some 
fundamental services that should for time immemorial be provided 
by government employees and by the government. But there are 
many, many services that can be provided at a more efficient and a 
less cost to the taxpayer by the private sector. And I’d like to use 
my own department as an example, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. And the members of 
the NDP Party have made the case, well your highways today are 
not being built as good as they were before. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we did have government crews 
building highways, and I am proud of the record of those 
government crews, and they built good roads, but, Mr. Speaker, 
the private sector has traditionally, fundamentally been involved in 
the building of roads in  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

65 
 
 

this country and in North America since day one. Those 
contractors, Mr. Speaker, are very, very capable of building good 
roads throughout Saskatchewan. And it is a slur on the 
construction industry as a whole, it is a slur on the millions of 
dollars of investment that those contractors have made, that you 
people in the NDP Party would say the roads aren’t being built to 
the same standard they used to be. Mr. Speaker, it’s not true. 
 
It’s not true, Mr. Speaker. The roads we are building today are as 
good as they ever have been. I’m not here to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
there’s not an awful lot of roads that need repair; certainly there is. 
I’ll be the first to admit that our system is ageing, that we need 
more money to be spent on highways, and I am one of the 
strongest advocates there are to spend more money on highways. 
But don’t tell me, my friends, that the roads today are not being 
constructed to a good level of service. 
 
I speak as well, Mr. Speaker, of the other services provided by the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, mostly the 
fundamental maintenance services that I talk abut. These services 
are today being provided by government employees. I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the vast majority of these 
maintenance-type services will be continued to be provided by 
government employees. And I am proud of the employees that I 
have in the Department of Highways, Mr. Speaker, they do an 
excellent job for me. They are out working right as we speak 
today, a Mr. Speaker, and they are proud individuals, proud of the 
job that they have, proud of the services that they perform for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I take a look at one of the things that we did the last couple of 
years with respect to advertising — advertising to protect those 
maintenance workers that we have. You may have seen, Mr. 
Speaker, on television the advertising campaign that we had called 
the “orange zone.” That advertising campaign was a public 
campaign to try and get the public to recognize these government 
employees working on the roads of Saskatchewan, trying to get 
the public to slow down, be more safe and save the lives of the 
people in the Department of Highways, Mr. Speaker. And that 
program is working, Mr. Speaker, and I’m extremely proud of the 
results we have had with this program. I’m extremely proud of the 
attention that the public has paid. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
employees of the Department of Highways are extremely proud 
that we would think that much of them to have a massive 
campaign like that. The NDP may say, well you’re spending too 
much money on advertising. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is not the 
same political type of advertising that the NDP did for years and 
years; this is good, straight, program advertising of which I am 
proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn now to our commitment in the throne 
speech as well, the commitment to economic diversification. And, 
Mr. Speaker, diversification has been a thrust of our programs and 
our policies for a good many years, and the results, Mr. Speaker, 
are starting to show all over, all over Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m not here to tell you that the economy of Saskatchewan is 
booming; of course it isn’t. We have a difficult time right now 
with factors that are mostly beyond our control. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I will tell you one thing: the spirit of free  

enterprise is alive and kicking and doing very, very well in 
Saskatchewan, and it is due to a large extent by the programs and 
the policies of this administration. 
 
And I turn to my own constituency for instance, Mr. Speaker, the 
constituency of Melfort, and I take a look what we have in 
Melfort. Today one of the big industries we have in Melfort is that 
of Thomson Meats — a meat processing facility that has expanded 
under the policies of this government, is employing a good 
number of people, processing the livestock, a value added type of 
an industry that is doing very, very well. I would dearly love to 
have more industries in Melfort. 
 
I take a look at the other industries. I take a look at the village of 
St. Brieux that has Bourgault Industries, a manufacturer of 
cultivators and a manufacturer of air seeders — and I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, those products are accepted very, very well, not only 
across Saskatchewan and not only across western Canada but 
across this entire country and into the United States — a firm in 
St. Brieux, Mr. Speaker, employing some probably roughly a 
hundred people, and a good, solid, firm economic base to this 
village of St. Brieux. 
 
I take a look at Taylor Industries — Taylor Industries in Beatty, 
Saskatchewan, manufacturer of grain bins and various odd 
assorted farm-related type products. I take a look at a new metal 
fabricating business in the town of Naicam — another fabricating 
business, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency that I am extremely 
proud of. 
 
I take a look at my own home town or home city of Melfort, and 
we would dearly love to have more industry in Melfort. Our city 
of Melfort, Mr. Speaker, in downtown Melfort today is suffering 
just a little bit. The morale is not good in the city of Melfort with 
respect to business because times are tough. 
 
But Ill tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker, the business men in 
Melfort and in the Melfort constituency are a tough lot. They have 
seen the good times and they have seen the bad times, and they are 
there, Mr. Speaker, to stick with us and stick through the thick and 
the thin of it. And, Mr. Speaker, those business men will survive. 
 
Those business men know that our economic policies are working 
very well today in Saskatchewan, attracting investment and 
attracting industry, and we are searching hard, Mr. Speaker, in the 
city of Melfort, to gain more industries to add to our economic 
base. And, Mr. Speaker, those industries will come. Once again, 
Mr. Speaker, this spirit of free enterprise in the Melfort 
constituency and, I believe, through Saskatchewan is alive and 
doing very, very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to some specific legislation that was 
mentioned in the throne speech, and that is the all-terrain vehicle 
legislation. Mr. Speaker, I believe that that legislation proves 
beyond a shadow of a doubt that we as a government are 
committed to the youth of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this spring session of the legislature, legislation 
will be introduced respecting all-terrain vehicles. This Act will 
help responsible owners and  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

66 
 
 

operators to continue using these all-terrain vehicles. This 
legislation will help to ensure the safe and the proper use of these 
vehicles. The government will not take all of the responsibilities 
for the safe and proper use of these vehicles — parents, children, 
and others will have their responsibilities as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental message that I give to you is 
that we do have a commitment to the youth of this province, we do 
have a commitment to safety. It will be well demonstrated by this 
legislation. I have worked very hard over the last couple of years 
to develop this legislation. I have had a transportation caucus; the 
transportation caucus members in this administration have spent 
hours and hours poring over the details of this legislation. 
 
And I, at this time, would like to pay tribute to a good friend and a 
good colleague of mine, and the chairman of the transportation 
caucus, the member from Redberry, who is a former member of 
the RCMP, a family man with children of his own, a man who has 
lived on the farm, a man who knows and understands things like 
all-terrain vehicles. And he and the other members of the 
transportation cause, I feel, have done an excellent job of bringing 
this legislation forth . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — . . . of bringing, of giving me some really 
good grass root advice on the all-terrain vehicle legislation, and I 
predict, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will meet with the vast 
majority of approval by the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the people of the Melfort constituency 
know and well realize that 1987 was a difficult year for us. But, 
Mr. Speaker, they are optimistic about our prospects. I believe that 
this throne speech confirms the optimism that I share with them. 
This, once again, Mr. Speaker, is a throne speech of commitment, 
commitment to a number of things that I have outlined here today, 
Mr. Speaker. And I do hope that I have demonstrated and made a 
good case to you and the members of the Legislative Assembly 
that this government is once again committed to the health care, to 
the diversification of the economy, to the agricultural base in 
Saskatchewan, to the health care system, to the protection of our 
youth, and other items that I have mentioned here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working with my colleagues in the 
legislature; I look forward to working under the capable leadership 
of our Premier, and it is certainly me pleasure as the MLA for the 
Melfort constituency to very much openly endorse this Speech 
from the Throne on health of the constituents of Melfort 
constituency. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find that 
I am very lucky to have followed the member for Melfort because 
I just have a couple of things to add, and I hope that some of his 
people will stay around. Just to prove how the rhetoric came 
through, I’m going to start 

off with the deficiency payment. 
 
That member from Melfort, in the spring of 1986, voted against 
the deficiency payment that our members put forward — voted 
against it. And now he comes around to here, in front of his 
people, and says, “We’re the only ones that could give this 
community a deficiency payments.” What type of hypocritical 
statements do we have here? 
 
This is exactly the method, a prime example of how this 
government talks out of both sides of its mouth. It says one thing 
in rhetoric and his actions are totally different. He talked about the 
land transfer program. What land transfer program, I ask? There is 
none right now. 
 
(1515) 
 
He talked about cash advances, cash advances in these hard trying 
times that this government cut back on and asked the farmers to 
pay a portion of it back because they were getting too much, 
obviously, they thought. What type of double standard rhetoric 
and betrayal to the farmers of this province? 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, this budget that we are debating, this throne 
speech rather, that we are debating, I believe is simply a puff ball. 
There is nothing . . . very, very few references to agriculture. In 
times of crisis, when farmers are expecting some type of guidance 
from the government, when small business and small rural 
communities are expecting some type of leadership, what is there 
in this throne speech about agriculture? Almost nothing. Nothing 
of substance, that’s for sure. 
 
I would like to say, when the Premier of this province back in 
1982 went around howdy-doodying everybody, he talked with the 
language of the folk. He said, we can do it because it’s doable, 
stuff like that. And he convinced people that maybe he had 
something going for him, maybe there was something behind this 
man who was to be Premier of this province. And so he got 
elected. 
 
But let’s just take a little bit of a look at what happened from 1982 
till now. We have seen in these years a steady decline in income, a 
steady increase in input costs, ever greater pressure on the farm 
economy. And what programs, what design, what plan does this 
government have to address those things? The rhetoric is there; the 
actions aren’t. We saw a Premier who said, I’m the only one in the 
world that can give you a deficiency payment — planned very 
well before the 1986 election. But what has he done from the 
standpoint of this legislature? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that there is a mood developing in this 
country, in fact throughout the world. It’s a mood of 
neo-Conservatism, where these people, this party in power in this 
province, I believe, are moving toward privatizing everything they 
can. The only thing they’ll control is the police and the military, 
and when they control the police and the military, they control the 
people. That’s the direction, that’s the mood of this government, 
that’s the mood of the B.C. government, and that’s the mood of 
the Alberta government, and that’s the mood of the government in 
Great Britain, that’s the mood of the federal government, and 
that’s what this province  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

67 
 
 

does not need. 
 
It’s Tory “idiotology” — or ideology — all in the name of 
progress and change, tearing down what was good in the past, all 
in the name of ideology — tearing down things that were good, 
tearing down the health plan, tearing down the dental plan, tearing 
down the drug plan, tearing apart people’s lives, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what these people are doing, all in the name of progress and 
ideology. 
 
They’re transferring the control of this province and the money 
into the hands of a few, the power of certain people over the other 
people to control. The result is a widening, a gap between the poor 
and the wealthy in this province, and that gap is, as I say, getting 
wider. The result of that, Mr. Speaker, is that this government is 
driving people out of this province. There’s no jobs for them, 
there’s no hope for them, because the government does not have 
any idea of how to govern. They have ideas of how to promise and 
betray. They have ideas of how to promise and not carry out 
promises. The people don’t trust them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government says it has a blueprint. It has a 
blueprint for Saskatchewan. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the legacy 
of this government will show that their blueprint is drafted with 
red ink, and the people of this province are paying for that. 
 
And I ask: exactly who is going to pay for this blueprint? Is it 
going to be shared equally, a plan this Tory government has? Is 
everybody going to contribute to building this province? Well, 
let’s just take a look at it. Individual taxpayers on a per capita basis 
are the second highest taxed in Canada — second highest taxed in 
Canada. So they’re paying their share. 
 
Now let’s look at the corporations. Corporations since 1981-82 
have had a tax increase of 7 per cent — 7 per cent. In the same 
time period the individual taxpayers of this province under this 
government have had an increase of 84 per cent. We know who’s 
paying for the blueprint of this government. We know who the 
blueprint is being designed for. And that is being witnessed over 
and over again by the people of this province, whether it be 
Pocklington or Weyerhaeuser or the patronage or whatever it may 
be. 
 
And then there’s the other increases. The utilities are up, retail 
sales tax is up, property tax is up, drug costs are up, licences are 
up, more tax on the people of this province. And a 7 per cent 
increase in the last seven years on the corporations — 7 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with all this tax money we could expect more services. But 
oh, oh, sorry, we don’t have any money — no more services. So 
where’s the money going? As I said, the money is going to 
Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser and George Hill and the patronage 
to nearly every ex-Tory MLA that was in this province. What a 
decrepit way to run government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These people have taken power on promises to build this province, 
and they have betrayed every person in this province except their 
large corporate friends. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just more over into agriculture for a 
minute. We have the people paying more for services, more taxes, 
and more in agriculture. We saw the last budget that came out 
here. We have an increase in the soil test lab fees where it comes 
out of farmers’ pockets because the government had to give 
money to somebody else. 
 
We saw an increase in the feed test lab because the government 
saw fit to give that money to somebody else, and the farmers are 
paying up to 60 or 65 per cent more to get their feed tested with a 
lesser quality of test, because they just can’t afford to do a better 
test. 
 
We’ve seen the horticultural societies — and I have letters from 
these people. They’re just being affected now because they’re 
planning this year’s fairs. They’re saying, please try to convince 
the government that we are out here to live, we’re not out here to 
scrape our way through this . . . an existence through this lifetime 
of ours. Please tell them that we have to have some money 
because we have no money left in our own pocket, and yet we 
have to have some semblance of society out in the rural part of this 
province with some dignity. But no, the government says no to 
that because they gave the money to somebody else, some large 
corporate friend. 
 
The R.M.’s are holding the line; they’ve had no increases. And 
what’s the result of that? Property tax. Property tax up 62 per cent 
from 1981 to 1986 — 62 per cent, when in comparison the general 
increase in expenditures on the farm were up only 23 per cent — 
tripled, because this government chose to give the money to 
somebody else and not to the rural municipalities, so the farmers 
out in the rural part of this province have to dig in their own 
pocket to maintain their services — another tax. 
 
They laid claim to their farm purchase program. A great promise 
— had it for a little while, and gone. And now we have no plan. 
They have no plan under which a farmer can transfer his land with 
any assistance. In the most critical times that we’ve had, Mr. 
Speaker, for many, many years, there’s no plan so that a farmer 
can retire in dignity and somebody else can take over his farm. 
 
They’re void of ideas. They’re void of a commitment to the rural 
part of this province. So what do they come up with? Equity 
financing. Equity financing could be the cure. They’re bringing in 
experts from Australia and Vancouver to tell us how we’re going 
to figure out a program to finance farm land, and they ran up and 
down this country hollering about the New Democrats and their 
land bank program. And like any program, I’m not going to stand 
here and say it was perfect, but it was much better than nothing 
It’s much better than nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s what we have now from this government, absolutely 
nothing, because they took their equity financing proposal out to 
the country and out to the people of this province with a plan to 
get investors to come in, to invest in farm land, to help out the 
farmers. A farmer could sell off part of his land to this equity 
corporation, get money back to get himself back on this feet. Well 
let’s just take a little closer look at that. 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

68 
 
 

A farmer buys four quarters of land in the late ’70s, early ’80s, for 
$100,000 a quarter; that’s $400,000. So the government proposes 
to bring in an equity financing corporation whereby he can sell off 
half of that because he’s probably in hock up to his ears and can’t 
get out of it. So he can sell some of his land off to get some money 
back to get on his feet. So he sells half of it off. But the problem is, 
Mr. Speaker, the land is only worth half of what it was, so he gets 
$100,000 back and he’s got a $400,000 debt. that’s a great plan for 
those people who are in deep trouble — equity financing — a 
great plan. 
 
It’s no plan at all, Mr. Speaker. It’s no solution. But they say, well 
we’re going to get people to come in and we’re going to get them 
to invest in Saskatchewan farm land, and we even may have the 
shares trade on the stock market. 
 
The problem is, when somebody’s investing in farm land, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re investing in it to make money. And if the value of 
that land starts to go up, and the farmer says to himself after he 
sold his land to the equity corporation, well I want to buy this land 
back because, you know, it’s going up and I want to get it for the 
cheapest price possible. Maybe I’d better go out and find some 
other money and get it back. But the person who ha invested it 
says, just a minute. That’s my share. I’m in it to make money. I’m 
not going to sell that share until that land is at top value. Who is 
the government protecting? Who is the government interested in 
— the farmer or the person with money to invest? 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
says he likes to call it share capital. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
what will happen if they bring anything like I see this equity 
financing corporation to be — it wont’ be share capital, but they’ll 
turn farmers into share-croppers. 
 
That’s exactly the direction of this government. That’s the 
blueprint. That’s the blueprint of the Tory government with rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And they can stand in their places and they can say farmers know 
who’s behind the farm. And farmers have had since 1982 to find 
out, and now they’re beginning to tell me. I’ve had people, Mr. 
Speaker, who have worked for these members opposite in the last 
election tell me, I believed what they said. And this is the honest 
truth. They said; I believed what they said, and I thought that they 
could do it a better way. And that person tells me now he will 
never again work for a Tory. That’s what’s happening. 
 
And they’ll stand in their place and they’ll say, we’re behind the 
farmer. And I hope they continue to say that, because every time 
they tell the farmers that they’ve consulted with them, that they’re 
behind them, that they’re going to do this and they’re going to do 
that, they go down one more point in the polls because the farmers 
of this province know they can’t trust a Tory. 
 
I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker — community pastures, a 
subject that I brought up today in question period, a subject that I 
brought up today in question period, community pasture. Last fall 
this government,  

without any notification, any consultation, dropped a new policy 
down on the table of those patrons at their fall meetings and said, 
the rules are changed. The people said, but we didn’t ask for a 
change. It’s a good program. It’s running well. It’s breaking even 
on the whole pasture program. So why do you want to change it? 
Why fix what’s not broken? 
 
And they went and they met with the government. They met with 
the government over at Kamsack and they said, please don’t 
change the policy; it doesn’t have to be fixed. 
 
(1530) 
 
And the government didn’t listen. And so they came into the 
legislature here, 30 people from many pastures around the 
province. Only at that time did the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena come and talk to them an listen. And he 
admitted that they didn’t consult with the pasture people at all 
before the program was changed. But he says, I’m going to listen 
to you next time, fellows. 
 
How can they trust him? How can those people trust this 
government from here on in? And they’re asking me, they’re 
phoning and writing sand saying, look, please try to convince this 
government that no change is necessary; we want the old policy 
back. And what’s the result? What’s the result? Here’s a letter 
from one, I’ll just quote. It’s a lengthy letter, talking about 
community pastures and how good it works and the programs, and 
I’ll quote. It says: 
 

In my opinion it has been a worthy program, and the impact 
would be negative if discontinued. 

 
Tory ideology, privatizing, one step at a time . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Talk about the bull program. That’s the most 
important issue, as the member from Weyburn mentions bulls. 
They’re going to do away with the bull program over a period of 
time. That’s what they wanted to do. And finally, when backed up 
against the wall, they said, well, maybe not. And the community 
pasture people still don’t know exactly where they’re at. It’s a 
good program; keep it. They’re going to increase the fees for 
fewer services. They’re going to have to buy their own salt, which 
is going to cost them about $20 a patron extra. There’s no more 
compensation or insurance program. They’re going to do that 
themselves. Tagging, breeding — it goes on and on. 
 
Another little message I got from a group concerned about it, and 
I’ll quote from it: 
 

We do not want any changes in this policy. 
 

There asking, don’t change the policy. 
 

Therefore, why change something that is running smoothly 
and breaking even or making a profit? 

 
And does this government listen to these people? They not only 
don’t consult with the people in these programs, they won’t listen 
to them after they’re down on their knees saying, please don’t 
wreck it. And that’s the legacy of this government. 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

69 
 
 

And it continues, it continues with regard to the production loan 
program. And this has to be a classic example, Mr. Speaker. 
Production loan program began in 1985, $25 an acre. I’m the first 
one to admit that the farmers needed the money. I didn’t agree 
with the process by which it was put out, and I think the 
government members now will admit that if they had given a little 
more thought — a little more thought — to tell the people that 
they don’t need the money or do need the money, but just a little 
organization, they wouldn’t be in the mess they are now. 
 
And they’re in a mess, Mr. Speaker, and they know they’re in a 
mess. And yet they stand in their place and they say, everything’s 
going good. The farmers are behind us. Well I hope they keep 
thinking that, because I know, because I get call after call after 
call, after letter after letter, telling me the disgust that the farmers 
have for this government. 
 
They took $25 an acre and they said it was a program for their 
farmers. And initially everybody thought that was right. But it 
didn’t turn out to be a program for the farmers, because what 
happened? It was put out before an election, it was used as an 
election program, and the government got elected. I say it was a 
program to promote self-government, not for the farmers. 
 
So the government got elected; the farmers got the debt. And how 
do they handle that? Things got worse. Twenty per cent last year. 
Twenty per cent the year before, with great lot of pressure. Last 
year they asked only for the interest back, but no, this year they 
have to fix it. They say, we’re going to give you an extension. 
They say the farmers asked for an extension. They asked for 
changes. The Premier said the farmers asked for nine and 
three-quarter per cent interest and asked for a tough security 
agreement. I don’t think many would agree with him. 
 
How can anybody trust this government when they start a 
program, politically motivated, and end it up by coming down 
hard on the farmers of this province? I’ll tell you, that is 
disgusting, and the farmers of this province know it. 
 
They said it was a hassle-free cash. The member for Weyburn, 
when he was minister of Agriculture, called it “hassle-free cash.” 
Just a promissory note; that’s all you need. Walk in, get your cash. 
And then after that, the people started feeling the pinch and they 
started getting a little upset that they couldn’t pay it back, and 
others had the government defer it. 
 
The next year the rules change. And I say that this government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, was simply baiting the trap because they put 
the money out under one set of rules. Times get tougher. They 
change the rules, put greater pressure on the farmers, and now — 
and now they are taking the farmers for everything that they have, 
everything that they have under this security agreement, because 
they don’t have any compassion, they don’t have any ideas and 
they have no regard for the rural part of this province, despite their 
rhetoric. 
 
So now they have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, become part of  

the problem. They’ve become part of the $6 billion debt that 
farmers have today. And they stand in their place and they say, 
trust us, fellows, we’re behind you. What a joke. What a joke! 
And the farmers are knowing that this government has 
double-crossed them, has betrayed them, and they can’t trust them. 
 
But they say, you’ve got an option; you’ve got an option of one 
program over three years, or the second option is that you can go 
over 10 years with tough security agreement and higher interest. 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s say I’m a farmer who 
has no money — many, many have none, operating on borrowed 
capital; they have many debts — if I’m in that much debt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I don’t have the option. There is no option but 
one, and that’s to tie yourself into a tough new security agreement. 
 
And that’s why I introduced the legislation that I did today, 
because under this new security agreement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this government, if the farmer goes down, can take the chairs out 
of his kitchen and the living room, and the crop on his field, and 
the tools, and his car, and everything he owns. That’s what the 
security agreement says. 
 
An Hon. Member: You’re just a fear monger. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The member for Rosthern says I’m a fear 
monger. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there was any 
other government in this province except this government, I 
wouldn’t be afraid, and nor would the farmers of this province. 
But I’ll tell you they are afraid, because they’ve seen the broken 
promises, they’ve seen the betrayals, and they’ve seen the lies, and 
they’ve seen the deception. That’s why they should be scared — 
and they are — and that’s why I introduced the legislation. 
 
Put the government on the same basis as lending institutions. The 
farmer does go under, leave him with a bit of dignity. Don’t chase 
him to his grave trying to get their money. Play under the same 
rules. 
 
So they have an agreement with the banks. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the banks, I believe, basically wrote this 
agreement because they had to know who was going to be in 
charge. But I’ll tell you something else — I don’t think anybody 
knows who’s going to get the first right on this land, because it’ll 
have to come to court first. 
 
It just reminds me — I can just picture it — here’s a couple of old 
vultures sitting up in a tree, side by side. There, down below, is the 
carcass of the dying family farm. And the old vultures in the tree 
are having a discussion, and they say, we’ve got to have an 
agreement because we’ve got to know who can pounce on that 
carcass first. That’s what this government did. They were more 
concerned about deciding who was going to get first jump on the 
dying family farm than they were about trying to keep the farm 
there. That’s the type of government this Tory government is in 
this province. 
 
Their rhetoric says, we’re behind you, boys, and their actions 
show how they jump out and pounce on you and take you for all 
they’re worth. And that’s why they were down in the ratings, and 
that’s why they’re going to  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

70 
 
 

continue to go down — promises made and promises broken. 
 
And what do they say about Weyerhaeuser? The point I made the 
other day: Weyerhaeuser, the large U.S. corporation, has an 
agreement with the government that it doesn’t have to make a 
payment on the loan until they make a certain amount of profit. 
They don’t have to make a payment but the farmer, he doesn’t get 
the same deal as this huge U.S. multinational — no, sir! He’s got 
to make his payments. He’s got one option or the other option, or 
he’s going to be foreclosed upon. The government will come and 
get him. 
 
And that’s another thing: Weyerhaeuser is farming the forests — 
huge, millions of acres. They’ve got a farming operation; they’re 
farming the forests. Farmers have a farming operation; they’re 
farming the grain. It’s basically the same thing, but when 
Weyerhaeuser farms their forests and don’t make money, they 
don’t have to pay, but when the farmer farms his grain and doesn’t 
make any money, he has to pay. What kind of a double standard, 
what kind of a government puts large, huge U.S. multinational 
corporations before the people who are the backbone of this 
province, and that’s the farm society that we have today. A Tory 
government does it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on about this ag credit 
corporation production loan, but I think the farmers of this 
province know now the true colours of this government when it 
comes to looking after the rural society. 
 
Another example is that I’d like to bring up is PAMI. Last night 
the Premier made an announcement, and there was nobody 
happier than me to hear that at least there was some, that someone 
had got through to the Premier to say that PAMI was a high-class 
operation. It served the farmers, the manufacturers; it was 
well-known around North America, well-known around the world. 
In fact, some of the other countries took the exact blueprint of 
PAMI and built one in their own countries. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we went two years, the workers at 
PAMI went two years not knowing if they were going to be there 
in the next year. The manufacturers went two years without 
knowing if they started a project whether it would be continued 
the next year. 
 
These people took two years of putting hardship in an institution 
recognized world-wide to decide that, well, maybe because the 
people at PAMI were lobbying, the town of Humboldt and the 
chamber of commerce were lobbying, our caucus was lobbying, 
the Manitoba government was lobbying, everybody was saying, 
yes, Mr. Premier, we need PAMI. And two years later it says, well 
maybe we need PAMI. That’s the type of government we have. 
Finally decided there was enough pressure that maybe he should 
do something because he knows he’s slipping down in the polls. 
And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it wasn’t for him being so 
on a downhill slide, he wouldn’t have done that either, because 
two years of inaction tells me that there was somebody deciding 
whether or not the existence of those families in Humboldt and 
this institute and the farmers that use it were going to have access, 
were going to have jobs, were  

going to have information. That’s the type of government we 
have. And we will yet to see what the agreement is. 
 
I do not call down anything that is good. And my first impression 
is finally something is coming after two years. So I will reserve 
judgement on to how the funding is going to be there. I say it has 
to go to PAMI; it has to be a million dollars a year or more. It 
can’t be fudged in an administration. It can’t be reduced. It has to 
be there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to turn to the trade deal for a 
minute. The trade deal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is something that I’m 
very much opposed to. I know the last speaker stood up and said 
the trade deal is good for western Canada, it’s good for beef 
producers, it’s good for the poultry producers and it’s good for 
everybody in the province. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he didn’t tell me one reason 
why it was good. And that’s the way they sell the deal — it’s 
good, trust me. Well I’ll tell you, the people of this province don’t 
trust you. And I get a different message than the member from 
Melfort. My message, when I go around to farmers, is they’re 
scared of this deal. They don’t know what it’s about, and I’d just 
like to give you a few examples. 
 
(1545) 
 
First of all, the agreement designated identified the freight — 
rape-seed, mash and oil going to the west coast ports — identified 
as a subsidy, it had to come off. But did it identify the Mississippi 
water system that is completely maintained by the Corps of 
Engineers in the U.S. which is totally subsidized? Not one 
mention of it. That’s the type of bargainers that the people over 
here and the Prime Minister of this country are. They couldn’t 
bargain their way out of a wet paper bag. 
 
The member from Melfort said, how are we going to improve our 
beef marketing if we don’t have access to this great American 
market? Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to have 
someone over there tell me how many times there’s been a 
shipment of beef from the country stopped at the border because 
we couldn’t ship it to the United States because there’s been a cap 
on export. Not once in recent history. 
 
We’re not shipping enough now to meet the maximum. What’s 
this trade deal going to do to all of a sudden create this booming 
beef industry? People down south of the border, cattlemen down 
there are saying — they’re laughing — they say, if these guys 
think that they’re close to California, well we’re a heck of a lot 
closer, and if they think they’re going to get advantage over us 
they’re crazy, and I think they’re right. Not to mention the fact that 
what happens when the dollar gets up to 85 cents or more. People 
have said when the dollar climbs, and it’s climbing right now, 
when it climbs up there’ll be no advantage for the people to come 
up, for Americans to come up here and buy, because they 
wouldn’t have the advantage of the dollar. The same applies to the 
pork industry. They don’t know what they’re talking about. 
They’re trying to build — the Prime Minister of this country — 
build them another election. It won’t work,  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

71 
 
 

gentlemen; I tell you it won’t work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Another thing, this government says there’s no 
fear, supply and management is protected. Supply and 
management is not protected, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll read to you 
from Article 706, Market Access for Poultry and Eggs: 
 

the level of global import quota on chicken and chicken 
products, as defined in Annex 706, for any given year shall 
be no less than 7.5 per cent of the previous year’s domestic 
production of chicken in Canada; 
 

That’s come up just over 1 per cent — 1.2 per cent — it was 6.3 
before, and the indication is it will keep climbing. 
 
But then let’s slip over the Annex 706. And it says: 
 

For the purposes of article 706: 
 
chicken and chicken products (meat) means chicken and 
chicken capons, live or eviscerated, chicken parts, whether 
breaded or battered, and chicken products manufactured 
wholly thereof, whether breaded or battered; 

 
But then we move down, number 2: 
 

Without limiting the generality of subparagraph 1(1) . . .  
 
Now listen closely gentlemen, for those of you who think you’re 
protecting supply and management in this country . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: And ladies. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Ladies and gentlemen. 

 
Without limiting the generality of subparagraph 1(a), chicken 
and chicken products does not include (now listen) does not 
include chicken cordon bleu, breaded breast of chicken 
cordon bleu, chicken Kiev, breaded breast of chicken Kiev, 
boneless Rock Cornish with rice, stuffed Rock Cornish; 
boneless chicken with apples an almonds, chicken Romanoff 
Regell, chicken Neptune breast, boneless chicken Panachee, 
chicken TV dinners, old roosters and “spent fowl” commonly 
called “stewing hen.” 

 
Those are things that are not included. And how much, do you 
think, of that market is supplied by our chicken producers? Did 
you wake up over there? All of a sudden, maybe this isn’t going to 
be so good. These things aren’t included, so they can come in. 
This is going to cut into the production of chicken in this province 
drastically. It’s going to weed out the people. Sure they’ll still 
have supply management, but you won’t be there. That’s the type 
of deal this is. That’s just one example, and there’s many. There’s 
many examples like that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I believe I’ve gone on long enough. I’m  

sure the government over there would like to learn more about free 
trade so they could go out and tell the truth about it, but 
unfortunately I don’t have time to do that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government has a deceitful plan. They 
have a plan to put people, ordinary people of this province, at a 
disadvantage, and they have done that through all the cuts that 
they have had in this province. And I don’t have to mention them 
again. They put them in a tough situation so that they’re trying to 
clamour and survive in an economy that’s not working because the 
government has turned the key off in the engine of this economy. 
 
But what’s the plan, what’s this deceitful plan? Then the 
government turns around and says, well, we’ll give you something 
back. 
 
I was at the SARM meeting. They said, well there probably won’t 
be another cut-back for the SARM this year. Everybody said, oh 
good, oh boy, that’s great. There should have been an increase; 
there was no increase last year. And the Premier gets up and says, 
well, we’re going to give you the rat control program back. And 
everyone says, oh good, isn’t he a great guy. 
 
So you take it away from them and make them feel good. You 
kick them in the teeth and then make them feel good when you 
pull your foot out. That’s what this government’s doing. And that 
is deceitful, it’s dishonest, it’s a betrayal, and people just won’t 
trust him anymore. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
people of this province are going to fight back. They’re not going 
to stand for this government. I’m hearing it now, other members 
are hearing it, and I know they’re hearing it. And I know, they talk 
about scare tactics. 
 
They should be scared, because the people of this province will 
fight back; they will stand up; they will run this Tory government 
right out of here, right out of the province into oblivion where they 
belong. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to enter the debate on the address in reply to Her 
Majesty’s Speech from the Throne, and I’m proud to do this as the 
representative of the people from the Wilkie constituency, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I was quite pleased to listen to the previous speaker making 
up for all the silence of the last session while he was here. I don’t 
think he made any sense, and I didn’t understand much of it, but at 
least he got his time in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that speech highlights not only the 
commitment demonstrated by the government but indeed the 
challenges faced by the province and its people. As chairman of 
the government caucus committee in agriculture, I must say that I 
was particularly pleased with the clear priority agriculture gets in 
the deliberations of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I must also say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I share the 
sentiments of the member from Rosthern who indicated when he 
introduced the motion that we are debating today that there must 
be more expected from political  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

72 
 
 

people than condemnation and complaint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it does not take a financial wizard to know that this 
province is subject to the very real difficulties in agriculture, and it 
is no longer even interesting, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the Leader 
of the Opposition and his whining, snivelling cohorts — from 
Humboldt — when they tell us that they have finally found out 
that there’s problems in agriculture. It’s disappointing, Mr. 
Speaker, that it took them so long to realize that there were 
problems. 
 
An Hon. Member: Disappointing, but not surprising. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Disappointing, but not surprising. And now they 
have the realization that we could expect maybe some mental 
effort from them over there, some genuine thought to some 
possible solutions. And I appreciate the attention I’m getting, and I 
sincerely invite them to share their ideas if they have only to take 
the time to come up with some, because, Mr. Speaker, it’s all fine 
and good to say the government is doing this wrong and that 
wrong and heaven knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that no one is 
perfect. So if we’re doing it wrong, tell us plainly and simply what 
policy you would . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: You’re doing it wrong. 
 
Mr. Britton: — What would you propose? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, farm families are not quite no naive as the 
banker from Riversdale would like to believe. They understand the 
challenges better than he can ever imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They will not be satisfied so easy, Mr. Speaker, simply because 
someone’s saying everything is wrong and if you let me run it, I 
can make everything right. Tell us how. 
 
Today the member from Riversdale said we didn’t have a policy. 
Well I tell you, we do have a policy, Mr. Speaker, because this 
government has been direct and forthright with farm families. It 
has committed larger amounts of dollars to direct assistance for 
farm families than any government in the history of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker — any government in the 
history in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that is a pretty profound speech, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has committed more financial resources to farm 
families than any ever in the history of Saskatchewan. And the 
member from Humboldt, when he does speak, says that’s wrong. 
He tells us that’s wrong. And the Leader of the Opposition for the 
most part says nothing at all — nothing at all abut farm families of 
agriculture. And let there be no mistake, Mr. Speaker, farm 
families expect more than restating problems, more than pretence 
and fabrication. They expect genuine policy options. They expect 
actions on the matters of grave concern to them. They demand the 
respect that is demonstrated by serious attempts to find solutions 
and not simple harping and complaining and continual 
name-calling. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I challenge the Leader of the Opposition to 
show some character and put some agricultural polices on the 
Table for discussion, because  

farm families will respect him more, even if they disagree with 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They will respect him more if he 
shows them some respect. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that farmers do not always agree 
with everything that we say. But let me say this, Mr. Speaker, 
when that happens, we listen to them and we take guidance that 
they offer us. That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. If we can’t get 
agreeance, we at least listen. But, Mr. Speaker, the one thing farm 
families always know about a Tory that is even when we disagree, 
the fact is we are trying hard to come up with some real answers, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are not just harping on how bad things 
are. That kind of thing is of no information to anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what fool doesn’t know that things are bad. And I 
don’t intend to imply that the Leader of the Opposition is a fool. 
That’s not my intention. I do wonder though, with the farmers in 
my riding, I wonder if he has the courage to put forward some real 
solutions, or if he simply doesn’t thing that farm families are 
important enough to devote some time to coming up with some 
solutions. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, enough about the Leader of 
the Opposition and his dismal failure to demonstrate even one tiny 
thought about agriculture in this province.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what of government? The fact, Mr. Speaker, 
is that this government’s record on agriculture speaks for itself. 
We have provided protection from high interest rates, protection 
that the Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues denied farm 
families when rates were 20 and 21 per cent. We have provided 
cash advances and drought assistance and deficiency payments 
and irrigation programs and all the other programs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have provided security against farm 
foreclosure and we know who is doing those foreclosures for the 
banks. Some of those people are sitting in this very room and 
needless to say, Mr. Speaker, they’re not on this side of the House. 
 
(1600) 
 
We have consulted with farm organizations and put in place 
mechanisms to develop even better programs and stronger 
responses. These are all things this government has done and the 
NDP has said no to. These are things that are done. They cannot 
be talked away. They cannot be ridiculed away. They are there, 
they are facts, and they will stand the scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. These 
are things that this government have done, not talked about. 
 
And it’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, to have a group of people 
stand up and defend Progressive Conservative policies, policies 
like the production loan program. That is also fact. It is very 
interesting because when the program was first introduced, what 
were they, over there, what were they saying? They were saying it 
was a program for the rich farmers. They were saying it’s just 
another give-away to farmers. They were saying it was 
inappropriate and unfair. 
 
And then the Minister of Agriculture heard representations from 
farm organizations, Mr. Speaker.  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

73 
 
 

They said to him, we would like you to introduce an option where 
the repayment period can be extended. And so the government did 
just that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They listened to the people and 
they done what they asked. That is fact. That can’t be talked away. 
That’s there. 
 
It provided the option to go a 10-year repayment instead of three. 
It continued to guarantee the lowest interest rates in Canada — the 
lowest interest rates in Canada. And what do the NDP do? They 
say the government is being unfair, unfair. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the logic of their argument. 
When the program was introduced they said it was for rich 
farmers and that it was a give-away. the government provides an 
extension and the NDP say the government is hurting poor 
farmers. Well what we say, Mr. Speaker, is hey, it’s not a 
give-away, and to prove it we will ask for a modest security on the 
10-year loan. And the NDP now says, but you shouldn’t ask for 
security, Mr. Speaker, it’s not fair. Where’s the logic, where’s the 
logic? 
 
Well I’ll tell you what’s not fair, Mr. Speaker. It’s not fair when a 
political party that thinks they can change their claims as the wind 
blows. And what is not fair, Mr. Speaker, is a bunch of guys who 
wouldn’t know a farm from a sanitary land fill trying to stir up the 
farm families with all kinds of utter total nonsense. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the thing the NDP will say is most unfair 
will be when, in 1990, farm families stand together and say you 
bunch of slick hypocrites, that’s what’s not fair, and we aren’t 
going to have you around any more. 
 
And it will be a pleasure indeed, Mr. Speaker, to see Humboldt, 
Quill Lakes, The Battlefords, the Prince Albert ridings, all once 
again represented by Progressive Conservatives, people who have 
some respect for farm families and know a little whereof what 
they speak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I will just briefly touch on 
some other areas of the throne speech. 
 
I want to particularly say that I am pleased with the continuing 
demonstration of commitment that this government has shown to 
health and education, and I again invite the Leader of the 
Opposition to tell the people where he stands, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The member for Rosthern made reference to the game of musical 
chairs being played over there. And I would just like to ask the 
member from Riversdale to quit playing games and come clean. If 
you are going to promise more of everything to everyone, you 
must, as an honourable gentleman, tell us how much more you are 
promising, to whom are you making these promises and where are 
you going to get the money. 
 
Now that member has made some noises about taxes, the member 
from Riversdale. And he has complained about the deficit. He has 
complained that not enough money is going into health, schools, 
universities, public service salaries, welfare payments, municipal 
grants, road  

building, provincial parks, third-party organizations like Planned 
Parenthood, and innumerable other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I ask him to bring before this House his proposal for a budget. 
He can have it ready for March 31, and he can get all kinds of 
media attention by showing us exactly how you increase spending 
on everything, reduce the deficit, and cut taxes all at the same 
time. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the media attention of this miracle will 
be so great that people will come from all over the world to 
witness this magician. But of course, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
magic, just flimflammery, distortion, and willingness to promise 
the earth that he might take domain over the land in which we live. 
The power of the premiership. 
 
And I leave the member from Riversdale with this thought. You 
may not be prepared to put forward your budget, but I’m taking a 
count of every promise you make, every dollar you are 
committing, and when you promise things like salary increases for 
everyone without specifying how those increases will be paid and 
how much, I will just have to guess at your generosity on my own. 
And in a very few months, Mr. Speaker, perhaps at the end of this 
session I will present his budget for him if he hasn’t had the 
intestinal fortitude to do so himself. 
 
Before I close, Mr. Speaker, let me say that it is apparent to all that 
we are living in challenging economic times. But we are also 
surrounded by opportunity, and I for one am determined that this 
province shall take hold of the opportunities and not be tied hand 
and foot by the obsolete thinking of the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one more subject I’d like to address. Before I 
finish my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I must comment on something 
that greatly disturbed me in the debate so far, and which has truly 
upset some people. Part of the throne speech announced that the 
government would take steps to deal with the problem of 
dangerous dogs, and the members opposite found that amusing, 
Mr. Speaker. they laughed when the Lieutenant Governor spoke 
— aloud — and I didn’t like that, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
Opposition made light of it in his reply to the Speech from the 
Throne. He also made light of it in the media. And again today, 
again today, Mr. Speaker, they make light of this. They chuckle 
and they chortle over there, and it bothers me, Mr. Speaker, it 
bothers me. And they are amused again today because I am 
addressing the issue. That shows the mentality they have over 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you a story that was related to me at the 
tea following the throne speech. A lady came to me and told me 
how important she thought that one item was. In fact for her, Mr. 
Speaker, she said it was the most important item in the throne 
speech. Yes, the most important. That’s what she told me. 
 
And she was indignant; she was livid. Because you see, she has a 
seven-year-old daughter. This seven-year-old daughter had her 
jaw literally torn off by a dog. And because of the expertise we 
have in our medical profession today, that child is well and that 
lady has a daughter. 
 
I can tell you another thing, Mr. Speaker. She told me  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

74 
 
 

about her neighbour, a lady, a senior citizen going home carrying 
two bags of groceries, attacked by a dog. She could neither fight 
nor could she run. If it hadn’t been for the intervention of 
neighbours, who knows what would have happened to that senior 
citizen. And they laugh. The people’s choice over there laugh. I 
can’t . . . it makes me a little upset, Mr. Speaker. (As a matter of 
fact, the lady told me her daughter almost died as a result of that 
attack. And I have to ask the NDP members, I have to ask the 
NDP members on the other side if your children and your seniors 
do not have the right to expect the government to provide some 
physical protection for them against such threats; do they not have 
that right? And you laugh and have a good time . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Right, right. 
 
I am not surprised at the member from Quill Lakes because it 
shows his level of mentality. It is certainly not amusing to me. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure of the ruling. I understand . . . Can 
I quote from these . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would like to 
quote. I would like to show some pictures. If there’s anyone in this 
room, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member is not allowed to use 
displays. He’s allowed to quote from the material but not allowed 
to use displays. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, if there’s anyone in this room thinks 
that this is not a serious problem . . . Do I have your permission to 
table these documents? For those people who are so amused at it 
can . . . These, Mr. Speaker, are documented attacks of dogs, 
vicious dogs. I asked to table them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
don’t have to quote from them, Mr. Speaker, they tell their own 
story. 
 
And I can tell you truthfully, Mr. Speaker, that the disrespect these 
people on the other side have shown for the people subject to such 
attacks has made me more than a little angry with them. I just 
don’t think . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: They’re insensitive, totally insensitive. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Totally insensitive is right. 
 
And perhaps if they received some letters from some of these 
people they won’t think it’s such a laughing matter any more. So I 
thank that Minister of Urban Affairs for recognizing that not every 
problem deals with international markets or the intellectual ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other things like the protection from 
dangerous dogs. And we certainly congratulate the Minister of 
Urban Affairs. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the motion by 
my friend, the member from Rosthern. I will support it. I thank 
you for your attention, Mr. Speaker, and for the time you’ve 
afforded me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Speech from the 
Throne that we heard earlier this week is very typical of this 
government, and is very typical of this government’s, or this PC 
government’s policy. It’s an embarrassment. This Speech from the 
Throne is an  

embarrassment because it contains no new ideas, no solutions to 
the problems we face, and no concern for the problems that 
Saskatchewan people are dealing with on a daily basis. 
 
Oh sure, in this speech we hear about a task force on health care, a 
plan to study health care yet again. But why wasn’t health care 
studied before the cut-backs that were introduced last spring? Now 
the government wants to study health care after it’s gutted the 
dental program, gutted the drug program, and penalized people 
who need medication and hospital care — after there are waiting 
lists of 11,000 people for hospital space in Saskatoon, and now we 
have a study. 
 
How wonderful. How thoughtful. It’s an embarrassment. It’s an 
insult to Saskatchewan people for this government to suggest a 
study in this Speech from the Throne after it’s taken major 
initiatives in health care to destroy it in the budget and its actions 
of last spring. This Speech from the Throne really ought to be an 
apology to the Saskatchewan people for the actions of this 
government over its past year. This Speech from the Throne ought 
to explain why some of these actions were taken. 
 
People ask, how can it be that the Premier and his cabinet 
ministers have no constructive agenda to offer in this speech, to 
offer to the problems that we face. Based on the performance of 
last spring and of last year, I think most Saskatchewan people can 
answer that question very handily. And the answer simply is that 
the only thing the government knows how to do is to slash and 
destroy, to hack and cut at the programs that Saskatchewan people 
have built over the years, indiscriminately I might add. They use 
no consultation; they simply cut and destroy. They use no logic; 
they simply cut and destroy, plunging blindly forward on what 
amounts to an ideological agenda to get government off the backs 
of people. 
 
Well Saskatchewan people know that there is a positive role for 
government to play, to provide health care for Saskatchewan 
people, to provide educational services, and they don’t want these 
services destroyed. They don’t want a government that wrecks 
Saskatchewan’s institutions and ruins people’s lives. 
 
(1615) 
 
This Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative Speech from the 
Throne ought to be looked at from the perspective of what is really 
progressive in it, what progress we have seen in higher taxation 
from the government, what progress we have in terms of a flat tax 
that progressively increases, and people feel or believe that it’s 
likely to be increased in the budget to be brought down next 
month; what progress we see, what progress in the sales tax 
increased to 7 per cent by this government; what progress we see 
in a gas tax reintroduced when the Premier of this province 
solemnly promised to Saskatchewan people that a gas tax would 
never again darken the doorstep of Saskatchewan homes. 
 
What progress indeed! We have a Premier and a government that 
goes back on its word and Saskatchewan people pay record 
taxation because of it. 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

75 
 
 

Families in our province now pay the second highest level of 
provincial income tax in the entire country — only the province of 
Quebec has higher personal income tax rates than does 
Saskatchewan. And for a Saskatchewan family of four people with 
a total income of $35,000, this means that the PC government 
takes $2,800 out of their pocket every year, 8 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people’s income, and that’s after applying what few 
credits and rebates the government still has left intact. 
 
Personal income taxes, another way to put it, now supply or fund 
one-quarter of all provincial revenue — one-quarter of all 
provincial revenue from personal income taxes compared to 15 
per cent when this PC government, this Progressive Conservative 
government came to power. Well that’s progress all right — 
progressive taxation on the backs of Saskatchewan families. 
 
And in contrast what do we see with the corporate tax rate? It 
supplies 4 per cent of government revenues, one-sixth of what 
Saskatchewan families provide, exactly the same percentage of six 
year sago when this government took office. And this represents a 
progressive tax policy. Well this is one tax policy, one progressive 
tax policy, that Saskatchewan people can do without. 
 
And while taxes continue to grow, Mr. Speaker, so do SGI rates, 
so do utility rates, so do licensing fees, and the like. Even young 
Saskatchewan couples going to get married this spring will find 
that the registration cost for their marriage certificates have 
increased. All of this when we have a record deficit. And there’s 
progress on this front too; successive record deficits from this 
government, if you can call that progress. After giving millions 
away to oil companies, we now have a deficit of $3.4 billion. 
 
And simple arithmetic will tell people that at 10 per cent interest, 
that some $340 million a year that Saskatchewan people pay in 
interest on this deficit of $3.4 billion — $340 million a year 
approximately on interest payments on that deficit, 365 days a 
year, we have what approaches a million dollars a day being spent 
by this Progressive government to finance its deficit, a deficit that 
was not there incidentally when it took office. 
 
And what does this Progressive Conservative Speech from the 
Throne propose to do about this deficit? Not a thing. We hear not 
a word about the deficit in this Speech from the Throne. The 
Premier, as we know, can go and rant about free trade, can go 
across the country and proclaim how great and how wonderful it 
is. And this same Premier can go and he can beat up on 
homosexuals and other groups of people such as people on social 
assistance. And he has all sorts of rhetoric of how he’s helping 
farm families but he sure doesn’t want to talk about the deficit that 
he’s inflicted on Saskatchewan people, and he sure doesn’t want to 
talk about the mismanagement. And there’s not a hint of that, not a 
hint of a plan to deal with the deficit in this Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That’s the last thing in this world that the  

Premier of this province wants to own up to. He’d just as soon 
have us all forget about it. 
 
So we have what amounts to a Speech from the Throne that comes 
from a Progressive Conservative government, a government that’s 
really a wrecking crew, a right-wing crew, a regressive group of 
people, a regressive Conservative Party, a reactionary party, rigid 
ideologues that believe only in less government, getting 
government off the backs of people. Well that’s not the issue at all. 
The issue is good government, government that takes care of 
Saskatchewan people and government that is as good as 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And what kind of progress, again, do we see in 
this Progressive Conservative Speech from the Throne? Let’s look 
at the highway system, for example. What does the Speech from 
the Throne have to say about highways? Nothing. Nothing about 
highways, nothing about the progressive deterioration of the 
highway system. 
 
Let’s look at job opportunities. What does the Progressive 
Conservative Speech from the Throne have to say about job 
opportunities? Not a word. Nothing for the unemployed in this 
Speech from the Throne — progressive deterioration of the 
economy and of the job situation, and not a proposal, not a plan, 
not an idea, not a clue to deal with the unemployment problem. 
 
And the same is true for education. There’s nothing in this Speech 
from the Throne for young people in terms of their educational 
future, as there isn’t for their job future. One-third of Kelsey 
Institute staff cut in Saskatoon last year, admissions frozen at the 
University of Saskatchewan, and not a word in this Speech from 
the Throne for young people looking for an education. Progressive 
deterioration of the educational system, just as we have 
progressive deterioration of the social fabric as the line-ups 
increase at the food bank in Saskatoon each month, and in Moose 
Jaw and in Regina. Legal aid, progressively dismantled; the John 
Howard society, dismantled; and we could go on and on. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we need yet to look at this Progressive 
Conservative Speech from the Throne and to ask ourselves just 
what it does conserve. Does it conserve or protect our health care 
system? Not really. Although it proposes the task force on health 
care, it basically amounts to a recipe for user fees, deterrent fees 
and more cut-backs to the health care system. And the problem 
then with the health care system here in Saskatchewan is not that 
there’s too much money being spent, as the government would 
want us to believe, but that this government is mismanaging the 
money that it does spend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — This Speech from the Throne says nothing 
about the 422 million given to Peter Pocklington — why would it? 
It conserves privilege for people like Peter Pocklington, but it 
indicates that this government can’t afford money to address the 
problem, the real  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

76 
 
 

problem, of waiting lists in Saskatchewan hospitals; $248 million 
dollars for the Weyerhaeuser corporation, but there’s not a cent for 
people needing dental care, and nothing in the Speech from the 
Throne to deal with that problem; fat patronage pay-offs of 
$100,000 a year for people like Paul Schoenhals, and nothing for 
people needing prescription drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Conservative government conserves some things 
very well. It conserves power and privilege for itself. That’s what 
it’s here for, to preserve power and privilege for itself. It preserves 
privilege for defeated PC candidates like Ralph Katzman and Jack 
Sandberg and Gordon Dirks. It preserves and conserves lush 
patronage appointments and, in fact, when we look at the ultimate 
in patronage, we can see that this government preserves privilege 
and power for the Premier himself, with the Shand-Rafferty 
project. There’s a billion dollars plus for the Shand-Rafferty 
project in the Premier’s backyard, but nothing in the way of help 
for Saskatchewan people in this Speech from the Throne. 
 
And so what do we find in the Speech from the Throne? — a 
continuation of the Conservative policies in the from of 
privatization. This is a bit of a new dynamic on the Saskatchewan 
scene, part of the new agenda of this government. 
 
And what is privatization, Mr. Speaker? What is privatization 
really, but the transfer of public investment into the hands of the 
wealthy and the privileged. Privatization is the conservation of 
privilege for supporters of the PC party. Those who have, get, with 
privatization. 
 
And people who are reliant on the food bank don’t participate in 
privatization. Farmers owing government farm production loans 
don’t participate in privatization. The unemployed certainly don’t 
participate in privatization; nor do students looking for jobs or an 
education; nor do senior citizens who face increased drug 
prescription costs. And ordinary families paying the flat tax and 
the sales tax and the crazy gas tax, they don’t participate in 
privatization. Yes, the privatization plans of this PC government 
are conservative. They conserve special privilege for friends of the 
PC party, but they sure don’t serve the public interest. 
 
And so I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying this Speech from the 
Throne is an incredible embarrassment for Saskatchewan people. 
It’s an insult to Saskatchewan people. It’s incredibly self-serving; 
it’s vacuous and empty; it contains no answers to the problems we 
face, and for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues will 
not be supporting it. thank you very much for your attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s definitely a 
pleasure for me to join in this debate to express my support for the 
Speech from the Throne. Let there be no doubt about it, I’m proud 
to stand in this legislature to speak in favour of our Progressive 
Conservative government. 
 

There are three points, Mr. Speaker, that I wish to state at the 
beginning of my remarks. One, on behalf of my constituents and 
the people I represent in this Assembly, I am proud of the 
legislative goals of this government as stated in the Speech from 
the Throne. Two, I consider it an honour to serve in this legislature 
as part of a Progressive Conservative government. And three, I 
wish to state my high regard and respect for the leadership of the 
Premier of Saskatchewan who has the courage and the vision to 
build a better Saskatchewan. 
 
It is during a debate on the Speech from the Throne that we who 
are members of this legislature can express our views on a wide 
range of issues facing Saskatchewan. Today I intend to do just that 
in my remarks. The Speech from the Throne is an important part 
of our legislative affairs. It sets out goals of the government of 
Saskatchewan. This government has, through his Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor, presented this Assembly with a throne 
speech we can take pride in. Let me say . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, Mr. Speaker, I know there are people here who would 
think otherwise, but let me say that I see many fine measure sin 
the throne speech that will benefit my constituents and 
Saskatchewan people in general. 
 
(1630) 
 
I want to start off by dealing with agriculture. All over Canada our 
province is know as the bread-basked of the nation. Our farmers 
are the backbone of Saskatchewan’s economy. With your 
permission, Mr. Speaker, I wish to make reference to a report by 
Dale Eisler in the Regina Leader-Post of today, Thursday March 
24, 1988. It deals with agriculture. Allow me to quote from the 
article. Eisler wrote, and I quote: 
 

Back during the 1982 election, when Grant Devine was 
weaving a spell over Saskatchewan people, it was often 
fascinating to watch him. As he trekked back and forth across 
the province, Devine displayed an uncanny ability to touch a 
nerve with the farmers. In countless town hall meetings, in 
front of large and small crowds, Devine talked about how 
rural Saskatchewan was founded on pride of ownership. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Eisler also writes of our Premier, quote: “His 
message was compelling.” Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers 
know and trust our Premier. He has never let them down. In tough 
times Saskatchewan farmers knew that their Premier would go to 
the wall for them. 
 
Yes, there’s trouble in our farm community, in our farm economy. 
Nobody knows and understands that more than the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. His commitment to farming is real and genuine. 
After all, Mr. Speaker, he farms himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know the excellent record of the government 
in defending and protecting the family farm. I believe it is worth 
repeating in this Assembly. No other government in the history of 
Saskatchewan has done so much for the farming community. In 
his leadership role as Minister of Agriculture, our Premier has 
made agriculture  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

77 
 
 

a number one priority — let me expand upon that, Mr. Speaker — 
a number one priority that has touched every corner of this world. 
He has brought it to a national and international scene. 
 
And the Speech from the Throne states that this Progressive 
Conservative government will continue to provide policies to 
preserve the rural way of life in Saskatchewan. Measures will be 
introduced by this PC government to provide even greater 
protection for rural families when times are difficult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a reminder. It was the NDP Leader of the 
Opposition who in the 1970s was one of the fathers of land bank. 
It was the NDP Leader of the Opposition who, back in the dark 
days of double-digit inflation, said no to protection programs for 
farmers. Now this same man thinks he can put on a pair of boots 
and a cowboy hat and pretend he is the farmer’s friend. Mr. 
Speaker, my only response to that is purely hogwash and baloney. 
Saskatchewan farmers will not be fooled by an urban cowboy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Progressive Conservative 
government and those of us who are in this legislature as 
government members continue our commitment for the farmers. 
Our record and our commitment to farming will continue the 
partnership with our farm families and this government. 
 
I mentioned farm families, and I want to take a few moments to 
talk about Saskatchewan families. Our Premier is know 
nation-wide for his leadership and his moral convictions in 
defending families. Far be it from some of the members on the 
opposite side that are making fun of this, but to our Premier and 
this government, the family is a sacred unit that has made 
Saskatchewan a great province. 
 
This government believes in the dignity of families. That is why in 
the past we have had such family protection programs as mortgage 
protection, mortgage protection during high interest times, home 
improvement programs as to help families, then a record health 
care spending program. Those who believe in the family know 
that they can count on this government in upholding traditional 
family values. As a member of this legislature, I am proud to be 
associated with a government that stands up for families. 
 
The NDP Leader of the Opposition has already spoken in response 
to the Speech from the Throne. I must say that there is a marked 
difference between him and the previous leader of the opposition. 
The one-time member from Regina Elphinstone, Mr. Blakeney, 
had a sense of decorum when he presented his ideas in this 
legislature. Obviously we did not agree with him totally or . . . 
well, at times he did kind of come our way, but we respected his 
decorum and thoughtful approach to issues. 
 
But the member from Saskatoon Riversdale has taken a backward 
step in his style. The Leader of the Opposition came in here, into 
the legislature, and ranted like an old-time political bass with no 
consideration of sounding either credible or reasonable. 
 

Mr. Speaker, for the record I want to state that I resent it when the 
leader of an opposition mocks a Speech from the Throne because 
it contains a provision to bring in legislation — and it may be 
minor to some — but legislation to protect people from dangerous 
dogs. And it’s been mentioned by my colleagues previous. The 
Leader of the Opposition made a joke, and now members opposite 
still joke about it as they did when the member from Wilkie had 
brought it to the attention in this House too. But I wonder if he 
thinks the attacks of pit bull terriers on elderly people and children 
is a laughing matter. I really wonder. 
 
And I also invite the members opposite, the members of the NDP 
caucus, to take a look at those pictures that had been tabled in this 
Assembly, when we see little children, babies, and on up to the 
adult and the senior citizens of this province, when we see those 
types of pictures . . . And it’s too bad that the public, the general 
public out there in TV land, couldn’t see those pictures because 
the bloody, gory, scarred-up mess of human flesh which normally 
took . . . band basically took the near lives of individuals — and 
there they are laughing yet, thinking it’s funny when you describe 
it. It’s not funny. 
 
On another point, I refer to page 20 in Hansard of March 22. The 
Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote: “Everywhere he 
travels.” Everywhere he travels, he travels to a prayer breakfast in 
Washington. I want to repeat that once more because this is a 
quote: “Everywhere he travels.” He travels to a prayer breakfast in 
Washington. The Leader of the Opposition was making reference 
to our Premier of this province travelling to a prayer breakfast in 
Washington. 
 
Now I wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the leader of the NDP 
opposition would have an objection to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan attending a prayer breakfast of leaders, world 
leaders, including the President of the United States, in 
Washington. I wonder what he would have against that. These 
leaders joined in fellowship to pay respect to God and spiritual 
values. 
 
And yes, they joke and laugh about it over on the other side of the 
House. But maybe that’s just it. Maybe they just don’t believe in 
values, in prayer, in a lot of things. I have to wonder why the 
Leader of the Opposition would make it a point to single out the 
Premier’s attendance at a prayer breakfast. I have to wonder. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne symbolizes the 
difference between the Progressive Conservative government and 
those who sit in the NDP opposition. Let me tell you some more 
reasons why. The Speech from the Throne contains bold and 
positive measures for farmers, for education, a new public 
participation plan, economic diversification, free trade and 
excellence in health care. What does the opposition leader have to 
say as an alternative? Well this so-called man of new ideas — 
there are no new ideas. After 20 years in politics, the leader of the 
NDP opposition is bankrupt — bankrupt of new policies and 
bankrupt of new ideas. 
 
What is the NDP’s opposition answer to free trade, for instance? 
Rip up the deal — rip it up, throw it out, no  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

78 
 
 

good. Let them join in with their brothers Ed and Bob from 
Ontario in denying western Canada new economic opportunities 
with free trade — let them. What is their policy for agriculture? 
Well the last I heard, they were calling for a return to some sort of 
land bank that they had. 
 
And remember the Leader of the Opposition has been quoted as 
saying, my position is simply that the party leader’s job is to 
implement party policy. Well, Mr. Speaker, that was a quote by 
the new leader of the NDP. And well I remind him of another 
quote he made; he made this quote back in 1982 when he said, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: “We deserved to be defeated in 1982.” Yes, 
he said, we deserved to be defeated in 1982, and to that I say, you 
served to be defeated in 1986 and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, take a look at any of the excellent items from the 
throne speech; health care, for example. This Progressive 
Conservative government has increased health care expenditures 
to a record high of 1.1 billion last year, the highest ever in the 
entire history of Saskatchewan. What is the opposition response to 
our health care measures? They oppose them. They oppose them. 
They say it’s not enough. Well, Mr. Speaker, you and I will both 
agree to that part; it’s not enough. But we will not agree to the part 
that it’s no good, that we shouldn’t do those things. There is more 
and more money continually needed in all realms of everyday life, 
and we have to manage that; we have to manage that. 
 
(1645) 
 
This Progressive Conservative government, as I had stated, has put 
the money into health care like any ever had in this history of this 
province. 
 
What is the opposition response to health care? As I said, they 
oppose them. Little wonder their leader is a man who supported 
measures such as extra billing on health care, a freeze on nursing 
home construction, and a decline in health services during his 
years in office. 
 
And I want to just point out to you that he was one of the 
instigators in my riding for the closure of a hospital district, my 
home town, the town of Lashburn, Saskatchewan, whom had a 
hospital at one particular time. And it was by his hand that it 
disappeared, and they lost their hospital district. Are we to believe 
that he is a new version of the old version? 
 
Let me talk about the real leader, a real leader in every sense of the 
word, our Premier of Saskatchewan. When it comes to the 
protection for farmers, the Premier is a leader. When it comes to 
building the Saskatchewan economy, the Premier is a leader. 
When it comes to excellence in health care, the Premier is a leader. 
When it comes to speaking out on traditional and moral values, 
family values, the Premier is a leader. The Speech from the 
Throne is a document is that represents the visionary leadership of 
our Premier and this government. 
 
I wish to reflect a few moments on our province. The 
Saskatchewan I remember as a kid is Saskatchewan. . .  

the slow, rural living Saskatchewan has bloomed as one of the 
most dynamic, industrious, successful provinces in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the future. Yes, we do have our 
problems in Saskatchewan, but far greater than that is the 
confidence, the sense that despite it’s growing pains this province 
can master its own destiny, shaping a new Canada, a freer, a fairer, 
a more prosperous Saskatchewan for all our children. 
 
Nowhere is this confidence more evident than today right here in 
Saskatchewan. From the Prince Albert pulp mill to the upgrader in 
Regina to a new coliseum in Saskatoon or a new hospital in 
Lloydminster, the spirit behind the shaping of this great province 
is very evident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mention the content and the main issues of the 
throne speech for a very valid and specific reason. Mr. Speaker, 
these are the issues of concerns to Saskatchewan people. These are 
the issues that Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan families 
want its government to focus on. They want us to develop new 
ideas and new ways of dealing with these issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are very clear in their 
message to this government. They want the continuation of new 
ideas. They do not want to turn back the pages of history and deal 
with old ideas. They want these issues to carry forward, and in a 
very strong . . . and with a very strong leadership which we, and I 
am very proud to say, have here in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and specifically to those members in the opposition 
benches, listen carefully, and I mean it. The people of 
Saskatchewan are depending on you to provide them with a 
credible and sincere opposition, so listen. As my hon. colleague 
has already said, put down the worn and tattered copies of your 
NDP rules and regulation books, quit using the same old answers 
for the new issues of today and those of the future. There are no 
answers in those old books of yours. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan told you, and I repeat, the people of 
Saskatchewan told you in 1982, and they’ve told you again in 
October of 1986, to get your heads out of the book, out of your 
books, you old books, and start listening to what the people of the 
great province are telling you. Stop misleading and stop 
misinforming the people. Stop trying to scare them at every turn. 
Stop scaring young people with your dishonesty. Stop scaring the 
workers who keep this province growing. And I warn you, and I 
warn you stop scaring the elderly. These are people who built this 
province, and they did it despite the regressive policies of your 
former administration. They did it in spite of you. And they will 
not allow your party to take away the things they have built. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are demanding that you put that old 
book of NDP rules and regulations away. They want some new 
ideas from you. They want you to be responsible representatives 
of their concerns. No more hypocrisy. Do you hear me? Mr. 
Leader of  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

79 
 
 

the Opposition, I’m asking you, do you hear me? No more 
hypocrisy; get a hold of your party. And I ask, and I’ll repeat that 
again, Mr. Speaker. I would like the Leader of the Opposition to 
get a hold of his party, get a hold of it now. 
 
Quit trying to buy votes. It’s scandalous. You had better learn a 
few things quickly, my friend, because if you don’t it won’t be 
long before we’ll be saying goodbye to you again. The people of 
this province and all of them want to know where you stand on 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are tired of the NDP hiding from them. Tell 
them what your party believes in — and I challenge you that — 
tell them what your party believes in. Quit running away from the 
people. Now I know that you have a great deal of difficulty in 
getting your caucus to agree on any issue. Nevertheless, the people 
of this province want to know what your party stands for, and they 
are not going to tolerate your dancing around the issues any 
longer. We want you to speak up; we want you people to speak 
up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserves far better from 
the opposition than they have been receiving, and I have no doubt 
they’ll have plenty to say when we go to the polls at the next 
election. 
 
Based on the performance of this opposition to date, I doubt if I 
will see many of the familiar faces on that side of the House back 
here. The people of Saskatchewan are simply tiring of the NDP 
Party. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when you hear of the issues of 
the NDP out buying votes it really makes me want to know from 
them as to where their ideals really are. To buy power, Mr. 
Speaker, I have never, ever in my entirety have every heard of 
something so low, so undignified, Mr. Speaker, it is totally, totally, 
an impressionable act that they have pulled in the past. 
 
The president of the NDP organization in this province out in the 
constituency of Elphinstone buying votes — buying votes, buying 
from poor people, he says. There’s a man in a three-piece suit out 
there trying to buy power from poor people. Well I’ve never heard 
of anything so degrading, disgraceful, disgusting, immoral, 
despicable. I have not ever . . . I was really shocked, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that with the 
particular throne speech, this particular throne speech in which it’s 
spelled out in the honesty and the direction and the moral values of 
this government, that we have to, and the people of this province 
have to put up with the degrading speeches, the negative speeches 
of the opposition. Well I apologize to the people out in TV land 
because that’s just part of what we’ve been putting up in this 
House for the last six years. They talk about taxation, and they talk 
about this and they talk about that, that we’re just taking the 
people to the cleaners. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have dealt with many of the various different 
issues, that when we, as a government, have announced the 
various different programs in this province and have spent the 
millions of dollars throughout the ridings of this province and have 
taken off the moratoriums and the health care, of expanding in the  

educational field, have protected the farmers, have gone to the 
wall for farmers and will continue to go to the wall for all people 
in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — . . . it’s kind of hard to believe that those people 
can stand on the other side of the House and be that negative. 
 
Well I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s definitely a pleasure 
for me to take part in a throne speech here to try and deal with just 
a few of the particular issues that have been mentioned in the 
throne speech. And it is definitely my pleasure to join with the 
member from Rosthern, who is my caucus colleague, who had 
moved the motion of the throne speech, it is definitely my pleasure 
to join with him, and I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I am very 
proud, very proud to be able to say to you that I am going to 
support the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


