


















































June 13, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 13, 1988 
 

2063 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 55 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 
the supper break, I was indicating to the House that, in the good 
old Saskatchewan traditional way, we have built this province 
using the three sectors of our economy: the private sector, the 
co-operative sector, and the public sector. And Bill No. 55 is so 
contrary to that philosophy that no one, I think, who believes in 
the good old Saskatchewan way, which has stood us in good 
stead, could possibly support this Bill. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, sells out Saskatchewan. And if you look 
at the deals that this government has made, almost every one of 
them has been a disadvantage to the people of Saskatchewan. 
We can go through all of them, but I’ll just mention a few. 
 
Take PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), for example, the 
pulp mill in P.A. which was evaluated at about $350 million. 
The government sold it for 248. And Weyerhaeuser, who 
bought the mill, themselves said that they were very fortunate to 
be able to buy it when the forest industry was at its worst. And 
so they bought it for $248 million, and we noticed that . . . with 
no down payment, Mr. Speaker, absolutely no payment 
whatsoever — interest rates for 30 years at eight and a half per 
cent. And, not only that, Mr. Speaker, but unless they made at 
least 12 per cent profits here in Saskatchewan, no payments, no 
payments would be made to the people of Saskatchewan. Now 
what kind of a deal is that for the people of this province? I say 
it’s a bad deal, it’s a bad deal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year, the books of Weyerhaeuser proved 
exactly that. Weyerhaeuser made over $80 million, which 
would have been in the coffers of this province to pay for health 
cost that the Minister of Health couldn’t afford to pay. It 
would’ve gone for education so that we wouldn’t have to cancel 
some of our programs and increase the teacher-pupil ratio. That 
money would’ve been there. Over $80 million would’ve gone 
to our coffers. But no, Weyerhaeuser was able to take $58 
million to United States of our money, and we got very, very 
little in return. 
 
And they brag about their business expertise. What kind of 
business people are those people over there that, when they can 
have $88 million, try and pat themselves on the back when they 
only get 30 million? It doesn’t make sense to me, Mr. Speaker, 
and it doesn’t make sense to the people on this side of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s go to Saskoil. Saskoil has made millions of 
dollars for this province, and, Mr. Speaker, what did they do? 
They turned Saskoil into a private company, sold  

the shares, and before long, what do you know, most of the 
shares are owned by people in Ontario. And not only that, what 
do they do? They lay off, they lay off 25 per cent of the people 
here in Saskatchewan so that Saskoil can go to Alberta, buy two 
private companies, and hire additional staff. Saskoil hiring 
people in Alberta, laying off people here in Saskatchewan. 
That’s what privatization does. What kind of a deal is that for 
our people? That, Mr. Speaker, is a bad deal, and we should do 
everything we can to oppose Bill 55 which simply does not 
benefit the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, the genius, the guy that 
could only be out over 200 per cent on his predictions — that is 
the guy. I’m sure that, Mr. Speaker, if the government listened 
to the present Minister of Finance on all their privatizations, it’s 
no wonder that we’ve had such bad deals. The guy that says that 
he was only going to have a deficit of 300 and some million 
ends up, ends up with a deficit of 1.2 billion. He is the guy . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — One point four. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — One point four billion. Oh, I’m sorry — $1.4 
billion deficit. He is the guy, he is the guy that has advised the 
government on these bad deals. It’s no wonder. Selling out, for 
example, our coal — coal fields and our drag-line to Manalta 
Coal of $150 million. Those are the people. Highway 
equipment sold for 5 or 6 million that was worth 40 million 
bucks. Now what deal is that for the people of Saskatchewan? 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a bad deal, it’s a poor deal, and every deal 
that these people have made has concentrated the moneys into 
the hands of the very rich, the few. But the ordinary citizen of 
Saskatchewan is the one that suffers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they take as their examples, is the British . . . is 
the United Kingdom. And they say, well, you know, this has 
been done all over the world and it’s been so successful. Well 
I’ve got an article here written on July 28, 1987, in the 
Star-Phoenix by Richard Gwyn. And Richard Gwyn writes 
about: “The U.K. developments show privatization not 
cure-all.” Privatization is not the cure-all. And let me read a few 
select paragraphs from this article. Richard Gwyn says the 
following: 
 

. . . Newly re-elected, she (Thatcher) plans to privatize just 
about everything that’s left, including water; some 
Conservatives even talk about privatizing state education 
and the national health service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that the Saskatchewan people are 
concerned? These people model themselves on the United 
Kingdom way of privatizing, bring in Madsen Pirie to advise 
them on what should be done, and Thatcher, Madam Thatcher, 
Prime Minister Thatcher is considering privatizing state 
education and health, national health services. This, Mr. 
Speaker, I think is part of the hidden agenda of this government 
opposite. Oh yes, they start with highway equipment, they start 
with Saskoil, they start with the coal mines, SaskPower, the 
next thing is health and education — that’s next. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as Richard Gwyn goes on to say, and I  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2064 
 

want the members opposite to note: “Some privatized 
companies are performing no better than before.” No better than 
better than before. So why privatize when the profits that you 
had before went to the people of the province and people of the 
country? And now you’re going to privatize and hope that the 
trickle down theory, where they give us a little bit of their 
profits, comes back to the ordinary citizen. That, Mr. Speaker, 
in my opinion, is a backward step and we simply shouldn’t 
follow through on that. 
 
Secondly, Richard Gwyn says this: “Less expectedly, and 
potentially much more significantly, some government 
companies are doing far better with having been privatized,” 
that’s Richard Gwyn talking about what’s happening in the 
United Kingdom on which these people are modeling their 
privatization scheme, their strategy. So, Mr. Speaker, just 
because you privatize doesn’t mean that the companies are 
going to be more efficient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 
 

Thatcher loves to talk about “people’s capitalism” and 
about how one in five Britons have become 
mini-capitalists by buying the shares of privatized 
companies. 

 
And exactly what this government is talking about. Oh, we’ll let 
people buy shares, people can buy shares in, or can buy shares 
in SaskPower, or buy the bonds at least in SaskPower. And then 
they can turn them in and buy shares in Saskoil. 
 
But what has happened? Those people who have bought shares 
in Saskoil, as I indicated before supper, what has happened? 
Exactly, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened in Britain. Those 
people, those individuals who have bought those shares didn’t 
keep the share because one of the things that you do when you 
privatize is you undervalue the shares so that people feel good 
about it. 
 
Well the people aren’t that dumb. I mean they buy these shares, 
they know they’re undervalued, and then when the shares go up 
a little higher, they sell. They make their little profit. And who 
buys the shares? Well the shares are bought up by a few big 
companies. Exactly the same thing that happened at Saskoil, 
exactly the same thing happened in the United Kingdom, and 
consequently we find that 75 per cent of Saskoil now is owned 
outside of the province of Saskatchewan, and mostly owned by 
people in Ontario and companies in Ontario. So when Saskoil 
makes a profit or pays a dividend, that money, instead of 
staying here and going into our coffers, goes into the province 
of Ontario. 
 
Exactly the same thing happened in Britain. It says: 
 

Instead, almost all of these have turned out to be just 
mini-gamblers who buy an allotment of shares and 
instantly sell them for a guaranteed profit — about $90 
each in the current instance of the sale of British Airport 
Authority shares. 

 

Now these people aren’t so dumb. That’s what they do. They 
gather up . . . They say, if the government is stupid enough to 
undervalue the shares, yes, we’ll buy them, and we’ll turn 
around the very next day or the next week and we’ll sell out, 
and we’ll make ourselves a little bit of money. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s what so wrong about it, because the 
bottom 20 or 30 per cent of the people who don’t have any 
money, they can’t afford to buy any, and not only do they lose 
the shares as owned by the public, but they have to subsidize 
through taxation those gamblers who are able to buy shares and 
make a quick buck. 
 
Richard Gwyn goes on to say: 
 

None of these developments means that privatization is 
misguided. They do mean that it isn’t a cure-all. 

 
Privatization is not going to be the cure-all. Oh it’ll give the 
government, it’ll give the government, as it did the Thatcher 
government, some money, some immediate money to offset the 
deficit that these people have created, Mr. Speaker, a deficit of 
close to $4 billion — close to $4 billion. Yes, they can take 
some of that money, and they will offset some of their deficit, 
Mr. Speaker, that deficit created by the ill policies implemented 
by the members opposite. 
 
Richard Gwyn goes on to say the following: 
 

More relevant to Canada (more relevant to Canada), these 
development demonstrate that government companies 
don’t need to be privatized to become efficient. (And I 
want the members opposite to note that — government 
companies don’t need to be privatized to be efficient). The 
right attitude and the right person in the right place gets 
the job done rather than does the newest, conventional, 
economic, wisdom. 

 
Richard Gwyn has done a fair amount of study of what’s 
happened on privatization in England, and he comes to the 
exact same conclusion: that government-run companies can be 
efficient, but you hire capable people, people who are . . . 
people who believe in the philosophy, run the companies 
efficiently, and don’t run them into the ground. 
 
We’ve got a good example of this, Mr. Speaker, right now, a 
good example of this right now. We have the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, which has earned millions of 
dollars for the people of this province. When these people 
became the government, they didn’t believe in public 
companies. So what did they do? They ran the potash 
corporation into the ground. But not only that — what do they 
do? — they hire to head up the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, an individual, Mr. Childers, who was, I believe, 
a big wheel in the company of IMC (International Minerals and 
Chemicals) who doesn’t believe in Crown corporations, doesn’t 
believe in government companies, to head up the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2065 
 

So what do we do, I mean, what do we see? We see Childers 
and his group again not running the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan very efficiently, not going out and being very 
vigorous and finding international markets, but to make sure 
that it looks bad when compared to other private corporations, 
so, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite and Mr. Childers will 
have a good excuse for selling off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve already seen it, Mr. Speaker, in shutting 
down, virtually shutting down the Cory mine in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t expect someone like Mr. Childers, who 
believes in private enterprise, to put in all his efforts and all his 
talent to run PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) as 
efficiently and to run it within the best interests of PCS and the 
best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what’s wrong. These people have their ideological bent 
set in their minds that they’re going to privatize everything that 
they possibly can — everything. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 
predict that it will not be far down the road and you will see 
further privatization of our education system and of our health 
system. 
 
We’ve seen the health system in the dental program; we’ve seen 
it, for example, in private nursing homes; we see it now in 
private day cares coming in; and we will see it, Mr. Speaker, to 
a much larger extent if the people of Saskatchewan don’t wake 
up soon to the hidden agenda of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 55, not only is it opposed to the traditional 
way in which we have organized ourselves here in 
Saskatchewan and in building up Saskatchewan, but, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill goes too far. It gives the minister sweeping 
powers, sweeping powers to sell virtually everything and 
anything in this province. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
all-encompassing power to the minister to make radical changes 
to the way this province has been run. And I quote, Mr. 
Speaker. This Bill will allow the minister to do any other thing 
— I quote — “to do any other thing that he considers 
appropriate . . .” to assist in the development of public 
participation. 
 
We don’t know . . . The minister says that he will consult, that 
he will allow individuals to participate. But we’ve seen what he 
means by participation. He goes to Chaplin, he tells the workers 
that, yes, there may be someone who will be buying Sask 
Minerals, but he doesn’t tell them who. He doesn’t them how 
much. He doesn’t give them any indication as to what the price 
will be. And they hear via the press later on — a few days later 
— that Sask Minerals has been sold to an outfit outside the 
province. That, Mr. Speaker, is not consultation, that is not 
allowing the employees to participate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, I think, will go a long way in 
changing the whole environment of Saskatchewan. This Bill, 
and as the actions of the government have indicated, will not 
increase jobs. Every deal that they have performed so far has 
cost us jobs, has cost Saskatchewan jobs. 
 

They say it will bring in more investments. Well look at the 
record of this government. If you compare it to the record of 
Allan Blakeney in the late ’70s and early ’80s, we have brought 
in more investment per year, and those are Statistics Canada — 
I know, the member from Yorkton shakes his head — we 
brought in more investment in this province before 1982 than in 
any other year in ’82 over . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh the 
member says we chased everybody out. You would have 
thought, Mr. Speaker, if we’d chased everybody out, there 
wouldn’t have been any revenues. We wouldn’t have been able 
to balance our budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more jobs were created, more housing per year 
than under this government. And, Mr. Speaker, if that is true, if 
there were more people in our province, if, Mr. Speaker, we 
built more houses on an annual basis than this government, 
surely one must assume therefore that the economy was better, 
and it was. It was. We had, Mr. Speaker, the fastest-growing 
economy in all of Canada, in all of Canada. We had the lowest 
unemployment, not, Mr. Speaker, as these people now. We 
have out-migrating about 14 or 15,000 people annually — a net 
out-migration of 9,000 under this government. 
 
They say that their privatization is going to bring in investment, 
going to bring the people into this province. It’s simply not true. 
Mr. Speaker, unless here in Saskatchewan, where we are a 
land-locked province, unless we take advantage . . . as our 
leader often says, unless we take advantage of the three engines 
of our society — that is the public engine, the private engine, 
and the co-operative engine — unless we use all three, this 
province simply can’t compete, not only cannot compete 
nationally, it can’t compete internationally. We’ve got to take 
advantage of all three and they’ve got to work in harmony. 
 
What this government has done is, they said, forget about two 
of those sectors; we’ll just go along with one, and that’s the 
private sector. And in order, Mr. speaker, to bring that about, 
they are willing to sacrifice much of what we have built over 
the last 40 or 50 years — much of what we have built. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is one of the main reasons why we are opposed to 
this Bill on privatization. 
 
They call it public participation. That’s a misnomer. Much 
better to call it, as my colleague from Moose Jaw indicated, 
piratization. Much better to call it that because it’s much closer, 
much closer to the real truth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, unless, as I said before, the people of 
Saskatchewan heed the warning that this hidden agenda is going 
to hurt us and hurt this province badly — unless they do that — 
it is going to take us literally years to undo the harm that this 
government has done by its ill-founded policies. Mr. Speaker, 
because this Bill ignores the history of this province, and 
because this Bill gives sweeping powers to the Minister of 
Public Participation, and because this Bill will not hold the 
minister accountable to this legislature, I can’t support this Bill 
and neither can my colleagues. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2066 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 55, which deals with 
privatization in Saskatchewan, has got to be a pivotal piece of 
legislation of this government. And as in cases such as this, 
there will be vigorous debate and it will be difficult for the 
public to determine from the debate that goes on in this 
Chamber, in all cases, what are the arguments in favour and 
against the Bill which is before us, Bill, 55, privatization. 
 
Now the public will see us disagreeing in this Chamber and 
disagreeing quite strongly, and recalling the history of 
Saskatchewan and how the economy of Saskatchewan was built 
up from the period of the ’30s, when it was in utter disarray, 
until the early 1980s when the economy was in very fine shape 
— one of the highest credit ratings in the country, all sectors of 
the economy participating in the growth of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And people will hear us recall those facts and 
government members will disagree with that and, as a 
consequence, some people will have some difficulty in making 
up their mind about what is the best stance to take on this Bill. 
 
But one thing is necessary in the discussion of Bills of this 
nature and that is that the public’s right to know be recognized. 
When we were the government of Saskatchewan we paid 
attention to that, that the public had a right to know, and various 
pieces of legislation were brought into this Assembly which 
demonstrated that point, that the public had a legislated or a 
statutory right to know what was going on. Since that time, 
some of that legislation has been taken away. We have Bill 5, 
which was brought in in a previous sitting of this legislature, 
which permits this Executive Council to do in the cabinet 
chambers that which would normally have been done in the 
legislative Chamber in full public view. 
 
However, government members are still giving assurances, 
although hollow they may be, that they are prepared to provide 
information. And they need only turn to the comments of the 
minister, when introducing this Bill on second readings, and 
speaking to the principle of Bill 55. He says the government has 
put in place “. . . protections to ensure public participation 
process is fair and is open.” And he goes on a little later on, on 
June 3, “We will continue this open tradition. Documents will 
be tabled under a public participation program for all to see.” 
 
And further the minister, in his literature dealing with 
privatization in Saskatchewan, has this statement as part of the 
four paragraphs of his personal message to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And in this he says, “As minister, I want to be 
fair and open throughout the public participation process so that 
all Saskatchewan people may realize the opportunities that 
await them.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in order that the public be assured, or 
otherwise, of the minister’s intent, and the minister’s statement, 
and the government’s statement about wanting to be open, it’s 
important that we should take a few minutes to examine the 
background in which this legislation is brought forward, in 
effect, to find out if the government’s word is the government’s 
bond. In other words, when they say something, do they mean it 
and do they stick to it? It’s important that the people of 
Saskatchewan feel secure that that is how their  

government acts. 
 
This government — and I was referring to it in another debate 
the other day — back in 1982 said they were going to establish 
freedom of information legislation. This government has been 
in power six years now and has never brought in freedom of 
information legislation. So they haven’t kept their word there. 
Their word is not their bond in that area. 
 
They said also, Mr. Speaker, that they would provide more 
funds for the watch-dog function of the Provincial Auditor in 
accordance with the growth of the budget of Saskatchewan. 
Well the budget of Saskatchewan has continued to grow in the 
last six years, but the exact reverse has occurred, Mr. Speaker. 
The auditor’s staff has been reduced, his power has been 
reduced, his budget has been reduced. But this government 
promised, promised in their election ads that they would give 
the auditor more power and more funds to provide the 
watch-dog function. 
 
Last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, we had the estimates of the 
Department of Health in this Assembly and spent some time 
dealing with them. And as we were beginning to deal with those 
particular estimates, the Minister of Health had laid on the table 
four reports dealing with his Department of Health. And at 
another time, I referred to these particular reports. One is 
Saskatchewan Health prescription drug plan. The Auditor 
approved it in June 26, ’87, it was tabled June 9, 1988. So this 
report, actually this information about the Saskatchewan health 
prescription drug plan, was available when this House was 
sitting last summer. 
 
The next report was Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Commission. It was tabled on June 9, as I stated earlier, but the 
auditor’s stamp on the report was August 18, 1987, almost a 
year ago. This report was actually available, so it could have 
been made available to the members of this Assembly when this 
House was sitting last summer because the House was sitting 
here in session. 
 
There followed two other reports from the Department of 
Health area: Saskatchewan Health vital statistics and the 
Saskatchewan Health annual report, each of them tabled on 
June 9 for the previous year ending March 31, 1987. Mr. 
Speaker, March 31, 1987, both of those reports — neither one 
tabled. 
 
(1930) 
 
So the government has not kept its word, has not kept its word 
about providing more information to the people of 
Saskatchewan in a timely fashion. Now since that time, since 
Thursday last, this government has tabled two more reports 
with regard to the Department of Health after the estimates had 
started — one is the Saskatchewan Health Research Board and 
the other one is the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation. Now it’s 
interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that in keeping with this 
alleged provision of information in a timely fashion to this 
Assembly, that the auditor’s stamp on the Health Research 
Board document is June 11, 1987 — June 11, 1987, this report 
was completed as far as the auditor was concerned. 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2067 
 

And we see the one for the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The audit was actually done on August 14, 
1987. So we have six reports here all related to the Department 
of Health, all in a health context, all tabled on June 9 and 10 
this year, when four of them actually had been audited in time 
to be tabled when the session was sitting last summer. None of 
those were tabled until last Thursday and Friday. 
 
So in the Department of Health area, the minister was a position 
that he could claim incompetence or concealing information. 
Now the minister chose the former. He said that he had them 
locked in his vault and had neglected to table them, and he 
apparently found two more that were locked in his vault after he 
said that. 
 
But the point I want to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this 
Department of Health, one of the ministers of the Executive 
Council, has sought to and has kept information away from this 
Assembly. So this government has not provided information in 
a timely fashion. This government’s word is not their bond. 
 
I dealt with before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the tabling of the 
public accounts documents last year and this year. This year 
was May 19, 1988. That is probably the latest public accounts 
have ever been tabled in this legislature. And once again it’s a 
good illustration of the point that this government has not made 
information available which was prepared and could have been 
made available. So this government has not kept their word; 
their word is not their bond. 
 
It’s similar to the last election when the government said that 
they were going to take care of the dental program. They gave 
no inclination of what they were going to do to the dental 
program. But once the election was out of the way and they 
formed a government again, they certainly took care of the 
dental program in a fashion which you could expect a 
reactionary Conservative government to take care of a plan like 
that. They, in effect, did away with the plan. 
 
They did much similar, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 
prescription drug plan. They said nothing before the election 
about the drug plan except to fret a bit about it, but they said 
nothing of what they would do with it. Once the election was 
out of the way, of course, we know that they’ve decimated the 
prescription drug plan and they shifted the cost on to the sick 
people where it’s now become a sick tax. And it’s as sick as the 
actions of this government in this area of not keeping its word 
— saying one thing one time, and doing something else 
different later. 
 
These put me in mind of the guarantee that the present Minister 
of Finance issued some time ago, which said they would never 
put, never put deterrent fees on the prescription drug plan — 
which, of course, they’ve done. 
 
Public participation or privatization, that is the question. And if 
the Minister of Consumer Affairs was doing his job, he would 
have the cabinet ringleaders of privatization in jail for false 
advertising, quite frankly. But of course the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs is implicated in the plot of  

privatization on Saskatchewan people so therefore he won’t do 
anything about that. 
 
The question is: is there public participation or privatization? 
No public participation in Weyerhaeuser. It’s a give-away to a 
multinational corporation — no public participation there; that’s 
private participation. Sask Minerals has been mentioned earlier, 
sacrificed to Ontario and Quebec — not to the public of 
Saskatchewan, but sacrificed to Ontario and Quebec. SED 
Systems to Fleet Aerospace in Ontario, another example of 
privatization. SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) to 
Manalta Coal in Alberta, another example. And there are further 
examples in SPC since that time. 
 
Saskoil sacrificed to the benefit of private investors outside of 
Saskatchewan. And I couldn’t help but review Saskoil because 
this is a . . . It turns out to be a classical example of this 
government’s privatization, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The PC government privatized Saskoil at the beginning of 
1986. From the time the PC government took office in 1982, 
Saskoil made a profit every year until its first year as a 
privatized corporation. So the year 1982 to 1985, if you average 
those four years out, they made an average profit of $31.7 
million every year, Mr. Chairman, until they had their first loss 
under the privatization of this government in 1986. 
 
IN 1984, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before privatization, Saskoil 
made a profit of 44 million, all of which was kept in the 
province of Saskatchewan — all kept in Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1986, the company had a loss of $1.3 million, paid nothing to 
the people of Saskatchewan but paid dividends of $5.3 million 
to the private holders of preferred shares. Within six months of 
being privatized, Saskoil had laid off one-quarter of its 
work-force, under this government. Within one year of 
privatization, by the end of 1986, three-quarters of the 
privately-owned shares were owned outside Saskatchewan. This 
is a statement right out of the annual report of Saskoil in 1986. 
 
As a matter of fact, I have that particular page out of the 
financial report of Saskoil before me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I stated that the $5.3 million of profit in 1986, 62 per cent of it 
went to 258 people or firms in Ontario — 62.04 per cent of the 
$5.3 million went to preferred shareholders, in the number of 
258, in the province of Ontario. That was the largest amount 
that went to anyone. So we see the effect of the privatization of 
this government. 
 
And the list goes on; the list goes on. There’s been bits of 
SaskTel privatized, and more bits of SaskTel are scheduled to 
be privatized. I can see that coming. Even the member for 
Saltcoats has said in his election literature that he was going to 
give more information to the people of Saskatchewan. They 
were going to boost the auditor up and give him greater 
prominence, and all those kind of things which you promised 
people before the election, but has not kept his word on after the 
election. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2068 
 

This government ‘s word is not its bond. These privatizations 
go on. Privatization is now being talked about for the liquor 
business in Saskatchewan, and we’ll have all of the 
ramifications that go with privatization in the liquor business. 
 
We heard earlier today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of some of the 
side effects of privatization in the liquor business. There will be 
promotion to a greater extent than there is now. There will be 
difficult problems on the horizon for enforcement in that area, 
and we will see, we will see some of the effects of privatization 
of the liquor business in Saskatchewan. And it will be 
interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who is involved in the 
privatization of liquor business in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I suggest to you that it may be . . . This may be the reward 
for the important Conservatives in Saskatchewan. This may be 
the reward for going along with the give-aways like 
Weyerhaeuser, Sask Minerals, SED Systems, and Saskoil. This 
may be their pay-off, the liquor business in Saskatchewan. 
 
The bottom line, the bottom line, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
whole privatization fiasco, is lost jobs or jobs at a public cost 
which is unconscionable. These are the effects. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even with this privatization that this 
government . . . Even the member of Weyburn supports this 
privatization, even though he’s trying to befuddle the issue from 
his seat in the legislature, as he usually does. He’s full of advice 
when he’s sitting down, and hasn’t got too much sensible to say 
when he gets up, but he’s got lots of advice on this one. I’ll look 
forward to hearing from the member for Weyburn, whose 
arrival this evening was certainly welcome by us all because 
this is one of the few contributions we’ll get from him as he sits 
in his seat. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, taxes continue to rise under this 
government, under privatization. Government deficits are 
increasing under this government, under privatization. And I 
can only draw the same conclusion that my other members in 
the Assembly have drawn, that there will be some serious 
shortcomings in this privatization program of this government. 
 
And I’m certainly not going to be a party to supporting this 
privatization Bill which is before us in this legislature because 
the government says one day, and does something else another 
day. And I think I’ve illustrated that with a number of points in 
the comments I’ve made this evening, and I certainly am not in 
a position to support this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I ask leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 56 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my presentation, of 
course, is on Bill 56, in regards to the privatization of  

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll be examining the privatization Bill in regards to 
the central issue of why privatization had taken place, also its 
impact in relation to jobs. I’ll also be mentioning other factors 
that were very important in the overall development of 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, the workers’ 
health and safety question, and the environmental question. 
 
I guess in my comments on the first day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
mentioned this was indeed the biggest example to date on what 
will be the biggest PC form of patronage in the history of 
Saskatchewan. And the reason why I say that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is because the question of privatization, especially in 
this case, makes absolutely no sense. 
 
(1945) 
 
In most cases, this PC government has argued that privatization 
occurs because we have to improve efficiency. In most cases, 
the previous speaker and many other speakers have pointed out, 
that is indeed a phoney argument, because we have found out 
that many public institutions can indeed be efficient, whether it 
is in the case of hospitals, schools, highways, or mines, or 
forests. And the question of efficiency is one that is based more 
on the level of development of the work-force and also the level 
of development in regards to technology. 
 
And in both of those cases, private and public corporations try 
to have both a highly developed work-force and also highly 
developed and up-to-date technology. So the question is a deep 
question in regards to efficiency, and when you examine the 
research, points out that it’s really no question of efficiency — 
that indeed, as I mentioned before, it’s more than efficiency. 
 
As I looked at this issue of privatization of our mining industry, 
I looked at it, number one, as something that has been done that 
goes against the basics of Saskatchewan tradition and 
Saskatchewan history. What we have seen in this province is a 
situation where we have basic raw materials; where the 
secondary manufacturing doesn’t exist; where the markets are 
usually far away and the transportation costs are fairly high, so 
that what was done by the early pioneers of this province is 
such that they wanted to have more control and more say on 
what happened in different areas of development. We had seen 
that in the areas of controlling our own school system, 
controlling our own health systems, and so on. 
 
In the early days, especially during the ’30s, a lot of people 
recognized that the ups and downs of the markets could not be 
relied upon in regards to not only public institutions, but in 
regards to the production end of the scale on economic 
development. And as such, many of the people in the province 
developed the idea that they ought to challenge the highly 
unstable and highly fluctuating private market system, and that 
in order for them to have a more stable, long-term, effective, 
and efficient approach, they had to join forces together, and to 
join forces together to be able to counteract the monopolizing 
tendencies of large-scale business which had been moving on 
the west. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2069 
 

The farmers were well aware of the earlier days of big corporate 
development in western Canada. One has to recall the issue 
where a large-scale corporation such as the pacific, the 
Canadian pacific was such that they had received about 25 . . . 
oh, I would say about 25 million acres of land. And when 
people were fighting for land, they saw the corporations only 
benefitting. 
 
So the strategy had been developed ideologically and in practice 
in England where the co-ops had formed. And the co-ops were 
forming in eastern Canada, as well, to counteract this highly 
unstable base of the market system. So co-ops were developed 
in that respect, and people worked together and challenged the 
large-scale corporations. 
 
One looks at that history and recognizes that it’s been highly 
successful. Of the top 100 businesses in Saskatchewan, we now 
have 25 of them in regards to the co-op system. 
 
When you examine the next phase of development, people 
recognized that the larger-scale developers were still moving 
and overtaking the co-ops in other key areas that the co-ops did 
not have time to move into. And again, basing their traditions 
on working together, the idea came out that indeed we have 
been effective in establishing not only a counter to, let’s say to 
the private school systems of the 1800s, we now had effective 
public school systems. The same idea was then applied to the 
service sector where we had sky-rocketing rates of insurance, 
and Saskatchewan Government Insurance was born as a counter 
to the monopolizing tendencies of the large-scale private 
profiteers in the area of insurance. 
 
So there needed to be a balanced approach, and many of the 
people debated whether or not the public sector could be 
effective in our system. And as time went on, it came to be 
recognized that not only could a public institution like a school 
under public control be effective and efficient, you could also 
add the same applying in regards to the service sector. And as 
such we came to see the involvement of Crown corporations in 
our lives in Saskatchewan as part of the building of this 
province. 
 
The next point of debate that took place was whether or not the 
public sector, which had moved into the school systems and 
also, you know, by the 60s in our health system, where we 
championed one of the best health care systems in the whole 
world, that indeed the proof had been there — that indeed we 
could have the best of both worlds in regards to this whole 
question of public control. 
 
But it was debated as to whether or not it was possible to have 
public control to move into the sphere of production. To a 
certain extent the co-op movement in regards to the wheat pools 
had already laid the basis of the argument and that, indeed, they 
had proven that they could be effective and efficient. But the 
debate still went on in regard to the areas such as forestry and 
mining, and today, this evening, I want to point out that one of 
the major corporations that is being privatized under this Bill 
has proven beyond any doubt that public involvement through 
Crown corporations can also be effective and efficient in what 
we might call the more industrialized sectors of the economy. 
We have seen that in the areas of  

both forestry and mining. 
 
Tonight I will now turn to the issue of Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation, which is being privatized through 
this Bill. Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation was 
started in 1974 and it’s been going on now in its 14th year. 
What we see here is a world-class corporation. It has assets of 
$900 million. It has a return on investment of 20 per cent. It has 
revenues totalling close to $200 million a year and a profit 
margin of 60 million, with a return on dividends totalling $30 
million. In other words, Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation has been a financial success. 
 
When we look at the questions that have been brought out in 
regards to long-term debt, we know that Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation would finish paying off its debt in 
about two years, so the issue is not really even in regard to the 
long-term debt. The long-term debt will be easily paid off. 
 
I think the other factor in regards to what SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) is about is: 
not only is it financially successful, it has utilized regular 
business management practice in regards to the overall 
integration of the industry. What we have seen is vertical and 
horizontal integration. We have seen the fact that Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation not only is involved in the 
early stages of exploration, what people usually refer to as the 
checking of the areas through aircraft and then later on starting 
line-cutting or geophysical survey when they prove that there’s 
a high enough reading on the different minerals that are there. 
 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation has involved 
itself in that, but they’ve also been involved in the area of the 
construction of mines and the operation of mines so that not 
only were they in the exploration field, it has been involved in 
very many areas of the overall aspect of mining development in 
the North. 
 
The other thing that’s important to recognize of Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation is that it had gone not only in 
the area of gold, but it had gone on into the areas of uranium 
and had played a very crucial role in putting Saskatchewan on 
the world map in regards to uranium development. Gold is 
another area where Saskatchewan has been put on the map, and 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation plays a very 
strong role in looking at the overall aspect of gold production. 
The other aspects, the other base metals such as zinc, nickel, 
copper is also a place where Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation works. 
 
(2000) 
 
In other words, when you look at Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation, it is financially successful, it’s got 
integration in the different aspects of mining, it’s dealing with 
the various resources from gold, copper, zinc, or uranium, and it 
has also done so in regards to Saskatchewan tradition. And the 
Saskatchewan tradition, of course, is such where you combine 
the public and the private sector. 
 
The mixed economy approach is what has been used in  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2070 
 

this overall situation — SMDC has not simply gone in to 
monopolize every mine. They own 16 per cent here, 20 per cent 
there, 33 per cent there, and 50 per cent in other situations. So 
that what they have done is strategic investment on the different 
aspects of mining production in northern Saskatchewan. And 
that has been the overall role played in regards to the economic 
management aspects of the resource. 
 
I suppose one could say that the reason why the joint venture 
strategy was so effectively used is because it provides a sense of 
stability for the private sector in recognizing that the 
government is playing a partnership role with them in regards to 
production. One also looks at the record of the past where the 
NDP government had an excellent record internationally in 
regards to borrowing and so on — their financial rating was 
top-notch. And in that sense, it brought a sense of stability for a 
lot of businesses to go in joint enterprise with the public 
corporation. 
 
In other words, in both cases, it reduced the risk for both the 
government and the private industry. It also helped to cut costs 
because each were efficient on different aspects of the 
development because SMDC would team up with corporations 
that were effective in some aspects and they, the private 
corporations, in turn recognized that the Saskatchewan 
development corporation that played a leadership role in key 
aspects of mining and, as such, the joint venture corporations 
became an effective means of doing business. 
 
But I think the real reason why a lot of people went into the 
public sector argument was this, and this is what the Bill does 
not deal with. We look at the aspects of development today not 
in a narrow, simplistic, and profit-oriented approach. Most 
development and most large-scale corporations in the world are 
starting to examine the fact that economic development has to 
be combined with social development and that some of the 
regional disparities that exist in particular areas have to be 
considered in relation to overall development. And key issues 
that arise from time to time are of course the concerns of jobs, 
the concerns of workers’ health and safety, especially in regards 
to uranium industry, the concerns of the environment question, 
and so on. 
 
When people became to be involved in the whole aspect of the 
public sector, there was another adjoining positive aspect — 
people expected greater involvement in the public sector. 
Where there was a lot of secrecy on the private sector 
development because the private sector always says, we can’t 
disclose the information because it might jeopardize our 
competitive base, a lot of people expected the public 
corporations to be a lot more than just secret, competitive, 
dealing businesses; that they had to deal with business in 
regards to the public good, that in regards to what was 
happening in that area, that ought to be recognized. 
 
So the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation set 
standards in the mining industry in regards to the whole issue of 
jobs. The device utilized in regards to jobs, which appears 
nowhere in terms of recognizing its potential in Bill 56, is a 
concept of lease agreement. The lease agreements had provided 
for the hiring of people in  

northern Saskatchewan and also for the Inuit and Metis people 
because the unemployment rate was anywhere from 60 to 80 
per cent. 
 
One of the top concerns for allowing development to proceed 
was that the jobs aspect had to be there; that the company had to 
be able to work with the local people so that the local people 
can have the responsibility of putting their own food on the 
table for their children and their families. And that was a key 
item, and in many cases, the other one that was brought in from 
time to time was a question of education and training. 
 
When we look at the experience of the ’70s during the rise of 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, especially in 
its joint ownership ventures in Amok and in Key Lake and later 
on in the gold industry, we recognize that we had tried certain 
things. One of the key things that was definitely stated was that 
the voluntarism of the past, where you do not define things in 
terms of how many people are going to be hired from the North 
or from Indian Metis people, if it was not defined, the 
voluntarism would slip back to how the old system used to run, 
where only maybe 2 to 5 per cent of the people used to get 
employed after the construction phase. 
 
As the construction phase went on in Amok, it was recognized 
that that was to be the case, so a clause was put in for hiring of 
people in the North. And a lot of that development took place, 
there was a lack of a clause for the operational phase. Later on 
people have found out that you had to have a clause also on the 
operational phase; that indeed, if you did not have these for 
protection of the people and for developmental reasons, things 
would always go back to the way it was in the past. 
 
There is no way in this Bill that there is any mention of jobs at 
all. There is no mention for jobs for Indian Metis people; there 
is no mention of jobs for northern people; there is no mention of 
jobs for Saskatchewan people. In other words, there is nothing, 
and what I predict is probably an empty promise from the 
minister in regards to jobs in the upcoming future. 
 
But it’s the same type of promise we have seen in six years. Six 
years of northern development has just proven to move us into 
more unemployment and greater hardships for the children, the 
workers, and the families. And this whole question is not 
mentioned anywhere in this Bill. And when I mentioned it in 
committee before, in the Crown Corporations Committee, again 
there was only a promise that something would be done. But 
people cannot live on promises. It has to be if it’s important, 
governed in law. If it’s meaningful and important, then the law 
should take that into consideration. But what we have seen in 
the past six years of PC practice is that they do not respect these 
historic developments of hiring people in the North from the 
previous government. 
 
When we looked at ’82 and the minister of northern affairs at 
that time came in, he did away with the monitoring committee 
that was supposed to look after jobs, to look the . . . making 
sure we had the northern contracts intact, making sure that the 
workers’ health and safety question was there, making sure that 
the environmental questions were being looked after.  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2071 
 

Because the best standards had been set up to that point in time 
in those days, and the minister of the day knew that, so they did 
away with the monitoring committee so there would be no 
public device except the whole secrecy based on the whole 
faulty theory of competitive edge. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that question, along with the workers’ 
health and safety question and the question of environment, is 
something we will be pursuing with the minister, something 
that we know he has made absolutely no mention in this Act. 
 
The other thing about the deal is that it smacks of the regular 
PC government patronage. It appears that here we have 
something we already own as Saskatchewan people. We already 
own this mine. We already own these mines. And what we’re 
going to do is turn them over to the big corporations and the 
business friends of the Tories. And all they will leave us is 
promises. 
 
I mentioned that this . . . I said that this, indeed this planned 
privatization of SMDC will become the highest and slickest 
form of PC patronage this province will have seen. And the sad 
part of it is that in the end result, we will be paying for this 
patronage. As I mentioned before, we will be paying in terms of 
not only the financial resources and the tremendous dividends 
and the profits that we already have coming to the coffers, we 
will be losing all that. 
 
We will be losing also jobs because the whole history of open 
for business, the past six years have shown that we will lose 
jobs. And I don’t see any other reason to change that. And when 
we look at Thatcher’s England in privatization, lost jobs are 
there. In other words, people will end up paying while the big 
corporations and the friends of the PCs get richer. 
 
One of the other aspects of SMDC was the whole issue of the 
politics behind it. I consider the selling of SMDC as directly 
tied to the politics of the Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney. 
 
(2015) 
 
In 1986 the Prime Minister bought the Saskatchewan election, 
and $1 billion that were transferred to the West, with 400 
coming over here, was, in many of the people’s eyes, the 
decisive factor in the winning of the election basically, because 
people knew that the NDP did win more votes than the PCs did, 
and that it has to be done on a selective basis. And this SMDC 
deal therefore is directly tied with Mulroney’s strategy of 
privatization. 
 
Mulroney could not sell Eldorado Nuclear the way it stood. 
Eldorado Nuclear, in comparison the SMDC, has a lot to be 
desired. I’ll give you some facts. Yes, it’s got $900 million — 
over $900 million worth of assets — but the long-term debt in 
that is over 400 million. It’s actually $420 million. And in the 
past three years, they’ve been losing $100 million — over $100 
million. At the same time, when we look at the fact that this 
past year alone, Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation made 60 million. 
 

So when we look at the financial record of Eldorado Nuclear, 
it’s not in very good shape, and what the Prime Minister wanted 
to do was to still sell Eldorado, but no private corporation 
would buy it because it was a losing entity at this point in time 
in history. So it had to be combined with a more world-class 
corporation like SMDC. And in that sense then, the combined 
assets of this new corporation — this new super corporation in 
Saskatchewan — would be 1.8 billion. And that’s taken from 
the annual reports of both Eldorado Nuclear and SMDC. 
 
It’s interesting, when I checked the reports out and it said that 
the company who looked over the assets of the two companies 
said it was $1.6 billion, somehow, somewhere already 200 
million was lost. We predict that the same will happen in 
regards to the devaluation of the shares as was mentioned 
earlier on. So all in all, we see the privatization of SMDC, as a 
political debt paid to Mulroney so that he can release Eldorado 
Nuclear. 
 
The only thing that we hear in regards to the minister is the 75 
per cent . . . The only thing that we see in regards is the shares, 
and the shares, supposing, are going to be sold. And that’s how 
we’re supposed to get it. But many speakers have already 
pointed out the shares themselves, the majority of the shares, 
will be owned by big business. That’s straightforward. 
 
I mentioned in the last statement, we’d be ending up paying for 
the . . . it was analogous to having our own house. The 
corporation would still own the house. We might be able to buy 
a few shares for a couple window panes or, you know, the door 
knobs or at the most, maybe, having a share on the garbage can 
in the back alley. 
 
So when we look at the overall aspect of the shares, they’ll use 
our money to try and advertise and paint it as our new golden 
garbage can. And in that regard, I would say that the minister 
should earn the title of the golden garbage can award of the year 
because, basically, that’s all it is. It’s not, of course, a solid 
golden garbage can, basically, because the minister probably 
will use gold paint to paint it over and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fool’s gold. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And fool’s gold will probably be used, as the 
member points out. So this whole idea of fool’s gold is a fitting 
basis on how to look at the shares. 
 
So in overall terms, in summary therefore, what we have seen is 
this: number one, we have gone away from Saskatchewan 
history. We have used the three engines of growth as many 
speakers have said. We have looked at the public sector, the 
private sector, and the co-ops as the essence of Saskatchewan 
history. What we are doing is relying solely on private 
enterprise to deal with economic development. What we have 
seen in the past is that that has been unstable, it has not proven 
itself, that it has fluctuated too much, it could not be relied 
upon, and that’s why Saskatchewan built a public sector and a 
co-op along with it. 
 
And so the other aspect is this: in the end result this slick  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2072 
 

form of patronage, which we’ll have to pay the advertising costs 
on will only benefit, of course, the large scale corporations and 
the friends of the Tories. The promises for jobs will not 
materialize because the history of privatization shows that we 
lose jobs. The history also shows that the concerns for social 
and resource development will not be there — that indeed, 
slowly but surely, the concerns for environment and the 
concerns for workers’ health and safety will diminish. 
 
So when I debate more in the future when we get back into the 
committee, I’ll be looking at the specifics. 
 
Number one, we know that this is a bad deal; it’s a rotten deal 
for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s a sell-out of 
one of our last major assets and resources. We have sold out 
just about everything. All we will have left is probably our 
hands and a few jobs that’ll be relayed to us from time to time. 
 
The jobs aspects — in comparison, is a second major thing — 
absolutely no promise in this Bill in regards to the jobs issue. 
 
The other thing that the people have talked about in regards to 
workers’ health and safety and environment are other things we 
will be looking at. 
 
So that what the people have laid out as a standard in regards to 
Saskatchewan history — that we will need to work jointly with 
the public sector; that, indeed, we will need to combine 
economic development with social development, along with 
resource development — are important standards that we need 
to uphold. 
 
So when I stand here, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have more people to 
make statements on it, and I’ll have a lot more to say when we 
get into committee. So, with leave, I guess I will ask for the 
adjournment of the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Swan that Bill NO. 82 — An Act to 
amend The Litter Control Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I intend 
to make a few more remarks on this Bill in second reading, and 
then we will hopefully move the Bill into committee where we 
can have a discussion with the minister on some if its 
implications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I identified my earlier remarks before moving 
the adjournment, when the initial legislation was brought to this 
House a year ago in terms of litter control — the legislation that 
made it possible for the reintroduction of cans . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I’m afraid that, depending on what the 
House decides to do, we might have to take a step back. Our 
records show that the member for Cumberland already 
adjourned debate on a prior occasion, so with leave we’ll allow 
somebody else to adjourn. 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the debate on the SMDC Bill 
is essentially a debate about privatization and the way that the 
economy of the province shall be run. My colleagues and I will 
want to make additional statements on that, and I would, at this 
time, adjourn debate on that motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Swan that Bill No. 82 — An Act to 
amend The Litter Control Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the initial legislation was brought to this House last 
session to permit the reintroduction of canned beverages and 
future containers, plastic containers for beverages, we on this 
side of the House supported the Bill, but we raised two very 
significant concerns in the hopes that the government would 
deal realistically with those concerns. They were concern about 
protection for Saskatchewan jobs and protection for 
Saskatchewan interests on the one hand, and concern about the 
environment on the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the question of protection of Saskatchewan 
jobs and Saskatchewan interests, with the reintroduction of the 
aluminum cans — and we can speak about that now because it 
happened about a month ago and we’re already beginning to see 
some of the results — on the question of protecting 
Saskatchewan jobs and protecting Saskatchewan interests, I 
think it can be fairly said that this government has been a failure 
in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am told that at the Molson’s brewery here in 
Regina, at this one brewery alone, it is expected by September, 
25 individuals will have lost their jobs directly as a result of the 
reintroduction of canned beer, and, in fact, some of those 
lay-off notices may be coming as early as this week. 
Twenty-five jobs in that brewery is a full 25 per cent of the 
work-force. I’m told that at the Carling brewery in Saskatoon, 
already 14 employees are gone — and that figure is 25 per cent 
of the work-force in the Carling brewery. Again, as a result of 
the reintroduction of aluminum cans, just by way of note, Mr. 
Speaker, during the current heat wave that this province has 
suffered, in a normal course of events, before the introduction 
of aluminum cans again, that Carling brewery in Saskatoon 
would have liked to have been working two full shifts, probably 
three. In fact, they’ve been working at one shift, at one shift. 
And 14 people have lost their jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked to a hotel owner in Moose Jaw and he 
tells me that, in fact, canned beer is now selling 10:1 — 10:1 to 
the beer being bottled in Saskatchewan. And so clearly, the 
brewing industry in Saskatchewan is suffering and 
Saskatchewan jobs are being lost. 
 
This government did not, did not insist that a canning line be 
built in Saskatchewan for the breweries and so, understandably, 
the majority of the cans are coming in from Alberta. We are 
creating jobs in Alberta and we’re seeing an industry in 
Saskatchewan suffering. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2073 
 

(2030) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the way that this government should be protecting 
those jobs — it’s easy and it’s obvious — is through a fair 
two-price system so that the market share for bottled beer can 
be held somewhat against the popularity of cans. A two-price 
system would . . . a two-price system, may I say, Mr. Speaker, 
that was enforced. And clearly, the two-price system that the 
government may have proposed is not being enforced and it’s 
not happening. 
 
Just for your information, Mr. speaker, this is from the weekend 
of June 3 and 4 — June 3 and 4 of this month. Of 14 Saskatoon 
hotels, only two sold the canned beer at the Liquor Board’s 
recommended suggested retail price of $13.95 a dozen, only 
two out of the 14. The remainder, 12 of them, were selling the 
canned beer at a lower price, at a lower price than the suggested 
retail. At one hotel, the price of canned beer, the price of canned 
beer, was at 12.95 initially, and then it was reduced to 12.70 a 
dozen. And that compared to their bottled beer price of 14.75 a 
dozen. So they’re undercutting the bottled beer and selling the 
canned beer. The solution, Mr. Speaker, is an enforced 
two-price system that ensures a market share for the bottled 
beer, which therefore would ensure Saskatchewan jobs can 
continue. 
 
The reintroduction of the aluminum cans is not benefitting the 
workers in Saskatchewan breweries — that’s obvious. And it’s 
obvious that this government is not willing to take the steps to 
protect those jobs. And the long-run consequence, Mr. Speaker, 
if it’s true across the province as it’s true in the hotel in Moose 
Jaw that I spoke with, that canned beer is selling 10:1, we may 
see the eventual loss of the brewing industry altogether. And so 
we’re not therefore just talking about tens of jobs, we’re talking 
about hundreds of jobs in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when this government talks about replacing 
those jobs at the breweries with jobs in recycling, in the 
recycling system that they’ve established, we’re really talking 
about apples and oranges. As welcome as the jobs are to the 
handicapped people of our Saskatchewan, they can hardly be 
compared to the jobs which now exist in the brewing industry. 
 
And so on that first point, Mr. Speaker, our concerns have not 
been met. And I don’t fault this entirely on the Minister of the 
Environment; it’s not his responsibility. I’m sure he should look 
down to his colleague, the minister responsible for the Liquor 
Board, to see if something can’t be done to address this job loss 
which is happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I observe in the short time now, in the month that 
we’ve had the canned products, that there are other 
Saskatchewan interests that are being sacrificed. I’m aware that 
one of the beverage companies has indeed established, or will 
soon have established, a canning line in the province. But I’m 
wondering, Mr. Speaker, what is to happen to the other 
Saskatchewan bottlers, the locally owned bottlers — for 
instance, the Pop Shoppe and the Pic-A-Pops. How will they 
survive against the influx of cans? What is being done to 
maintain their interests in our province> And they are a 
significant part of our province.  

What’s to be done to protect the jobs in those companies? 
 
And I’m also told, Mr. Speaker, that when a bottle of beer is 
produced in this province, 53 per cent of the purchase price 
eventually comes to the provincial treasury — 53 per cent — 
but when a can is produced in Alberta the excise, of course, is 
paid in Alberta. And I’m told that we could stand to lose 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $275 million from the 
provincial treasury. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Dreaming. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So while the minister responsible says I’m 
dreaming, I’ll be glad for him to correct my error if it’s wrong. 
I’ll be glad to have him stand up and defend what he’s doing to 
the brewing industry in this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on the first point when we ask that 
Saskatchewan jobs and Saskatchewan interests be protected 
with the reintroduction of cans, we find that that, in fact, has not 
been the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, the other major concern that we had 
. . . Oh, let me say, Mr. Speaker, just also another concern that 
has come to my attention since the legislation was introduced 
last year, and has come to my attention again of late, is the role 
and relationship between the aluminum and the Alzheimer’s 
disease. It had . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, get serious. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Now the minister from Kindersley says I ought 
to get serious. Well if he would take some time to study recent 
medical journals, if he would . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which journals? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The Minister of Education wants to know 
which journal. I refer him to the Lancet; I refer him to 
neurosurgeons out of Toronto; I refer him to somewhere much 
closer — the Saskatchewan Alzheimer’s Society who raised 
this concern with me. 
 
Now I know this government is not in the habit of consulting 
with people. Perhaps they should, Mr. Speaker. It is fairly 
clearly established now by the medical community that a link 
exists between aluminum and Alzheimer’s. I ask, therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, what is this government doing to acquaint consumers 
with possible risks and what is this government doing to protect 
those who will work with these aluminum cans . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I’m having some difficulty communicating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will eagerly wait and perhaps the debate should 
not go to committee, because apparently some members wish to 
get into this debate. Apparently they would like to stand in the 
House and deny there is any link between aluminum and the 
Alzheimer’s disease. Perhaps they would like to share with us 
their medical knowledge that says this is so. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2074 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member 
would permit a question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the member entertain a question? 
 
Mr. Calvert: No, Mr. Speaker, I will not. I will recommend 
that that member, if he has some questions about this issue, 
should tomorrow, at his earliest opportunity, phone the 
Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan. Let him phone the people 
who are concerned and are aware, and when he’s made that 
consultation then I’ll expect him to get into this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I simply raise this concern because it has been raised 
with me by people much more knowledgeable than I in the 
field, and I want to know what this government intends to do to 
notify consumers of some of these concerns; I want to know 
what this government intends to do to protect those who will be 
working in the recycling process, who will be working with 
aluminum now on a daily basis, day in and day out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the major concern that I want to bring to the 
discussion tonight has to do with environmental protection. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reintroduction of cans and perhaps in 
future, of plastic containers, is clearly the reintroduction of a 
non-biodegradable product into the Saskatchewan environment. 
And I don’t believe that there’s anyone in this House or anyone 
in this province that wants to see the Saskatchewan landscape 
littered with aluminum cans, who want to see our beaches, our 
parks, our back alleys, our streets . . . No one in this House, no 
one in this province wants to see a littering of aluminum cans or 
plastic containers. 
 
And so, in essence, Mr. Speaker, the protection of our 
environment depends almost totally on the kind of return and 
recycling system that we have in place — almost entirely. 
Because we’ve had the cans now on the market for a month and 
because we’ve not really had a return and recycling system in 
place until of very late, and some portions not yet in place, 
we’ve had a bit of a chance to observe what can happen with 
aluminum cans. And, Mr. Speaker, on the Sunday of the very 
week that the cans were reintroduced in Saskatchewan, I 
happened to travel the piece of road that goes from Briercrest to 
Avonlea — I think it’s something like 18 miles. And on that 
very first weekend I counted no less than eight cans in the ditch 
on that 18-mile stretch of road. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many bottles? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And I didn’t see one bottle, Mr. Speaker. The 
member asks how many bottles did I see. I didn’t see one bottle, 
because he knows full well that the return rate for bottles in this 
province has never fallen below 90 per cent. He knows that the 
return rate has been 90 plus for bottles. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he has brought to the province, and through 
this piece of legislation, a return recycling system  

that, by his own prediction, is going to net a return of 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of 20 per cent — 20 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. It’s simply 
not good enough. 
 
Now in my estimation, Mr. Speaker, the government has made 
a beginning, and in some ways a good beginning on a return 
and recycling system. I know that those folks involved with 
SARC, the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres, are pleased with the opportunity to be part of this 
system. They’ve made a beginning and in some ways a good 
beginning. But, Mr. Speaker, I just think it’s not enough. 
 
In fact, we have a golden opportunity here, I think, to go 
further. We have a golden opportunity because we’re sort of 
late now on the scene of the aluminum can recycling. Many 
other jurisdictions have plans. We have an opportunity, now, to 
look for the very best and improve on that for our province. 
We’ve made a beginning but clearly it’s not good enough. If 
we’re only talking about a 20 per cent return, that’s simply not 
good enough. 
 
The legislation regulations, I understand, have placed a 5 cent 
deposit on the cans. That’s significantly lower than the deposit 
on bottles, as you know. And as I just pointed out, bottles have 
a return rate of 90 per cent. I will want to see if the government 
would be willing to institute a higher deposit fee which, in my 
judgement, would assist in the return rate. 
 
It’s my understanding — and I get a variety of figures, but it’s 
my understanding that when in place the recycling system will 
involve, and I’ve heard a variety of figures, some figures 
indicate 25 depots, some indicate 30 depots, some indicate as 
high as 40 depots across the province for the return of 
aluminum cans. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are in Saskatchewan, by my count, 
well over 500 communities — 500 cities, towns and villages. 
And out of 500 cities, town and villages we’re only going to 
have, at best, 40 depots for the return of cans. I’m told we’re 
only going to have one; there will only be one depot in the city 
of Regina — one depot for 175,000 people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It doesn’t even exist. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — As my colleague says, it doesn’t even exist to 
this point. Well it’s just not enough, Mr. Speaker. The 
government has made a start, and in some ways a good start, 
but it’s just not enough. 
 
I’ll be interested to know when we get into committee why the 
minister chose not to further explore the possibility of a 
curb-side recycling. It’s my understanding that the study was 
completed, which recommended curb-side recycling. I’ll be 
interested to know why that possibility was neglected; and I’ll 
be interested in committee to see if this government will 
consider a higher deposit on the cans. 
 
I’ll be interested in committee, Mr. Speaker, to see if the 
minister will consider expanding the program he’s put in place, 
maybe taking a leaf out of the Manitoba model — using 
charitable organizations across the province, in  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2075 
 

every community, to act as gathering points, recycling agents 
— and then perhaps with the assistance of his department in 
providing transportation for the cans, to bring those cans from a 
whole variety of communities to the 25 or 30 or 40 depots so 
that perhaps the Boy Scout troop in Gravelbourg can be a 
collection agency, perhaps the 4-H club in Maidstone could be a 
collection, and if his department would then provide some 
transport for the cans — that’s the difficulty, it’s getting the 
cans from the small community to the larger depots. So I’ll be 
exploring that with him, Mr. Speaker, and seeing if he’ll 
consider perhaps establishing an experimental curb-side 
recycling, because we have a golden opportunity to start 
something new and be creative here. 
 
Simply put, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that if nothing is done to 
build, to build upon what is in place now; if nothing is done in a 
positive manner to improve the system instituted, then I think 
we’re going to have a problem. If a 20 per cent return rate is all 
that we can expect, I think we’re going to have a problem. 
 
(2045) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would be very interested to discuss these 
issues with the minister in committee, and we’ll be judging our 
response on his willingness to look at some positive suggestions 
and improvements. 
 
So therefore, Mr. speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks 
in this second reading debate. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Unfortunately, 
there was a bit of an interruption of several days since we began 
these estimates for the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, and I just want to pick up by reinforcing 
some of the things that I said last Thursday when we began 
these estimates. 
 
The first thing I want to say, Mr. Chairperson, is that I stand 
here tonight to give voice to those 6,733 Saskatchewan citizens 
who lost their life savings and in many cases their retirement 
funds because of government negligence. I want to begin by 
reading into the record the comments of one of those 
Saskatchewan couples that contacted me this spring, and I 
quote: 
 

My wife and I are 64 years old. We invested nearly all the 
money we had saved in Principal Trust. It amounted to 
$45,000. We were told, like many others, that for every 
dollar we invested, Principal Trust or its subsidiaries had 
to have $1.04 on deposit in a chartered bank in Canada. 
Now I think it is very unlikely we will get back over 50  

cents on the dollar, and God knows when. 
 

That is pathetic, Mr. Chairperson. That is absolutely pathetic. 
And I say more than that, I say it is a damning indictment of 
this Progressive Conservative government and its regulatory 
policies — or lack of them, more properly put. 
 
I quote from another individual, a Saskatchewan citizen who 
wrote to me earlier this spring referring to a letter written to 
Joan Duncan, the former minister of consumer affairs, in July of 
1986. The individual writes: 
 

I believe what has taken place since then proves ever more 
that we were cheated, lied to, and our money stolen. I hold 
the Saskatchewan government responsible for it is up to 
them to control and regulate the firms they license to 
practise. 

 
This individual, Mr. Chairperson, displays much more realism 
and sensitivity to the facts of the matter than the government 
has displayed to date. And I want to say, therefore, that there 
are now 6,733 Saskatchewan citizens who have been victimized 
by their own government, who have lost their life savings and 
their future financial security. 
 
Now it’s obvious from the reports of the Code inquiry that have 
been coming the last number of months since last fall, through 
the media, that these investors are angry. They’re certainly 
angry at Donald Cormie and his cronies for their sleazy 
operation and their self-serving manipulations of depositors’ 
finances that ended up in robbery. 
 
But I contend, and these investors here in Saskatchewan 
contend, that they’re equally angry at the Premier of this 
province and his government for complicity in this crime and 
for lack of sensitivity to their plight, even to this day. Even to 
this day there isn’t the slightest decency from the Premier in 
terms of recognizing the plight of these people and doing 
anything about it. He can’t even commiserate with them. 
 
And I say that this government, then, is fast to rush and cover 
its head and to protect itself and to hire legal counsel to go to 
the Code inquiry in Edmonton to protect itself. But it refuses to 
acknowledge the real life tragedies that are endured by its own 
citizens, tragedies that confront Saskatchewan depositors on a 
day-to-day basis as they face their future, or what they deem the 
lack of it, because of government negligence, as they 
experience emotional trauma, and still to this day some of them, 
sleepless nights as they experience marital breakup. And I’ve 
heard from depositors that that’s precisely what some of them 
are still going through because of the stress induced by the loss 
of their life savings; and yes, some of them, even thoughts of 
suicide. 
 
And these people were not the wheelers and dealers that the 
Premier of this province would like us to believe. These people 
were, for the most part, senior citizens who remembered the 
Dirty Thirties, who wanted to take charge of their own lives and 
provide for their own retirement so they wouldn’t have to fall 
back on the  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2076 
 

government. But the government let them down — this PC 
government — and they were betrayed. 
 
So tonight they’re looking for some answers. They’re looking 
for the government to come clean and to come through for 
them, and they’re looking for the government to make good on 
some of the losses. They’re looking for the government to 
finally, even now at this late hour, to admit some of its 
negligence, some of its responsibility in mismanagement in this 
affair, to assume some shred of responsibility, and to give some 
slight measure of comfort that they might, in fact, be 
compensated and have advocacy done on their behalf by their 
own Saskatchewan government, which isn’t too much to ask. 
 
So I would like to begin tonight, Mr. Minister, by asking you if 
you could tell me if you have a list of the Saskatchewan 
depositors who lost money in FIC (First Investors Corporation) 
and AIC (Associated Investors of Canada). 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it sounds to me 
like we’re right back at square one. I realize, I think it was as far 
back as last Monday that we were in estimates, and the hon. 
member across the way doesn’t seem to have remembered 
anything that was discussed that night. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that this government is very much in 
sympathy with those individuals who are involved with the two 
companies that have gone into receivership. But let me just 
review again a few of the facts that he likes to throw out here, 
misleading people. I think the only fear that the investors have, 
of course, is the scare tactics that are used by the members 
opposite. 
 
I have already pointed out to you, and I’ll do it again because 
your memory seems to be just a little bit short, we’re talking 
about 4,392 — that’s 4-3-9-2 individuals who were investors. 
They’re not depositors; not 6,733 as you keep putting out. You 
talk about depositors. Let me point out to you that there were 
only two depositors that had money with Principal Savings and 
Trust that did not recover all of the money that they had on 
deposit. In other words, they were in excess of the $60,000. 
 
The investors that we’re talking about, they haven’t lost their 
life savings, I pointed that out to you last week as well. To this 
point, no one has lost anything. We know that the investors 
have all received a minimum of 30 cents on the dollar to date; 
they will be receiving more money as time goes on and as real 
estate is going to be disposed of. The Alberta government has 
indicated that they may very well consider purchasing the real 
estate to speed up the process, but they’re not going to do 
anything until the Code inquiry has been completed, and you’re 
well aware of that as well. 
 
The investors have not been victimized by this government. 
We’re talking about investors who had invested money in two 
different companies that were based out of Alberta, two 
companies that got into difficulty because they got into a lot of 
real estate and the prices of the real estate went down 
substantially, and the two companies ended up going into 
receivership. But they certainly have not been victimized by 
this  

government. 
 
This government has done many things over the last several 
months to assure the investors that they will do all that they can 
to help, and there are many things that we have done to date. 
The investors that I’ve talked to are well aware of what the 
situation is; they know the position of the government; they 
know that nothing is going to be done by any of the 
governments that are involved with these two investment 
companies until the Code inquiry is finished. 
 
We do sympathize with these investors, and we’ll do everything 
that we can to ensure that they are going to get their money 
back, but the Alberta government has indicated that they may 
very well consider paying the investors if in fact the Code 
inquiry is going to find that they are at fault. And we have 
stressed very strongly that the Alberta government should be 
refunding the money to all investors, not just those who reside 
in Alberta. 
 
So we have taken several steps to help out and we will continue 
to do that. We’re monitoring the situation. The Code inquiry, as 
you know, is now into, I think, its 118th day and is expected 
tow rap up some time within the next couple of months and the 
final report should be forthcoming probably around the middle 
or later part of September. 
 
So until that time, there is nothing more that this government or 
any other government is going to be doing until all of the 
evidence has been put out. But in the meantime, we are 
handling inquiries that come in from investors and assuring 
them that we are monitoring the situation and we will do all that 
we can to insure that they are going to get their money back 
after the whole thing is finished. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the minister have a list of Saskatchewan 
individuals who deposited in Principal subsidiaries FIC and 
AIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have a list, 
as I understand it, of the investors but we do not have addresses 
as to where these individual would live. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How can that be, Mr. Minister, that you have 
a list of the names but not of the addresses of the individuals? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — This is the only information that had 
been provided to us by the receivers. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And has the minister seen no need to secure 
or attempt to secure the addresses of the depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well this is the only information that 
the receivers have agreed to give us at this time, and we don’t 
see that it would serve any purpose right now to have the 
addresses of these individuals. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — So if you don’t have that information from 
the receivers, could the minister tell me how many  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2077 
 

names and addresses of Saskatchewan depositors does the 
department have on file? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, the hon. 
member is referring to investors, I believe, and not depositors. 
The only names and addresses that we would have would be 
those individuals who have contacted the department, and there 
have been several that have contacted the department, and we 
have responded to those. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And how many depositors then would have 
contacted the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — All I can say is several hundred. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Will the minister undertake to share the 
addresses and the names with the official opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, the inquiries are all confidential 
in nature, and unless we were to get the permission from each 
one of the individuals, we could not provide that information to 
the opposition. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Will the member . . . the minister undertake 
to secure permission, from the individuals whose names and 
addresses he has, as to whether those names might be released 
to the official opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t feel that 
there’d be any justification for the additional costs that would 
be involved in getting these names and addresses. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, your Minister of Finance 
has just spent in the neighbourhood of a quarter of a million 
dollars shipping his smiling mug shot across Saskatchewan to 
notify people that they’re receiving their gas rebates in yet 
another piece of correspondence from his office. And so I don’t 
think it’s an undue burden on Saskatchewan taxpayers, many of 
whom are looking to the official opposition to advocate their 
cause, to share the names and the addresses of those individuals 
who deem it appropriate. Why don’t you let them make that 
decision for themselves rather than you denying that 
information and that potential opportunity for information for 
those depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I’m not sure, Mr. Chairman, 
what the purpose would be for the opposition wanting the 
names and addresses of these individuals. And I feel that if 
those individuals want us to give you that information, or in 
fact, if they want you to have that information, they can contact 
us or they can send you the information. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well let’s just pursue this for a minute, Mr. 
Minister. On how many occasions have you communicated by 
mail with your list of several hundred Saskatchewan 
depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — It’s my information that they have 
received two letters from the receiver, and they have received, I 
believe, two letters with information from the department. 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Could the minister table those two pieces of 
correspondence that he has shared with his list of Saskatchewan 
depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the very nature of 
complaints and letters that would come in from the investors are 
confidential, and it’s not information that we would be sharing. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, what you’re really saying is 
that you have not communicated once with the complete list of 
those names and addresses that you have. Will you admit that 
you have not yet taken even that minor, minuscule step to 
correspond with those individuals most affected by your 
government’s negligence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I point out to 
the member opposite that this government has not been 
negligent with regard to these investors. I would also point out 
again to you that those who have contacted the department have 
received responses from the department. Here again, going back 
to the list of all of the investors, and I’ve indicated to you that 
we do not have the addresses of all of those people, and they 
certainly have not all been contacted. But those that have 
contacted the department have been contacted. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, but you led me to believe earlier that 
you had sent out two blanket mailings to those depositors 
whose names and addresses you had. And what you’re saying 
now, Mr. Minister, is you haven’t done that at all. 
 
What you’re really saying in so many words is you’ll have the 
courtesy — which some be your ministers on that side of the 
House don’t even extend — you’ll have the courtesy and the 
decency to at least answer correspondence, and for that, I 
commend you. 
 
But I condemn you for not sharing information on this matter 
that directly touches the lives of 6,733 Saskatchewan 
depositors. And I condemn you for not sharing the list of names 
and addresses of depositors you have so that a government in 
waiting that is responsible — namely the official opposition on 
this side of the House — can at least communicate some of the 
facts of the matter, even so basic as copies of Hansard, with 
those individuals who are affected. 
 
But I can see very clearly why you wouldn’t want that to 
happen at all when you earlier tonight have minimized — 
entirely minimized — the problems besetting these depositors, 
that the numbers aren’t as large as they might seem, that these 
people aren’t really depositors, that they were taken care of by 
the government, that there was no negligence, and finally, the 
audacious statement, “To this point, no one has lost anything.” 
 
Well if you can’t release and you won’t release names and 
addresses, can you tell me, according to your department’s 
studies of this problem, what is the average loss facing 
depositors that your department has dealt with to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I understand 
it, the 4,392 investors — not depositors — on  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2078 
 

average, the loss or the amount that they had invested here was 
approximately 10 to $12,000. And I just want to clarify for the 
member that, with regard to what has been done and what 
hasn’t been done, the department has responded to any of those 
letters that investors had written to the department, and I had 
indicated that that was several hundred. 
 
We have the addresses, naturally, for those people, and we did 
respond. But for all of those who had invested, we don’t have 
the addresses for that total list, so I want to make that perfectly 
clear for the member opposite. 
 
But as I said, from the information that we have, the average 
investment here would have been in the neighbourhood of 10 to 
$12,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the minister have a figure for the total 
loss sustained by Saskatchewan depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The potential loss, if we take the 
thing right through . . . And I pointed out earlier, there hasn’t 
been a loss to this particular point, but if you consider that if 
there are 4,392 investors and the average loss was . . . or the 
amount invested, 10 to $12,000, the total would be about $48 
million. Now the investors have received, you must remember, 
30 cents on the dollar from each one of these companies and, I 
believe, another 5 cents on the dollar from one of the 
companies. So the $48 million would be the total, but they have 
received back in excess, I suppose, of a third of that. But until 
the Code inquiry is completed and it’s established then exactly 
what is happening, we can’t say that the investors have really 
lost anything to this point. That’s the total amount 
approximately that has been invested in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You’d lead one to believe, Mr. Minister, that 
things are just merrily going their way as if nothing had 
happened. Certainly those individuals who sustained the loss 
will confirm that that’s not the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the average age of 
Saskatchewan depositors is, according to the contact or the 
information that you’ve had from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, it’s beyond me how 
the member opposite would feel that we would have the 
average age of these investors. 
 
I would also point out, too — he likes to make a point of the 
fact that the government isn’t doing anything — there’s no 
information going out to these investors. I would think that the 
majority of the newspapers and media outlets in the country 
have fairly adequately covered the Code inquiry in Edmonton. 
So I don’t think there’s been any shortage of information 
coming out. Since I took over the department back in the 
middle of January, I have had one call from one investor. So it’s 
not like there are hundreds out there or thousands that are 
contacting me every day to find out what’s going on. So it’s 
fairly adequately being covered in the media — lots of 
information coming out. 
 
But in answer to your question about average age, we certainly 
don’t have that information. 

Mr. Koenker: — Well, I can only say thank God there’s lots of 
information coming out in the media because there’s nothing 
coming out of this government. 
 
I’d like to shift gears, Mr. Minister, and refer to a letter you 
wrote me dated April 27, 1988, enclosing quarterly and 
financial statements for First Investors Corporation and 
Associated Investors Corporation, for which I thank you. You 
indicated in the second to the last paragraph of that letter: 
 

Quarterly statements for the periods ending March 31, 
1985 and June 30, 1985 could not be located. 

 
Can you explain what’s behind that sentence. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I am informed, Mr. Chairman, that 
the quarterly reports were not in the files. They were not in the 
files. That’s why they’re not available. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And can the minister explain then why the 
quarterly statements were not in the files. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, I can’t. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can explain to the 
public of Saskatchewan that according to section 25 of The 
Investment Contracts Act, that the Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs is responsible for, regarding the filing 
of statements and balance sheets, and I quote: 
 

Not later than thirty days after the expiration of each 
quarterly period ending March 31, June 30, September 30, 
and December 31 respectively, every licensed issuer shall 
file with the superintendent a statement, certified by its 
auditor, showing: 

 
And I won’t go on to continue the particulars. But clearly, these 
are the quarterly statements required by law to be filed. Now 
how is it that those statements for the periods ending March 31, 
1985 and June 30, 1985, required to be filed by law, are not in 
the possession of the department in its files? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the only information 
that I have with regard to the quarterly reports that they were 
not in the files and . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Given the noise in the Assembly, I cannot 
hear the minister’s answer. I’m wondering if you could call the 
government members to order please. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I don’t think that was a fair statement since 
the discussion seems to be quite adamant on both sides of the 
House. I would ask all members to please let the two people 
who are having this discussion on Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs to please proceed as unhindered as possible. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2079 
 

I give the floor back to the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I 
pointed out earlier, the quarterly reports were not on file and 
there had been no indication from the Alberta government that 
there was any reason for any cancellations of licences at this 
particular time, and certainly I cannot give you any further 
explanation as to why they were not in the files. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have just established 
very conclusively, very conclusively, a point of Saskatchewan 
government negligence — that filing statements required by 
Saskatchewan law, according to section 25 of The Investment 
Contracts Act, filing statements for March 31, 1985 and June 
30, 1985 are not in the possession of the Government of 
Saskatchewan as required by law. 
 
I think that, as I’ve said, substantiates some of my earlier 
statements about your government’s negligence. I think these 
facts here that we’ve just established are a damning indictment 
of your predecessor’s incompetence. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to refer now to a letter dated May 31, 
1988, in which you respond to correspondence that I had 
requested, or that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition had 
requested, regarding a list of dates on which financial reports 
from First Investors and Associated Investors were received by 
the department for each year commencing in 1982; secondly, 
information for each year commencing in 1982 as to the date 
that the department issued the licence for each of these 
companies; and thirdly, any condition or qualification attached 
to any of these licences. 
 
And I’m wondering if the minister can explain why his reply 
dated May 31, 1988 did not contain all of the information 
requested, namely the date that the department issued the 
licence and namely whether there were any qualifications or 
conditions attached to any of these licences. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I believe I gave this 
information to the member the last time we were in estimates. 
The licences were issued on the 31st or near the 31st of 
December in each of the last three years, and there were no 
conditions attached in either case. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can the minister explain, further to this letter 
dated May 31, 1988, why, for the report period December 31, 
1983, the annual statements for both First Investors and 
Associated Investors are indicated as having been received in 
March of 1984, and there is no date given as to precisely when 
they were received by the department in March of 1984. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, this was another 
point that was covered last week, but I’ll certainly go over it 
again for the hon. member. 
 
The year end, of course, is December 31, and licences are 
usually issued on the basis of the previous year’s annual report. 
The annual report, in pretty well all cases that I see here — 
including when the previous administration was in power — the 
reports would be received some time in  

the spring of the year, probably in April or May. And so there is 
a certain period of time after the year end when the companies 
have to be audited and the audited statement received, and then 
the report, of course, is issued following that. 
 
So you can’t wait for the report to be received before you issue 
the licence, and that was the same practice that your 
administration followed back in the late ’70s into 1981-82. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can the minister tell us the dates in which he 
did receive the 1983 annual statements for First Investors and 
Associated Investors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure the hon. 
member has to realize that the department receives thousands of 
pieces of mail in the course of a year, and to know the actual 
date when a report is received . . . The information that I have is 
that the report would have been received in March of 1984, but 
a specific date, I cannot give it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think it’s too much to 
ask, when the superintendent of insurance was responsible for 
three firms under The Investment Contracts Act filing only 
three annual reports once a year, I don’t think it’s unreasonable 
that the department can’t be expected to produce the date on 
which it received the annual report for First Investors and 
Associated Investors in March, 1984. None the less, I would 
like to ask if the minister has a copy of that 1983 annual 
statement from First Investors Corporation with him tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have a copy 
of that with us tonight. I would assure the hon. member that we 
will attempt to find the actual date for you as far as the report, 
when it was received in March, 1984. 
 
And again I would point out to him that we do have no fewer 
than 500 licensed financial institutions doing business in this 
particular province. So, I mean, for him to say that there only 
three that were selling investment contracts, that’s true, but 
there are many other licensed investment or financial firms as 
well. But we will attempt to get that specific date for you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I don’t pretend to say that there are only three 
investment firms licensed under The Investment Contracts Act, 
Mr. Minister. There were only three. That is the truth. 
 
I wonder if the minister could undertake to have a copy of the 
annual statements with him when we continue these estimates 
tomorrow or at some subsequent date. Can you give me your 
assurance that those statements will be in hand when we 
continue these estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if it’s 
necessary for us to come back again, I’m sure we could bring 
them with us; otherwise we would certainly be happy to 
forward them to the member. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’d like to say, Mr. Minister, I think that they 
are necessary for the process of these estimates, and  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2080 
 

I’m surprised — in fact, I’m shocked — that your departmental 
officials wouldn’t have brought them along or that you 
wouldn’t have ensured that they were in your possession as part 
of the preparation for these estimates. 
 
And I’m wondering if you couldn’t speed this thing along. We 
have the potential to conclude tonight, if you could secure those 
— even tonight send somebody upstairs if they’re available up 
there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, from the information 
that I have, these reports have already been forwarded to the 
member opposite, so possibly if he wants the reports . . . We 
don’t have them here tonight. Possibly he could check in his 
own office because it’s my understanding, the officials say that 
they have forwarded that to you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That’s true, Mr. Minister, but in order to deal 
with some of the material, I need to ensure that you have a copy 
of it in front of yourself such that we can go through it. And I 
want to explain why now, for the benefit of those people who 
might be listening or might be reading the transcripts of 
Hansard. 
 
The 1983 annual reports of First Investors Corporation and 
Associated Investors Corporation, as far as I can determine, 
have been to some extent sort of neglected in some of the 
discussion of Principal Trust here in Saskatchewan. But in 
Alberta, there has been information presented before Code 
which indicated heavy duty government negligence stemming 
from that period 1983-84. 
 
(2130) 
 
I want to run through a list of dates with information so that 
people can fully understand the significance of this material and 
the role of the provincial regulators in ensuring that depositors’ 
investments were protected. For example, on March 31 of 1984 
the superintendent of insurance in Alberta, Tewfik Saleh, 
renewed licences of First Investors Corporation and Associated 
Investors Corporation in contravention of provincial legislation 
despite the face that their ’83 financial statements were overdue. 
 
We were talking about this question earlier, Mr. Minister. The 
statements finally arrived on May 7th of 1984. That’s why I 
was asking as to when you had received the 1983 financial 
statements. You indicated it was in March of 1984; I find that a 
little bit surprising if the Alberta regulators received them only 
on May 7th of 1984. 
 
In March, First Investors Corporation and Associated Investors 
Corporation purchased Principal Trust’s interest in a $65 
million real estate and mortgage portfolio for 23.5 million, and 
what this transaction did was to provide the trust company with 
the cash that was needed to provide its Canadian Deposit 
Insurance Corporation requirements. And as you are probably 
well aware, and as most depositors are certainly aware, it was 
during this period of 1983, early 1984 that the Principal group 
was under some pressure from the federal regulators concerning 
fulfilling the federal requirements for CDIC (Canada Deposit 
Insurance Corporation). 

Further to this, on April 24th of 1984 it was none other than the 
assistant deputy minister of the Department of Consumer and 
Corporate Affairs in Alberta, a Mr. Jim Darwish, who sent a 
memo to the deputy minister, Mr. Barry Martin, recommending 
that FIC and AIC be wound up if they refused to reverse the 
transaction that I’ve just referred to. This assistant deputy 
minister, Mr. Darwish, suggested that “serious consideration be 
given to the immediate curtailment . . .” (end of quote) of FIC 
and AIC licences. 
 
And I think that it’s obvious why I’m reading this material into 
the record, because if the Alberta regulators were smelling a rat 
in the Principal Group at this point, it’s only reasonable to 
assume that Saskatchewan regulators should have had some 
alarm bells ringing as well. And let me make the point that 
we’re talking about the assistant deputy minister in the 
Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs in Alberta. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Darwish, in April of 1984, also recommended 
that the Alberta Securities Commission withdraw FIC and AIC 
from the list of investments provided to trustees under the 
Alberta Trustees Act. The Alberta Securities Commission 
finally did this, removed it from the list of trustees in July of 
1985, more than a year later. 
 
Mr. Darwish’s memo goes on to list 20 problems, 20 different 
problems with FIC, AIC practices, and says, among other 
things, quote: 
 

The present condition of the foreclosed real estate and 
mortgage portfolio is one of the worst, if not the worst, 
that the audit unit has examined. 

 
And he goes on to say, quote: 
 

. . . because of the high interest rates the company offers, it 
attracts many thousands of Alberta investors. Should this 
company fail . . . 

 
And I say, parenthetically, what a prophecy, but it’s no wonder, 
given what Mr. Darwish saw at that point. 
 
To continue: 
 

Should this company fail, the effect on the confidence in 
financial institutions in Alberta would be serious. 

 
I want to continue, Mr. Minister, by indicating that I have a 
copy of this memorandum from the assistant deputy minister in 
Alberta. And if anyone listening or reading these transcripts is 
interested in seeing it, I’m sure they’ll find it very, very 
interesting in terms of applying some of the scrutiny done in 
Alberta at that time to an examination of some of the scrutiny 
that ought to have been going on if Saskatchewan regulators 
and if the former Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs here in Saskatchewan had been doing her job. 
 
I continue by pointing to events in May of 1984 simply to 
establish the critical nature of some of the financial transactions 
that were going on at that time, the serious  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2081 
 

condition of FIC and AIC, and more than that, the fact that the 
regulators in another jurisdiction were recognizing that the 
companies were in serious trouble. 
 
In May of 1984, the superintendent of insurance, Tewfik Saleh 
wrote in a letter to Ken Marlin, president of FIC and AIC: 
 

It appears that some of the problems which your two 
companies are facing today, particularly in the mortgage 
portfolio, stems from their continued reluctance to abide 
by the superintendent’s direction. 

 
So one wonders whether that might not perhaps be part of the 
problem that was going on here in Saskatchewan, although 
from what we’ve learned so far, there really was no direction 
coming from the Government of Saskatchewan. There was a 
laissez faire, hands-off sort of attitude to this whole enterprise 
— all the more of a damning indictment of your predecessor. 
 
Saleh goes on to order Principal in May of 1984 to reverse the 
$23.5 billion transaction that we’ve just talked about with 
Principal Trust, and he called it, “prejudicial to the interests of 
FIC/AIC contract holders.” 
 
In September of 1984, the government accountants in Alberta, 
Saf Bokari wrote to the then vice-president of operations at the 
Principal Group, Grant Mitchell, that the investment contract 
was misleading — misleading, Mr. Minister. The investment 
contract itself was misleading when it said that the companies 
kept assets worth 100 per cent of liabilities to contract holders 
in a chartered bank. Bokari recommended it to say that the Act 
required companies to do so. Would that the Government of 
Saskatchewan had been regulating to that effect, had been 
surveying the documents that you don’t have with you tonight, 
so that the investors and depositors of Saskatchewan might have 
been spared the calamity that befell them because of your 
negligence. 
 
It was only a week later, in September of ’84, that the deputy 
superintendent of insurance in Alberta, Bernard Rodrigues 
confirmed these requirements, and Mitchell testified that he 
could not recall seeing this letter. This continues, Mr. Minister, 
into 1985 when the Alberta Securities Commission made aware 
of First Investors problems in preliminary prospectuses 
revealing: 
 

As of December 31, 1984, principal and interest 
outstanding in respect of all mortgage loans on which 
payments were 90 or more days in arrears represents 63.3 
per cent of the corporation’s outstanding portfolio, but 
loan or mortgage loss reserves were only 6.5 per cent of 
the $117 million portfolio. 

 
This from the Alberta Securities Commission. 
 
Now the implication, Mr. Minister, is clear that if regulators in 
the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs in 
Alberta and in the Alberta Securities Commission and in the 
Alberta government could see that there were problems on the 
horizons with the Principal Group at that time, surely to 
goodness,  

could not your departmental officials at that time, even though 
they were not under your instruction, but they were under the 
instruction of your predecessors, is it not reasonable to assume 
that they could have read financial statements to the extent to 
ascertain that 63.6 per cent of FIC and AIC’s mortgage loans 
were 90 or more days in arrears, and that these mortgage loss 
provisions were only 6.5 per cent of the $117 million portfolio. 
 
Is that too much to have asked of the Saskatchewan 
government, in your estimation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that was quite a 
lengthy dissertation we had. I hope we’re not going to be going 
through the whole Code inquiry, or we could be here for several 
months. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that you say Alberta was recognizing 
problems back as 1984. Let me point out to the hon. member 
that they had recognized that there were problems of these two 
particular firms back in the ’70s, and the fact that they had a 
precarious financial condition. I wonder why the NDP 
government of the day wasn’t doing something. Do you 
suppose maybe it’s possible because the information wasn’t 
provided by the Alberta government to the Saskatchewan 
government? 
 
I think it’s a good thing that Alberta was monitoring it. I mean, 
after all, they had prime jurisdiction s far as these two 
companies were concerned. The problem, of course, that we 
have is the fact that they weren’t sharing that information with 
Saskatchewan, and I’ve already indicated that to you. Alberta 
were certainly doing a regulatory audit. 
 
You’re saying about all of this information that was in the 
financial statements. It wasn’t in the financial statements that 
were sent to Saskatchewan. We had no indication in 
Saskatchewan that there was any difficulty with these two 
particular companies, as I indicated, until back in June of 1987, 
at which time the Alberta government pulled their licences. 
 
So you can go back . . . It’s mentioned in another article here 
that I could quote from, that there were indications back in 1966 
that there were problems with these two companies, but they in 
each case were worked out. But all of that information was not 
transmitted to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it would be pretty hard for the Government of Saskatchewan 
to take any action if this information wasn’t forthcoming, 
because the Saskatchewan government, and certainly the 
superintendent of insurance here, had no jurisdiction over 
pulling licences if there wasn’t just cause being given by the 
province that had the prime jurisdiction over them. The 
information wasn’t providing any more here in 1984 than it was 
for your government back in the 1970s. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well we certainly learned already tonight, 
Mr. Minister, that some of the information, some of it, the 
quarterly statements for 1985, March and June, weren’t 
provided your government and you chose to do nothing about it 
when, by law, you were required to regulate and to have that 
information. 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2082 
 

And I think the corollary of that, and the inescapable corollary 
for anyone who has ears to hear what you say, is to assume that 
the materials that were received by the Government of 
Saskatchewan weren’t looked at. It was too much trouble, too 
much trouble for a government committed to deregulation to 
bother regulating three companies under The Investment 
Contracts Act — three companies too many — three companies 
too many to see that they filed their statements; three companies 
too many to see that the statements are even filed on time. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Minister, I say, and the people of Saskatchewan who lost 
their savings in this Principal fiasco say, that government 
complicity in the Cormie scam led to the demise of their life 
savings, that they were bamboozled out of their money by your 
and your cronies, by your incompetence. And I think, Mr. 
Minister, I think — and I have some information here that I’d 
like to share — I think that I might have an explanation for the 
people of Saskatchewan as to why they were bamboozled by 
your government and why the Premier of this province didn’t 
stand up to Donald Cormie and his sleazy actions with Principal 
Trust. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, it just might be coincidence have 
something to do with the fact that the Principal Group is a 
high-time financier, or had been until its demise, of the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and of Alberta 
and of Canada. And I think it’s important for the people of 
Saskatchewan to know that in 1983 the Principal Group, led by 
Donald Cormie, contributed $5,000 to the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan — $5,000. So that he who 
pays the piper calls the tune. We also know, in that same year, 
that the Principal Group and Donald Cormie and his mortgage 
company shelled out some $3,111.44 to the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Canada; that in 1984, it was Donald 
Cormie and his Principal Group that paid out $17,000 to the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Canada — $17,150; and in 
1985 — this is no fluke — in 1985 this same Principal Group 
contributes $15,642.13 to the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Canada; and yes, in 1986 it was the Cormie group, the Principal 
Group, that contributed $10,338 to the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Canada, for a grand total — excluding 
the contribution to Saskatchewan in 1983 of $5,000 — in a 
period of four short years, $46,000 to the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we can go on and talk about the contributions made by 
these same cronies of the Tory party to the Progressive 
Conservative Association of Alberta; that the Principal Group 
contributed $20,000 to Premier Don Getty’s bid for the 
Conservative leadership, the Code inquiry has learned; and that 
the Principal subsidiaries, First Investors Corporation and 
Associated Investors, the very companies we’ve been talking 
about the last couple of nights, record that in 1984 Principal 
gave $30,000 to the Progressive Conservatives; and that in 1985 
the Principal Group gave to the Progressive Conservative 
Association of Alberta, in 1985, $4,475; in 1986, $3,600, and 
contributed anywhere from 1,000 to $1,500 to the constituency 
election campaigns of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6  

different cabinet ministers in 1986, for a total contribution from 
the Principal Group to the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Alberta of $11,100 in 1986. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, how you can possibly deny that 
there is some complicity between the Cormie family and the 
Progressive Conservative Associations of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan and Canada. How can you defend that kind of 
record to people who have lost their life savings? Doesn’t that 
give the real explanation as to why your government stood with 
its hand behind its back, looking into the dark, and not touching 
any of the Principal questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I could 
probably make the same comment about the NDP Government 
back in the 1970s. 
 
Are you suggesting that because the NDP Government may 
have received some donations back in the ’70s, that the civil 
servants didn’t do something about what was happening with 
these two firms? Is that what the member is suggesting? Are 
you suggesting that just because a firm would donate to a 
political party that the professional civil servants are going to be 
swayed or influenced by this particular action? I would think 
that that’s a . . . those are comments that are really very 
appalling. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that the Code inquiry has been set up 
for one specific reason, and that is to determine why these two 
companies have gone down. And I think it’s really interesting 
that you try and stand in your place and indicate why these 
companies have gone down. 
 
The Code inquiry has only been sitting for 118 days. They 
haven’t heard all of the evidence to this point, and it’s going to 
be a couple of months yet before they do hear it all, and then a 
report will be forthcoming which should be making suggestions 
as to why these two firms went down. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I find the member’s comments just a little 
bit out of place, and I think a real — a slight on the professional 
civil servants who have been involved, not only over the last six 
years but over the last many years. These are companies, after 
all, that have been in business in this particular province for 
over 30 years. So I mean we’re not talking about something 
that’s just been started overnight. And we’ll see in the next 
couple of months why these companies actually went down, but 
some of your statements are just totally out of line. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — We all know, Mr. Minister, that particularly 
with your government, civil servants act by way of executive 
decree. I have no grudge against civil servants; in fact, I have a 
lot of respect for them. I have very little respect for the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan or of Canada 
and the way in which we know it to take favours from its 
friends in terms of financial assistance for election campaigns 
and expenses in exchange for concessions when it comes to 
regulation, and how your government is consistently prepared 
to accommodate those in positions of power and privilege and 
not to stand up for ordinary Saskatchewan families who have 
lost their life savings. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2083 
 

These people had what they thought to be guaranteed deposits. 
Guaranteed by whom? By their provincial government. These 
people didn’t assume the risk that their government wasn’t 
regulating, not in their wildest imagination, when they made 
their deposits with the Principal Group of companies — not by 
the furthest stretch of the imagination. 
 
It’s like going to the corner store, as one of them told me, to 
buy a quart of milk. You go to the corner store and you buy a 
quart of milk with implicit trust that there is someone out there 
regulating the pasteurization process, the homogenization 
process, and certifying the sanitation and the cleanliness and the 
suitability, the drinkability, of that milk before it gets into the 
carton and it arrives at the store. And who is that someone? 
That’s the positive role of the government — to set standards 
for milk production. 
 
People don’t go to the store and assume a risk when they go to 
buy a quart of milk, and neither should they go to make what 
they understand to be a guaranteed deposit when the very firms 
used for that transaction invoke the sanctity of The Investment 
Contracts Act and the security afforded by government 
regulation, neither should they assume a risk when it comes to 
that kind of deposit. 
 
Evidence at Code, Mr. Minister, as you well know, has shown 
that the millionaire at the head of the Cormie empire — the man 
with the ranch, the man with the leather coasters for his parties 
at his ranch, the man with the mansion, the man with the bank, 
the man with the yacht — evidence at Code has shown that he 
was siphoning off large sums, extravagant sums of money from 
First Investors Corporation and Associated Investors 
Corporation for his own purposes. And we see tonight where 
some of that money would up from that millionaire bamboozler; 
it wound up in the coffers of the Progressive Conservative party 
of Saskatchewan and of Alberta and of Canada. 
 
And what did our government here in Saskatchewan do in 
exchange? It winked and nodded and walked away from 
Saskatchewan depositors. And I say, Mr. Minister, that is a 
damning indictment of your predecessors. That is a damning 
indictment of your predecessors, that they put the interests of 
their own political ambitions and aspirations ahead of the 
welfare of the people of Saskatchewan, ordinary families, senior 
citizens such as I talked about when I opened my remarks — 64 
years old, and have lost their life’s savings, their retirement 
savings. 
 
I think that the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
and of Canada, if it were possible, should be made to make 
restitution itself to the depositors of First Investors and 
Associated Investors Corporation. I dare say, it shouldn’t be the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the taxpayer making that 
kind of pay-out, it should properly be the Progressive 
Conservative Party who winked and nodded, winked and 
nodded when their friends came from Alberta with their 
cowboy boots on, or wined and dined them in the yacht out on 
Vancouver Island, the Cormie yacht, in the mansion. 
 
If ever we need a parable of what goes wrong when 
governments put their friends ahead of the people, if ever we 
needed such a parable, Mr. Minister, we have it in the  

actions of your government with respect to the regulation of 
Principal Trust. And I want to know how you can justify 
financial contributions on that kind of scale when the First 
Investors’ depositors and Associated Investors’ depositors have 
lost their life savings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well that may not be the best case of 
grandstanding I’ve seen, Mr. Chairman, but it’s getting pretty 
close. You know, it’s really interesting — the member opposite, 
he goes on and on at great length and not really saying a whole 
heck of a lot. He again indicates that the investors have lost all 
of their life savings and, you know, I’ve indicated that is not the 
case. 
 
Certainly we have sympathy for those people who have been 
involved with these two particular companies, and it is 
unfortunate that there are not safeguards in particular cases like 
this. I’m certainly pleased that the Canadian Deposit Insurance 
Corporation is now going to start policing abusers and insuring 
that some of these things can’t happen. 
 
But I think for the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, I should 
just indicate to him what we’re really talking about here, 
because he’s been rambling on at great length, and what he’s 
been saying has absolutely nothing to do with why these two 
companies have gone down — absolutely nothing to do with 
that. 
 
I just point out to him that really, does he understand, Mr. 
Chairman, what an investment contract company is and what it 
really does? An investment contract company is a firm that 
enters into a contract for funds with investors who wish to take 
advantage of higher interest rates or returns while accepting 
higher risk. And he was just saying something here a minute 
ago about no risk. This is evidenced by the fact that many 
contracts are written with a minimum of 4 per cent interest and 
the balance of the credits coming out of the profits of the 
company. There’s no deposit insurance for these contracts. Any 
guarantee is only as good as the strength of the company’s 
assets. 
 
So he’s carrying on here and just totally not making any sense, 
and what he’s saying has absolutely nothing to do with the topic 
that we’re dealing with. And I would certainly wish that he 
would stop indicating that these people have lost all of their 
savings and using these scare tactics, because for all of those 
investors out there who invested in these two companies, I 
would certainly hope that they are not going to lose any of their 
life savings. And I know that there were many of them that put 
life savings into these two companies, and certainly I would 
hope that they will be able to successfully recover all of the 
money that they have invested. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to go back to the 
financial statement for 1983 that was sent to me, and I’d like to 
note that, first of all, that when this 1983 annual financial 
statement for First Investors Corporation was requested by the 
Hon. Allan Blakeney during estimates last year, and an 
undertaking was secured from your predecessor that it would be 
provided, it wasn’t provided, and that I had to write to you in 
the spring of this year to secure a copy of this document. 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2084 
 

I further note that upon receiving this 1983 financial statement, 
amongst all the financial statements that I received from your 
office there was one page that was missing — one page that 
was missing. And quite by accident, either that or quite by 
design or by intention, that happened to be the single most 
important page of the document. 
 
First, the document was supplied when requested by Mr. 
Blakeney; that was your predecessor’s responsibility. Secondly, 
when it’s supplied by my request to you, it’s supplied, but 
missing the most crucial page. And I want to refer to the 
remarks made by Touche Ross and Company who were the 
auditors of this financial statement for 1983. And I want to note 
and quote from their first remark, or their first note to the 
financial statement. And it reads as follows: 
 

Summary of significant accounting practices. These 
financial statements have been prepared in accordance 
with accounting principles generally accepted in Canada 
and have been presented on a going concern basis which 
should be considered in relation to note 9, which 
contemplates the realizations of assets and the satisfaction 
of liabilities in the normal course of business. 

 
Mr. Minister, what is your understanding of that statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we’d have to see the 
total statement before we could make a comment on something 
that’s been taken out of context. And so I couldn’t make any 
other comment than that at this time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Real convenient for you, Mr. Minister. Real 
convenient for you. I’ll give you my understanding of this 
statement, and it is understanding that any decent accountant 
would have of this statement, and that is that it’s waving red 
flags all over the place that this company, First Investors 
Corporation, is in deep trouble that this audit should have been 
present, “on a going-concern basis,” is waving red flags all over 
the place for anyone who has eyes to see. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, that your department didn’t even read 
the statement. I make that claim and that assertion that your 
department at that time didn’t even bother to read this 
statement, with red flags waving all over the place, about the 
trouble that this company was in. 
 
And I note, Mr. Minister, that this was at a time when the 
investment . . . when the oil economy in Alberta and the Prairies 
was in bad trouble, and that the mortgage markets in Alberta 
were bottoming out, and that anyone with an ounce of 
competency or a will to regulate would have known that this 
annual report should have been reviewed very carefully and, 
seeing such red flags, would have taken appropriate action to at 
least question some of the actions of the company. But it was 
too much, too much for the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs. 
 
The note that I’ve just referred to indicates that the audit 
presented on a going-concern basis should be considered in 
relation to note 9 — very convenient for you to have  

supplied me with a document that didn’t have note 9 in it. Very 
convenient for you to have done that. 
 
Well I went to Code inquiry in Edmonton and I secured a copy, 
a complete copy, of the financial statement which was too much 
for your department to provide to me — a complete copy. And I 
want to read what note 9 says, and it is not good news. Note 9: 
 

Contingencies: It is the policy of the company to provide 
an allowance against income to meet future general and 
exceptional losses arising from the company’s mortgage 
and owned-property portfolio. The cumulative allowance 
for anticipated losses, which has been provided for in the 
accounts, is $2,890,000. The amount of the allowance is a 
discretionary matter as judged necessary by its directors 
and management, based on their knowledge of the 
company’s affairs and their assessment of the economic 
conditions of the provinces, mainly Alberta and British 
Columbia, where the current security for the mortgage is 
located. 

 
And I add, parenthetically, here comes the important part: 
 

Because of the complexities of the real estate market and 
the economic uncertainly surrounding the underlying 
values and the present undeterminable value of collateral 
securities to the mortgages, an estimated additional 
exposure of $10 million exists if current market levels 
represent a permanent rather than a temporary decline in 
value. 
 
In addition to the exposure relating to mortgages and 
owned property on hand at December 31, 1983, the 
company has increased its exposure by $4.6 million 
relating to interests redeemed in mortgages and owned 
property subsequent to the year end as outlined in note 
8(a). 

 
And I’m wondering if you have any comment, or your 
departmental officials have any comment on a note to that 
effect, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, as has been standard 
practice, the Saskatchewan government was relying on the 
Alberta government in the same way that the previous 
administration had relied on the Alberta government back in the 
1970s. I dare say that if one were to check back over the 
financial statements and the notes that were made at that 
particular time that there were probably red flags being waved 
as well. 
 
But I think that there is certainly ample evidence that the 
Alberta government was in there doing their audit, they were 
working with the companies, and of course it was not the first 
time that they had been in difficulty, but they felt that things 
could be worked out, and they in fact did carry on successfully 
for a few years following that. So I can’t see where the member 
opposite is indicating that things were any different certainly 
back in 1984 than they were back in the 1970s. We relied on 
that information from Alberta, and there was no information 
forthcoming  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2085 
 

then until June of 1987 that these companies were in very 
serious difficulty, at which time their licences were pulled. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, that’s hog-wash, that’s utter 
nonsense and hog-wash. There was never a financial statement 
presented to the Government of Saskatchewan with respect to 
Associated Investors and First Investors Corporation prior to 
1983, never an audit conducted by a firm like Touche Ross and 
Company that was conducted on a going-concern basis. This 
just didn’t happen — that’s nonsense. 
 
Your government, in 1983, in the annual report that I’m 
referring to, in note 9, had the information that should have shut 
the Principal Group down, and it wasn’t done. It was too much 
to ask of this government, committed to deregulation and its 
friend Donald Cormie in Alberta — it was too much to ask. 
 
And Mr. Minister, I think again that we see what amounts to a 
damning indictment of your government and your Premier and 
the incompetency and the lack of will to protect the interests of 
Saskatchewan people. When you had the information and it was 
being waved in your face with red flags, you couldn’t bother 
then to even do anything. 
 
I just want to note, Mr. Minister, with respect to this particular 
document, the annual report of 1983, that it strikes me as 
bordering on a falsehood that you could have received that 
report in March, in March of 1984, when the auditors, Touche 
Ross and Company, dated May 7, in Edmonton, Alberta. And I 
would like to know how it is that a report tabled or signed by 
the auditors, Touche Ross and Company, chartered accountants, 
1983 annual statement for First Investors Corporation, can be 
dated May 7 in Edmonton, Alberta, and received some time in 
March — you can’t even give me a date — by your 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would suggest at 
this time that we’ll have to check back on that date. That’s the 
information that I had, and the officials will have to go back and 
check on the actual date. That was the understanding that we 
had. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Another thing I want to say, Mr. Minister, 
about this report is in the subsequent year there were still 
problems, and the annual report for 1984, there were still 
problems there. There were new auditors. There were new 
auditors, all right, but there were still problems that should have 
been picked up. And in the 1985 annual report for First 
Investors there were red flags waving all over the place again, 
and your government did nothing. 
 
And I reiterate the point I had made earlier when I went through 
some of the time line with respect to the regulatory provisions 
made by the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
in Alberta in the spring of 1984 — the very period that we’re 
talking about — that they saw problems. The deputy minister in 
Alberta saw red flags waving all over. 
 
(2215) 
 

Maybe the red flags were caught by deputy ministers here in 
Saskatchewan, and maybe it was the minister who issued the 
edict to just ignore them. We’ll never know for sure. We’ll 
never know for sure, but what people in Saskatchewan, what 
the depositors in First Investors Corporation and Associated 
Investors know for sure is that their government let them down. 
It was negligent. The job was too much. The PC Party was too 
preferential to its rich, powerful friends like Donald Cormie in 
Alberta. And that again is a damning indictment of the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
That Saskatchewan officials should know in 1986, that again 
this further substantiates my case, that the provincial 
government knew of problems with one of the Principal 
companies operating here in Saskatchewan, right in river city, 
Saskatoon, that the Securities Commission investigated 
Principal Consultants Ltd. in 1986. It investigated the sales of 
securities and expressed concerns about other aspects of the 
Principal Group and its activities here in Saskatchewan. And 
what was done? Nothing. Another example that shows that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the Progressive Conservative 
Government of Saskatchewan knew of the problems with the 
Principal Group and its subsidiaries at least a year ahead of its 
demise. 
 
When the Securities Commission here invested Principal 
Consultants for its sales policy, for suspected forgeries and 
thefts and questionable ethics, it did nothing. And that was your 
predecessor, and that was your Premier, and that’s a damning 
indictment of your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, the government of . . . the legislature of 
Saskatchewan has passed The Investment Contracts Act with 
the intention of providing security to Saskatchewan depositors. 
And this, as I’ve said over and over again, this Investment 
Contracts Act, this government regulation that was supposed to 
be there, was invoked by the Principal Group to perpetuate its 
scam on Saskatchewan people. 
 
And it was the Progressive Conservative government that 
permitted these application forms to be used, the very forms 
that are to be reviewed, according The Investment Contracts 
Act, for their propriety and their suitability for use in 
Saskatchewan. And the government did nothing. 
 
The public was assured over and over again by agents operating 
in Saskatchewan — Principal agents — that Principal had to 
abide by the investment contracts regulations, that they couldn’t 
do otherwise in conducting their business, and that, as a result, 
depositors’ money was safe, safe, safe. It was guaranteed. It 
was better than covered by CDIC because the government of 
Saskatchewan and The Investment Contracts Act was in place, 
supposedly doing its job. 
 
Now we know, and as I have established tonight, there was no 
regulation, and in all likelihood there was no reading, even, of 
the materials that were tabled. And so, Mr. Minister, I would 
like to know what it is that you intend to do now for the 
depositors of First Investors and Associated Investors. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2086 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve gone 
now nearly three hours in what, supposedly, is estimates for 
Consumer Affairs. I think it’s really interesting that the member 
opposite has chosen to totally ignore many of the things that are 
the good things that are happening within Consumer Affairs — 
a very fine group of professionals providing a lot of good 
service for the province of Saskatchewan. We certainly are 
committed to providing protection to consumers in whatever 
way that we can. And I can assure the member opposite that we 
will continue to do that. 
 
He’s concentrated solely on the Principal affair and certainly 
trying to make every point possible that it’s the government of 
Saskatchewan that is responsible for these two companies going 
under. We certainly know that that is not the case, and I’m sure 
that all thinking people with the province understand that. The 
investors understand what’s happening. They, too, are waiting 
for the completion of the Code inquiry, and at that time this 
government will be making a decision as to what moves we are 
going to make in so far as the investors, and not the depositors, 
but the investors in these two companies are concerned. 
 
We have indicated that if the Government of Alberta is found 
negligent in their duties with regard to their regulatory 
responsibilities that they had with these companies, that they 
will be making compensation to all of the investors. And we 
have asked, and will be stressing, that they pay out each of the 
investors, no matter where they live. 
 
You make a comment about Principal Consultants, and I just 
make a short comment on that, the fact that they were licensed 
by the Securities Commission. It’s my understanding that they 
were checked, and that after assurances were received, that the 
problems had been rectified, that they were allowed to carry on 
with their business. 
 
You have indicated about red flags being waved here, and I 
would suggest to you that if the red flags were in fact serious, 
that I would have thought that the Government of Alberta, as 
the primary regulator, would have been doing something about 
it and would have been yanking their licences at that time. 
Certainly, from the information that we had, there was not the 
serious problems that the member is leading us to believe were 
there. And it was not until the Alberta government pulled the 
licences back in June of 1987 that we followed suit and 
cancelled the licences of these two companies. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, once again you’ve confirmed 
that you aren’t prepared to do anything but sit on your hands 
and wait for Code. And this is the problem with your 
government right from the start. It’s refused to do anything for 
Saskatchewan depositors — nothing at all, nothing that will 
result in any kind of tangible help or benefit for Saskatchewan 
people who were hurt by this financial fiasco. 
 
First of all, you refuse to set up a financial inquiry. You refuse 
all requests. You refuse to look at the issue of regulatory 
responsibility even to consider the possibility of regulator 
failure here in Saskatchewan. That sure  

doesn’t help Saskatchewan depositors. 
 
Secondly, you refuse to give any financial assistance. You 
refuse all requests to even pay a portion of the Coopers & 
Lybrand’s fees. Thirdly, you refuse all requests for legal 
assistance from the depositors. Some help, some help from your 
government. 
 
Fourthly, fourthly you refuse to even meet with depositors. 
Your predecessor refused to even meet with depositors. The 
premier refuses to even discuss the issue or consider it. The 
Minister of Finance refuses to even listen to people who phone 
him or contact him. The Minister of Justice refuses to meet with 
depositors. The premier and the Cabinet refuse to even let back 
bench MLAs talk about the issue. It’s too dangerous, it’s too 
sensitive, and a gag order is issued. 
 
Finally, you misrepresent the facts. You misrepresent the 
position of the depositors. I think that people are getting wise to 
what the name of the game really is on the government side. 
 
I would like to just begin to conclude, Mr. Minister, by asking 
you who represents the Government of Saskatchewan at Code? 
Is there anyone other than Joseph Brumlik representing the 
interests of the Government of Saskatchewan at Code? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what he 
is talking about as far as costs are concerned. The costs of the 
receivers are being paid by the Government of Alberta. We 
have not had requests from — certainly I have not had any 
requests from any of these investors to offer them help at this 
point in time. The investors certainly understand the situation. 
They are, too, waiting. I think it is only the member opposite 
that is so concerned about what is happening right now. 
 
In so far as the Code inquiry in Edmonton, the member has 
been at the Code inquiry; he’s mentioned the law firm which is 
representing all of the investors there. Mr. Al Higgs from 
Saskatchewan, from Regina here, is monitoring the situation, 
and we get daily reports from him. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What is the relationship of Mr. Higgs to Mr. 
Brumlik? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Higgs is there in 
a capacity representing the provincial government and 
monitoring the inquiry and reporting back on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That wasn’t the question, Mr. Minister. What 
is the relationship between Mr. Higgs and Mr. Brumlik? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — There’s no relationship that I’m 
aware of. You’re talking about the law firm that is representing 
the investors. Mr. Higgs is simply there to monitor the situation 
and report back and provide the information for us on a daily 
basis. We certainly aren’t getting the information from the law 
firm on a daily basis, so he is our contact up there. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2087 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Is Mr. Higgs a lawyer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Why have the Saskatchewan depositors had 
no information from either Mr. Brumlik or Mr. Higgs with 
respect to the proceedings of Code inquiry? Why have 
Saskatchewan depositors received no word when the 
Government of Saskatchewan has legal counsel and observer, 
both, at Code? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, the law firm is representing 
the investors. Mr. Higgs is there as a representative of the 
government. And I should think that there has been ample 
information coming out from the inquiry so that investors are 
pretty well informed, I think, as to what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, that’s damning, Mr. Minister. I’m 
wondering if you can do this: can you assure the depositors that 
if they were to desire information, or perhaps even legal 
counsel, that they could have pertinent information made 
available to them from your department, based on what you 
received from Code? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the court has 
appointed McNiven and White, I understand, to represent the 
investors. They’re being paid by the Government of Alberta, 
and I would think that if any investors wanted information they 
should be able to get it from their own legal representatives. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Don’t ask the Government of Saskatchewan 
to do anything. Don’t ask the Government of Saskatchewan to 
do anything for its own people. That’s what you’re really 
saying, Mr. Minister. That’s obscene. To have legal counsel in 
Alberta paid by public purse, to have an observer in Alberta 
paid by the public purse — by taxpayers — and yet they have 
this lawyer and this observer there in Edmonton to protect the 
interests of the Government of Saskatchewan, the PC 
Government of Saskatchewan, and not to protect the interests of 
Saskatchewan depositors. That’s obscene. That’s obscene. 
That’s not just damning, that’s obscene. And, Mr. Minister, I 
think that you will have some accounting with respect to the 
depositors when they learn of that. 
 
(2230) 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, to conclude or to sum up, as 
someone just said, who in your government has the authority or 
the mandate to pursue settlement with the Government of 
Alberta? Who in your government has the authority or the 
mandate to pursue any sorts of negotiations with respect to a 
financial settlement on behalf of Saskatchewan depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Two things, Mr. Chairman, any of 
the investors that have contacted our department or my office, 
certainly we are very willing to help out in whatever way that 
we can and give whatever information we can to the investors. 
In so far as the representative from the government who would 
be responsible for this, the finance ministers in the other 
provinces have been taking the lead role in this particular area, 
and I would assume it would be the Finance minister for the 
province of  

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can you assure Saskatchewan depositors that 
they will get no less, no less than their Alberta counterparts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — It’s pretty difficult for me to ensure 
that. We’ve already indicated, and I’ve indicated to you that if 
Alberta is found negligent in their responsibilities and that 
they’re going to be paying the investors — not depositors — 
that we have asked that they should give Saskatchewan 
investors the same treatment as they would be giving to the 
Alberta investors. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, yours is a do-nothing 
government. You have a do-nothing Premier, you have a 
do-nothing department, and you’re assuming a do-nothing 
attitude yourself with respect to Principal depositors. And your 
words have spoken for themselves tonight. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The only final comment I would 
make is that it’s really offensive when you run down the 
officials of the department, and I would simply point out to you, 
sir, that the Saskatchewan Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs is looked upon as the leader in the whole 
country of Canada. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I have the highest respect for 
civil servants, and I commend the officials that you have 
surrounding you tonight who have had to endure the nonsense 
that you have spewed out at the instruction of your Premier. I 
pity them that they have to answer to a government that isn’t 
prepared to stand up for its own people. 
 
So I, Mr. Minister, have the highest regard for the civil servants 
in your department. I don’t have nearly the same regard for your 
Premier or the government opposite. So I want to conclude 
tonight by thanking those officials who have been here and who 
have provided the help that has been so necessary to the 
minister. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 11 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 4 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to 
thank my officials. I think they’re doing a terrific job in the 
department, and I certainly look forward to working with them 
in the months ahead. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:36 p.m. 
 


