


















































June 8, 1988 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 8, 1988 
 

1933 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, as chairperson of the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, I present the fifth report 
of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Research Council Act 
 

Ms. Smart: — I wish to report Bill No. 30, An Act to amend 
The Research Council Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 
 

Ms. Smart: — As chairperson of the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills, I wish to report Bill No. 35, An Act to 
amend The Jury Act, 1981, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 
Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 

 
Ms. Smart: — As chairperson of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 34, An Act to promote 
Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan by repealing Certain 
Obsolete Statutes, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Enforcement of Foreign 

Arbitral Awards Act 
 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 51, An 
Act to amend The Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 
Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 52, An 
Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Attachment of Debts 
Act 

 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 57, An Act to 
amend The Attachment of Debts Act, as non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Justices of the Peace 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1934 
 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report Bill No. 66, An 
Act respecting Justices of the Peace, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting a Traffic Safety Court for 

Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I report Bill No. 67, An Act 
respecting a Traffic Safety Court for Saskatchewan, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation 
Board Act 

 
Ms. Smart: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, as chairperson of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 
53, An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act, as 
being controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Department of Finance Act, 1983 (No. 2). 
 
I give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you, and through you to the members 
of this Assembly, Mr. John Weyland from Bruno, 
Saskatchewan. He’s sitting in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Weyland came from Luxembourg, Germany in 1920. He’s 
accompanied by his son-in-law, Percy Schmeiser, a former 
MLA of this Assembly. It’s Mr. Weyland’s first visit to the 
Assembly of this House. 

It’s also a very special occasion for him today as he celebrates 
his 98th birthday. Mr. Speaker, I would like to wish Mr. 
Weyland a very happy birthday, and I would ask this Assembly 
to help me welcome such a guest. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — May I also extend our welcome to the 
gentlemen who have just been introduced, and say welcome to 
Mr. Schmeiser, the former MLA for a part of the constituency 
which I represented at one time as well. 
 
And while I’m on my fee, Mr. Speaker, through you I would 
like to introduce another group of people of a different 
generation who are here today. They are 42 students from Dr. 
George Ferguson School in the constituency of Regina North 
East in the city of Regina. They are here to learn from their 
experience in the legislature. They are accompanied by Mrs. 
Burns, Mrs. Wolfe, and Mrs. Hack. 
 
I hope that they find the proceedings here of interest and of 
educational value and that they enjoy their stay here. I intend to 
meet with them for some drinks and some questions after the 
question period, and I look forward to that. And I invite all the 
members of this House to join me in extending our welcome to 
these students from Dr. George Ferguson School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly, some 17 
young people from my constituency of Regina South. They’re 
sitting in the west gallery, grade 8 students from Grant Road 
School, and they are accompanied here today by their teacher 
Charlotte Henryk, along with Wayne Eaton and Gary Holt. 
 
Hopefully they will find their visit here this afternoon 
informational, informative, have a little bit of fun. And although 
business of this Assembly could affect my timetable, I look 
forward to meeting with them a little bit later, determining how 
they enjoyed question period, perhaps taking a picture. 
 
Yesterday was a busy day, Mr. Speaker; we couldn’t even find 
a room to meet our school. But today, I understand we might be 
meeting out on the front lawn, and I look forward to that. I ask 
all the members to welcome these people to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you 
to the other members of the legislature, some 32 students from 
the Lanigan Elementary School. They’re grade 2 students; 
they’re seated in the east gallery. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers Marlys Jantz, Lauren Featherby; chaperons Mr. 
Strawson, Mrs. Nugent, Mrs. Bernauer, Mrs. Daelick, Ms. 
Dodd, and Ms. Sono. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to welcome the students here, 
and I will be meeting with you. We couldn’t find a  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1935 
 

location in the building, also, so we’ll be meeting on the front 
lawn for questions and for refreshments. I want to welcome you 
here. Have a safe journey home. Would other members join 
with me to welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, some 
32 students that are here from Assiniboine School in Kamsack, 
Saskatchewan today. They’re in with teachers Lorne Reilkoff 
and Allan Kondratoff. 
 
I hope they’ve had a good trip in. I hope they appreciate what 
they’re about to see in the legislature this afternoon. I hope it’s 
educational and interesting for them. And I will meet with them 
right after question period for some drinks and questions and to 
discuss what they’ve seen this afternoon. I wish them a good 
journey home. I hope that everybody in the legislature will help 
me welcome them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It’s also my pleasure to introduce a group 
of 25 grade 5 and 6 students from the Margaret McClumb 
School in Semans, Saskatchewan. They are here today with 
their teacher Miss Sonia Shewchuk, and chaperons Heather 
Hodgins, Gregg Marshall, Kathryn Hodgins, and Ernie 
Oblander. Their bus driver today is Carol MacMurchy, and I 
extend a special welcome to her. Carol is the daughter-in-law of 
a former member of this House, Gordon MacMurchy. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them after question period. I 
trust they will enjoy question period. I’d just like to inform 
them that according to the business of the House that is before 
me I may be 10 or 15 minutes late, but I do look forward to 
chatting with you and trust you will have some questions that 
we can discuss. 
 
Please extend to them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cancelled Lay-offs at Central Canada Potash 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, you’ve told us a number of times 
in this House that the reason why you’re shutting down the 
Cory mine is because of an over-supply situation and your 
chairman, Mr. Childers, has made that point in media 
interviews as well. And you’ve told us, tried to impress on us at 
least, that PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) is trying 
to maintain its market share, hold on to its market share, at least 
in the last few years. I want to know in light of that, Minister, 
why Central Canada Potash announced yesterday that it was 
cancelling a four-week shut-down planned for this summer and 
a further lay-off plan for this fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m not privy to the management  

decisions of Central Canada, but I . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, they laugh. Obviously they continue to show a lack of 
understanding of the potash industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear that what I’ve said before, 
that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, as an entity unto 
itself, has a tremendous surplus of productive capacity. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has had 
record sales. What I didn’t tell the House before, Mr. Speaker, 
that the record sales of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
last year — and I emphasize the adjective “record” — still do 
not meet the productive capacity of the potash mines when they 
were taken over by the New Democratic Party; and secondly, 
Mr. Speaker, what I did not give to the House in my previous 
answers is documentations with the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition being vice-chairman of the potash corporation, 
which shows the major expansions and projects which happen 
to be totally false and wrong, Mr. Speaker, which have led to 
that overcapacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I can tell the hon. member that within the 
potash corporation itself as a result of the decision made by the 
Leader of the Opposition to expand Lanigan, the potash 
corporation of itself, Mr. Speaker, has never met the sales of the 
productive capacity set out when it was nationalized; and 
secondly, it still has tremendous overcapacity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — . . . That is so much malarkey, Mr. Minister. 
It’s just another red herring that you’re trying to draw across the 
path . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — . . . across the path of this decision to shut 
down the Cory mine. You’ve got too much overcapacity as a 
result of your Lanigan expansion; then why shut down Cory? 
Why not just ease the Lanigan expansion into effect over the 
years? 
 
We’ve got Central Canada Potash cancelling its lay-offs. It has 
so much work for its employees that it has just opened new 
warehouses, two in the United States and two in eastern 
Canada, and it has to put something in them. Now it’s quite 
obvious that Central Canada Potash is finding an expanded 
market for its product. 
 
Now does this expanded market come about as the result of the 
Cory closure, or does it come about because under your 
administration PCS has just not been marketing aggressively 
and is leaving the market to be divided up between the private 
operators? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the hon. 
member’s statement of the true NDP policy regarding the 
potash corporation when he said, why not shut down Lanigan 
because of the overcapacity at Lanigan. And I frankly hope that 
the students from Lanigan understand the New Democratic 
position, which is: keep Cory going, shut down Lanigan for an 
additional two to three months a year; shut down Allan for an 
extra two to three months a year; shut down Rocanville for an 
extra two to three  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1936 
 

months a year. Mr. Speaker, from what I’m told by the people 
of Lanigan, they’re quite pleased with the government’s 
decision to keep Lanigan going for 11 months of the year. So 
I’m sure many people are very disappointed to hear restated, as 
the member of Quill Lakes has said, which is, shut down 
Lanigan for another two months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have indicated to the hon. member and to the 
public and to the Star-Phoenix that there have been record sales. 
We have been increasing our market share every year, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last three years. We have increased our 
market shares outside of the United States as well, Mr. Speaker. 
We have increased our market share in the first quarter of 1987, 
Mr. Speaker, through the potash corporation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in 1979 the NDP decided they’re going to 
have a major expansion of Lanigan. Today the potash 
corporation can produce nearly twice as much potash as has 
ever been sold by the potash corporation, Mr. Speaker, and 
some difficult decisions had to be made. We’re trying to rectify 
a situation created by the New Democratic Party; we’re trying 
to do it fairly, and we’ll do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has deliberately 
misstated what I said. I said nothing whatever about shutting 
down Lanigan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes you did. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I did not. I said the expansion at Lanigan is no 
excuse for shutting down the Cory mine, and you can’t make it 
an excuse for cutting down the Cory mine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. The union at 
the potash corporation mine at Allan, Mr. Gary Phillips, while 
saying that they would prefer to stay working 12 months a year, 
said he would have been willing to sacrifice some work because 
it feels strongly that the production cuts should be spread 
throughout the industry. 
 
As Mr. Phillips said in his statement: “We were assured by the 
hon. minister that The Potash Resources Act would save jobs by 
doing this. I have no idea why it was not enforced,” so said Mr. 
Phillips. Now you and I both know that it couldn’t be enforced 
because it was never proclaimed, and that’s what we on this 
side of the House don’t understand. Why wasn’t that Act 
proclaimed so that these cut-backs can fall across the whole 
industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I think I will, as 
much respect as I have for the individual member, take as a 
grain of salt that the union in Lanigan is prepared to have an 
extra two months a year shut down, Mr. Speaker, because that’s 
not the advice I have. 
 
The advice I have is that they are pleased to be working  

the 11 months of the year. If they’re volunteering extra 
shut-down, that is the first I have heard of it. And I have some 
difficulty accepting that, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll certainly pass that 
on to the potash corporation management, that the NDP say that 
the union at Lanigan is prepared to shut down an extra two 
months of the year, which he has just said that he wanted it 
spread around, and that’s the position taken. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member did say that the 
tremendous expansion at Lanigan, doubling the capacity of the 
potash corporation, is no excuse for shutting down Cory. I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, it’s simple arithmetic. 
 
When you’re producing twice as much potash in the potash 
corporation as you can possibly sell, Mr. Speaker, you have 
tremendous overcapacity. That tremendous overcapacity comes 
about because of the decision made in 1979, set out again with 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. I’d like to remind 
the hon. member that exhibits are not . . . Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, you simply don’t listen. I said 
that the union president Mr. Phillips, from the potash 
corporation mine at Allan. Allan, Mr. Speaker — Allan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m sure we’re having 
some difficulty in hearing the hon. member from Saskatoon 
Fairview, and let’s give him the opportunity to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplementary. 
Isn’t it true, Minister, that had the law, had The Potash 
Resources Act been proclaimed in September or October of last 
year, you would have had considerably more trouble shutting 
down Cory, which is a move you had planned more than a year 
ago according to your buddy Paul Schoenhals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Not at all, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a look at 
where the potash industry was a year ago prior to this 
government taking the courageous act to bring in legislation 
and, Mr. Speaker, to make the difficult decisions with regard to 
the potash corporation. Potash prices, Mr. Speaker, were 50 per 
cent lower than they are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Now we’re having 
difficulty hearing the minister, and I would like to ask the 
co-operation of the House in allowing the minister to answer 
the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago potash prices were 
nearly 100 per cent lower than they are today. Mr. Speaker, this 
government took the action which has brought stability to the 
potash industry. Mr. Speaker, this government has taken the 
action . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. We can’t hear the  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1937 
 

minister if he’s being continually interrupted, and I know the 
hon. members will want to hear the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have taken 
the action which has brought tremendous stability to the world 
potash industry. We have taken the action, Mr. Speaker, that 
has resulted in dramatic price increases in potash. Mr. Speaker, 
we have taken the action to try and put the potash corporation 
on a sound financial footing. Mr. Speaker, we have brought in 
management which is considered the best in the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, is advocating that 
we shut down all the mines for a period of three months. I have 
stated time and time again what the policy decisions were. Mr. 
Speaker, we start with the fundamental problem that because of 
New Democratic Party decisions . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I think the minister has made 
his point. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
just keep changing your answers every time you stand up on 
this question. One moment it’s over-supply, and next moment 
it’s overcapacity. You don’t know what it is. I’d like to quote 
once again from Mr. Phillips the president of the local at the 
Allan mine, Mr. Minister, the Allan mine, who says: “I can’t 
understand why Cory was moth-balled. If they get away with 
this, I’d hate to think of who is next.” Well, who is next, Mr. 
Minister? Mr. Phillips’ co-workers at Allan because they 
protested your move? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the hon. 
member doesn’t understand that Cory is continuing to produce 
white product, Mr. Speaker. It is not moth-balled. The decision 
to moth-ball any mine is a tremendously expensive one, Mr. 
Speaker. To shut down a potash mine and then start it up again 
is, in the cost estimates, anywhere from 20 to $50 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We did not moth-ball Cory. Cory is now producing a 
specialized product which we believe we can sell, Mr. Speaker. 
The demand is there. It’s a specialized product. We are trying to 
bring the tremendous capacity of the potash corporation more in 
line with world demand, Mr. Speaker. We are trying to bring 
that tremendous excess productive capacity in line with reality, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are trying to correct a decision that the now Leader of the 
Opposition made in 1979, Mr. Speaker. It’s not easy; it’s 
difficult. I’ve said that. But I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
decision we’ve taken will keep people working in Allan and 
Lanigan and Rocanville, Mr. Speaker, 11 months of the year, 
which is a risk and a change that they did not want to have of 
working al lot less, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Lay-offs of Sask Forest Products Workers 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for Sask Forest Products. 
Mr. Minister, on Monday, 50-plus employees at the Sask Forest 
Products mill in Carrot River got their  

lay-off notices for an indefinite period of time. The reason for 
these lay-offs is because Premier Cdn, which purchased the 
land on which the mill stands, wanted the burner shut down. 
 
Your government’s sell-off of Sask Minerals to two 
out-of-province companies has just cost 50 employees in an 
unrelated industry their jobs. How does that square with your 
assurance that the privatization of Sask Minerals would not cost 
any jobs to Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as we have said before, 
the sell-off to Premier peat will not cost jobs to Saskatchewan 
employees. Mr. Speaker, it is important for the member to 
recognize the Carrot river area is an extremely dry area these 
days, as we’ve heard about some other areas of the province in 
recent days here, in recent days. 
 
The peat industry is adjacent to the saw mill. The saw mill has a 
burner, Mr. Speaker, and that burner presents a significant 
danger to a wider area at a time when it’s extremely dry in the 
area. That’s all that this is related to. Mr. Speaker, I give you 
the assurance, and to the hon. member, the saw mill in Carrot 
River will be running and will continue to run. What the 
members should join with all of us in hoping for, praying for 
rain, whatever it is, at Carrot River, as we have been doing and 
as it relates to south-western Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. On Monday 
night at 6 o’clock the workers were informed that they were 
being laid off indefinitely, and you indicate that that’s not true. 
 
By way of information, Mr. Speaker, and a supplementary, 
there had been an agreement between Sask Forest Products and 
Premier Cdn that Sask Forest Products would be moving the 
burner that you speak of in July and there would be a six weeks 
lay-off to facilitate that move because of the fires. 
 
Now, however, Premier Cdn has apparently demanded that the 
burner be shut down now, and your government has meekly 
bowed to its wishes and given employees indefinite lay-offs. 
Why have you placed the wishes of this Quebec company ahead 
of the needs of Saskatchewan workers and families in this 
province, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the immediate 
problem is as I’ve described it just a few moments ago. The 
burner, Mr. Speaker, will be moved at Carrot River; the burner 
will be moved. And during the time of the move of the burner 
from one location to another, there will be some lay-offs. 
 
As the member knows, as the member knows very well, there is 
a requirement, and justifiably so — there’s a  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1938 
 

requirement for notification of those lay-offs prior to them 
taking place, and I think everyone in this House would agree 
with that being the case. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate again, no people at that saw mill, or 
the vast majority of employees at that saw mill will certainly 
not be losing any of their employment as a result of Premier 
peat coming into the expansion of the peat industry in the 
Carrot River area, which is something that should be noted as 
well — major expansion of the peat industry, and more jobs in 
the Carrot River area. 
 
But people in the saw mill industry will not be losing their jobs 
as a result of it. Yes, the burner will be moved, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s by agreement. And everyone in the saw mill industry 
there knows that that’s a reasonable development to take place. 
 
And secondly, it’s also very reasonable that we express some 
concern, and that all of us express some concern about the 
problems of the burner at a time when it’s extremely dry in the 
area. 
 

Cancellation of Two-Price Wheat 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
absence of the Premier and the Deputy Premier, I would direct 
my question to the Acting Premier, whoever it may be. 
 
Your government negotiating skills, or the federal government 
negotiating skills have cost Saskatchewan farmers a substantial 
part of their income — the two-price wheat system. But the 
Premier has said, don’t worry about that because it will be 
compensated for by the federal government in the form of a 
subsidy. But now we find that that’s only going to be one year. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, farmers are going to get compensation for 
the two-price wheat system in the year of the election, of the 
federal election, but what happens after election year? My 
question is: where will that lost revenue come from after 
election year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the 
two-price wheat system, I think that most agree of two things 
happening. One is that over the last 10 years you saw more and 
more wheat being produced in Ontario. They were then starting 
to think about producing wheat in Quebec, to the point where 
the projections were that 70 per cent of any benefit from 
two-price wheat was going to go to the provinces of Ontario 
and Quebec, but which traditionally has come to the province of 
Saskatchewan and the prairie region. 
 
We agreed, as did other provinces, including the province of 
Manitoba, that in fact if the two-price wheat system went, it 
would be replaced by a payment process that would be part of 
an ongoing deficiency payment process. That is in fact . . . That 
isn’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One year, the hon. member 
says. 
 
That process, that payment will continue to be made over a long 
period of time, as the deficiency payments will be  

made by the federal government over a long period of time for 
the benefit of the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would hope that you, for once, would take your hat off 
and acknowledge the contribution by the federal government to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. It has been significant. It has been 
the area of a billion-plus dollars a year, something never, ever 
contemplated by previous federal governments well into 
history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
your Premier and the Premier of the province led the people to 
believe that there would be a separate program to ensure that 
the farmers in this province had compensation for the two-price 
wheat, and you can’t complicate the issue by talking about 
Ontario because if we wanted to get into the issues there’s much 
better ways of doing this. 
 
But you gave them that guarantee and now you’ve 
double-crossed them. You and the Tory government in Ottawa 
have double-crossed them, and in the year of an election you’re 
going to give them a subsidy, and the years after you’re going 
to roll it into the deficiency payments. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question is this: what guarantees are 
you going to give the farms of Saskatchewan that the 
compensation for the moneys lost from the elimination of 
two-price wheat will be there in the form of a separate program 
every year, not just the year of a federal Tory election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite made the same false statement when the first 
deficiency payment was made to the farmers of western 
Canada. it was just prior to the vote in 1986, and they said 
there’s nothing more than simply a method to buy votes. You 
campaigned upon that, you yelled about that for a whole year. 
One year later, Mr. Speaker, one year later a similar payment 
was made. There was no federal election; there was no 
provincial election. The reason, Mr. Speaker, is there’s a 
government in Ottawa that cares about the Saskatchewan 
farmer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this fall there will be more 
payments by that same federal government, and we can only 
hope and wish that that government continues to be in office for 
the benefit of the Saskatchewan farmer. Praise the Lord, Mr. 
Speaker, that an NDP will never, ever be in Ottawa because 
there would never be a financial payment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
your government and the Tory government in Ottawa is doing it 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan again, like they’ve done it to 
them many other times. You’re making a promise in an election 
year to take care of them, but again  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1939 
 

there’s no long-term commitment, like we’ve seen in programs 
gone by. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is this, and I wish you would not 
make light of it as you did the last question: when is your 
government going to stop pegging agricultural policy around 
your own popularity polls, and when are you going to start 
using agriculture policy to benefit farmers in Saskatchewan in 
the long term? When are you going to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
been in power since 1982, Mr. Speaker, and since 1982 we have 
stood behind the farmers of Saskatchewan. Every year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to 
continue to stand behind the farmers of Saskatchewan well into 
the future. And, Mr. Speaker, since 1984, since 1984, with a 
new federal government, they too have stood behind the 
Saskatchewan farmer, and we should be happy about that, Mr. 
Speaker, not because, Mr. Speaker, not because of some poll, 
and not because of some election — and the members opposite 
should know that; they represent virtually all city ridings — we 
stand behind them not because of polls or politics. That’s where 
we come from; that’s the people we represent; that’s what we 
believe in; and we will continue to believe in that, Mr. Speaker, 
and we will continue to represent rural Saskatchewan. 
 
If, on the other hand, they would wish to elect an NDP, what 
would you get? You would get no deficiency payment, and you 
would probably get a national land bank program for the federal 
government to buy all farm land, not only here but all across the 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Co-operation with Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Finance. Mr. Minister, I’ve noticed in the auditor’s report a 
statement by the auditor which no democratic and responsible 
government can simply be proud of. And I quote: 
 

I find it regrettable that, for the first time since my 
appointment, I must include in my annual report 
comments concerning a lack of co-operation in obtaining 
information that I consider necessary. 

 
Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor is the taxpayers’ 
watch-dog and he makes it his business to make sure that the 
tax dollars, taxpayers’ dollars are spent according to the laws 
laid down by this legislature. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you tell the taxpayers today why you 
refuse to co-operate with the Provincial Auditor so that he is 
able to perform his duties. Why, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the  

auditor’s report is, and I’m sure will be, a matter of some 
debate, but the specific examples referred to by the Provincial 
Auditor dealt with requests for information from the Crown 
Management Board which were subsequently supplied to the 
Provincial Auditor and that there is a stated procedure and 
process for him to follow, and when he’s followed the process 
he has received the information. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Litter Control Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 — An Act respecting the Operation of All 
Terrain Vehicles 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Operation of All Terrain Vehicles. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 
 

DIVISION DEFERRED 
 
Mr. Speaker: — On Monday there was a deferral of a division 
of the vote until this time today. Therefore that vote will now 
take place. 
 
I’ll repeat the motion itself. It dealt with the first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of Certain Acts and the Passing of 
Certain Orders and Regulations pursuant to The Government 
Organization Act. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 
Muller    Toth 
Duncan   Sauder 
McLeod   McLaren 
Andrew   Hopfner 
Lane    Petersen 
Taylor    Swenson 
Smith    Martens 
Swan    Baker 
Muirhead  Gleim 
Hodgins   Neudorf 
Gerich    Gardner 
Hardy    Kopelchuk 
Klein    Saxinger 
Meiklejohn  Britton 
Martin  
 

Nays — 20 
 
Rolfes    Anguish 
Lingenfelter  Goulet 



 
June 8, 1988 

1940 
 

Shillington  Hagel 
Tchorzewski  Pringle 
Koskie    Calvert 
Thompson  Lautermilch 
Brockelbank  Trew 
Mitchell   Smart 
Kowalsky  Van Mulligen 
Solomon   Koenker 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — To my right, John Edwards; to his right 
we’ve got Jim Anderson. I guess that’s it. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I welcome this opportunity to 
engage in some discussion with the minister concerning the Bill 
currently before the House which will affect funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Chairman, in essence freezes the funding for the 
Wakamow Valley Authority at the 1986-1987 level, and not 
only does it freeze that particular level of funding, but it at the 
same time freezes the inequity in funding to Wakamow that’s 
existed for some time and continues to exist. And I’ll want to be 
discussing that inequity in funding and unfairness with the 
minister this afternoon, and I’m hoping that we can take some 
time to discuss these issues thoroughly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, perhaps before we begin, if I can just 
review once more some of the background and the history that’s 
brought us to this point. Mr. Chairman, the Wakamow Valley 
Authority was developed, was established in the city of Moose 
Jaw to develop and redevelop the Moose Jaw River Valley, by 
the former New Democratic government prior to 1982. It was at 
that time a very welcome announcement by the city of Moose 
Jaw, and it has proven to be one of the greatest things that’s 
happened to our community in the last number of years. 
 
Mr. Chairman, you should know that the Wakamow Valley has 
the wide support of the population of the city of Moose Jaw; 
enjoys the broad-based support of community organizations and 
Moose Jaw service clubs, businesses, individuals; and has been 
able over its short history to reach out to the province and to the 
country for support and funding. 
 

But, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the issue that is at hand here has to 
do with the funding of the Wakamow Valley Authority, and it 
remains today the lowest per capita-based funding level of the 
four like authorities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today the Meewasin Valley Authority in Saskatoon and the 
Wascana authority in Regina are each funded at a level of four 
city mills. The Chinook authority in Swift Current is funded at a 
level 1.85 city mills. The Wakamow Valley Authority is funded 
at a level of 1.6 city mills — the lowest in the province, the 
lowest of all four. 
 
This Bill that we’re addressing today not only freezes the total 
funding in dollar amounts, it freezes that in equity, and that’s 
something we’ll want to talk about this afternoon. 
 
Perhaps to begin our discussion, Mr. Minister, I want us to be 
absolutely clear about your responsibility and your role in terms 
of funding for the Wakamow Valley. I want to be absolutely 
sure that indeed you are the minister responsible for making the 
arrangements for funding to the Wakamow Valley. I want to 
know if that’s correct. 
 
I want to know if it is within your power, Mr. Minister, to 
negotiate that funding; whether it’s within your power to raise 
the level of that funding, lower the level of that funding; 
whether it’s within your power to propose legislation, if 
necessary, to do those things. Mr. Minister, I would like you to 
describe your particular responsibilities in regard to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, what the member says is 
correct. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I asked a question, Mr. Minister. I’ll ask it 
once more. Will you describe, Mr. Minister, will you describe, 
in your words, from your point of view, your understanding of 
your responsibility in terms of the Wascana valley authority in 
Moose Jaw? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m the minister in charge 
of the Wakamow Valley Authority Act, I believe is the official 
title. And what the member indicates is true, that as minister in 
charge I have a control over the budget, control being that if 
there were any negotiations for new funding arrangements, that 
that would be within my jurisdiction. And it would be a 
negotiated process to see if the other players that are involved in 
it with us would be interested. 
 
And just as when the Act was set up by the NDP government, it 
was set up in an inequitable proportion compared to the other 
urban parks that were in existence at that time, and has been 
dealt with since 1982. No new negotiations have formally 
occurred other than the fact that because of the restraint we 
were not in a position to increase that funding. 
 
The chairman and the authority of Wakamow Valley 
understand that. We have discussed it on more than several 
occasions. And the fact that there is an inequitable situation to 
the formula right now is in existence, Mr. Chairman, because 
that’s how the NDP set it up. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1941 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you have described the funding 
formula for Wakamow as inequitable. You have been in 
government since 1982. Will you give a fuller explanation to 
this House why your government, and now you as the minister 
responsible, have not acted to address that situation which you 
consider to be inequitable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, unfortunately when we 
assumed office in 1982 we found a lot of errors that the NDP 
had made. And as we are in a position to correct the mistakes of 
the NDP government, we are doing that. And to name one for 
the member of Regina North East, is the Bill that we’re talking 
about today. 
 
The NDP set up the existing formula, and now they question as 
to why the inequity exists. Mr. Chairman, they created the 
inequity. As soon as our government is in a position to change 
the funding, we will do that. I’ve said that on several occasions, 
and I’m not embarrassed to say that. We will correct your 
mistake in time, just as soon as we are able to. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, just for the record and just so 
that this House is very clear on this point — and it’s widely 
known and widely admitted by all that when the funding level 
was established for Wakamow, it was established at a level for 
the developmental stage of the Wakamow Valley Authority. 
The minister knows that. And once the authority was 
functioning, the funding was to be changed and raised to 
become more equitable with the other authorities. He knows 
that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
What happened? What happened was that in 1982 this group of 
people got elected. That’s what’s happened. And we’ve seen the 
neglect that the city of Moose Jaw has received by this 
government, even when they had two members from the city of 
Moose Jaw sitting over there. They’ve had, Mr. Chairman, 
seven years, seven budgets now, six years in government, to 
address the situation. What have they done? 
 
Well in 1983, rather than addressing the inequity, they went and 
slashed all the funding to all of the boards across the province 
— 20 per cent to all the park authorities across the province, 20 
per cent cut. That was in 1983. That’s when world oil prices 
were at their very highest. That’s before you had a chance to 
run up a $3.7 billion deficit that costs us $330 million a year to 
service now. 
 
For this minister to stand in the House and say that inequity, as 
he describes it, was established in 1981, cannot be addressed by 
1988, leaves the people of Moose Jaw and those concerned 
about the Wakamow Valley really wondering about his 
commitment to address this inequity some time, somewhere. 
Well let me ask, Mr. Minister, you’ve made a commitment; do 
you want to address this inequity? 
 
Let’s have a little future look. When do you expect we might 
see? Next budget year? The next budget year, perhaps just as 
we’re coming into an election? When do you see some change 
happening? 
 
(1500) 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — We wouldn’t be so crass as to think of 
doing it when an election is forthcoming. Listen, whatever the 
NDP promised . . . I don’t know what the NDP promised; I 
wasn’t part of the negotiation process, you have to understand 
that. So if the NDP gave them a song and dance, that’s their 
problem. 
 
All I inherited was the legislation and the existing funding. I’ve 
been questioned on it more than several times, not only in this 
Assembly, but by the people of Moose Jaw. They understand 
where the inequity began, how the inequity was put in place. 
They also understand that as our provincial economy improves, 
so will their position. They understand that. 
 
And I believe that, Mr. Chairman, this continual line of 
excessive questioning on the same topic is going to do him no 
god in his constituency because it’s going to get you . . . they 
understand the position and I freely admit it. So if he wants to 
continue along this line of questioning I have nothing further to 
add than that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then may I ask why if you have 
found it impossible to address the situation of funding to the 
Wakamow Valley, how is it then when you established the 
Chinook authority in Swift Current, you found it possible to 
establish a better rate of funding for that authority than exists 
for the Wakamow Valley? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman that was negotiated between 
the city and the province. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well how is it then, Mr. Minister, you couldn’t 
negotiate that same sort of . . . at least that same level of 
funding for Wakamow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve said it a dozen times 
and I’ll say it again: I didn’t negotiate it; the NDP did. So if the 
NDP negotiated a deal that the people of Moose Jaw see as 
unfair, they should deal with it at election time and put you out 
of there. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, did you not say to this House 
somewhat earlier this afternoon, a few moments ago, that it is 
within your power to negotiate? Is it not within your power to 
renegotiate? Mr. Minister, is it not within your power to 
renegotiate with the Wakamow people in Moose Jaw? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Certainly it is, and I’ve freely admitted that 
they are aware that a negotiation process will take place and 
will occur. It occurs continually year after year, and that this 
will occur. And things will improve for them just as it improves 
for our province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, while I’m on my feet right now, as the members 
of the Assembly know, I had a school visit this afternoon and, 
with leave, if their critic is ready, the same officials would be 
required for the Meewasin Act, and if they wouldn’t mind going 
into the Meewasin Act, I would beg leave to go and visit my 
students for a few minutes and then I would return to continue 
with Wakamow, if that’s permissible. I don’t know. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1942 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, during the 
second reading of this particular Bill I made reference to a 
period some time ago which dealt with the reduction of the 
statutory amount, in this specific instance to Meewasin Valley, 
from five mills to four mills. And at that time the minister in 
charge of Meewasin Valley Authority, the hon. Paul 
Schoenhals, said that it was too late to do anything in this 
particular budget year but there could be budgetary 
considerations next year. 
 
In order to determine, Mr. Minister, the reluctance of the 
government to reconsider this matter, I wonder if the minister 
could go back just a little bit in history to give us the basis of 
why the government has not reconsidered increasing the mill 
rate equivalent to Meewasin Valley, when in fact the Meewasin 
Valley Authority is a creator of employment in the city of 
Saskatoon, and Saskatoon has one of the highest unemployment 
rates in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I know this wouldn’t be part of your 
considerations, but you are a member from Saskatoon. You 
have a responsibility tot he whole province, but you also have a 
responsibility to the people of Saskatoon, and Meewasin 
Valley, a good portion of it, is located in your constituency. 
And I want to know the history of the considerations with 
regard to a drop from five mills to four mills and no further 
consideration of the matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly am 
very concerned about the Meewasin Valley and think that the 
authority is doing a tremendous job in so far as developing and 
creating a much better quality of life for the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I believe it was back in 1983, the time that you mention, that 
there was a 20 per cent cut-back in the funding right across the 
board for all of these urban parks; and the reason for it being, as 
I understand it, that because of the economic situation of the 
day. And I know that the member well understands that the 
Meewasin Valley Authority is funded by the university, which 
is, indirectly again, from the government, and also from the city 
of Saskatoon. So any financial changes that take place, of 
course, affect all three of these bodies. 
 
As I indicated, the cut-back, as I understand it, then was to do 
with the economic situation of the day. And the feeling has 
been then that the situation has not improved since that time to 
enable us to allow any further increase in the grants. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, your Bill in 1983 
came into effect on April Fool’s Day — April 1, 1983. That’s 
when the Bill came into force that reduced . . . it was made 
retroactive, and that reduced the mill rate equivalent for 
Meewasin Valley from five mills to four mills. 
 
Now the minister says — and that’s rather a weak excuse — the 
minister says, the economic conditions of the  

province. Well if you look at the main economic generators in 
the province of Saskatchewan, one of them being resource 
revenues, you’ll find that the resource revenues for that year, 
the previous year, the following year and the following year 
after that, remained relatively stable at a high level. And in fact 
about two years after 1983, the resource levels for the province 
were higher than they had ever been before. 
 
And the minister stands here and says: economic conditions. 
Well one of the economic conditions of that day was there was 
higher unemployment in Saskatoon. Did the minister take into 
consideration that projects would have to be cut or delayed in 
Meewasin Valley, which is recognized for generating 
employment in the city of Saskatoon. Did the minister . . . did 
his government not take that into consideration at that time? 
That’s one of the economic factors too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the one thing 
that the member opposite forgets — that priorities of a 
government, of course, are dictated by need. And I would point 
out to him that certainly after the PCs came to power in 1982, 
that there were priorities in one particular area that his 
government had neglected, and that was in the area of nursing 
home construction. I mean, the fact that you had a moratorium 
on for five years certainly didn’t help the situation in regard to 
the construction of nursing home beds. 
 
One of the priorities of this government then obviously had to 
be in the construction in that area, and I think that the member 
would agree with that. 
 
You indicate that there is a concern about unemployment in the 
city of Saskatoon. I would say that certainly because of the 20 
per cent cut-back that there was some loss of jobs in 1983. But I 
will also point out to the member that since that time there have 
been a fair number of jobs created in the Meewasin Valley 
Authority through the New Careers Corporation. And that has 
been very, very well received, very popular and has employed a 
good number of people. 
 
So even though that isn’t included in the legislation, none the 
less, it is government funding. It has been applied to that 
particular area, and I think that you would have to agree has 
helped to maintain the job level, certainly, in that particular 
area. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m really surprised 
at the minister dragging in extraneous matter like nursing 
homes. Now some members in that government over there have 
been using that angle for an excuse; that is their crutch. And 
including the member for Wilkie, that’s his crutch for not doing 
anything, for not doing anything because they had to put 
priority on nursing homes. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, I was on city council in 
Saskatoon, and I know how quickly you got started that nursing 
home in Saskatoon. I’ll tell you how quickly. It was at least two 
years after this you still had not acquired all the property to put 
the nursing home on, because I know the city of Saskatoon sold 
it to the province. And I can get you the exact dates that make a 
lie out of the  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1943 
 

statement that you’ve made. The truth of the matter is that this 
minister and his other government ministers have been using 
this as a crutch, as an excuse. 
 
And I strongly object, Mr. Chairman, for the minister to drag in 
that extraneous material about nursing homes and say that they 
have to make priority decisions. The priority decision, I might 
remind the minister, of the city of Saskatoon at that time — and 
I have the resolution right here in my hand — is that they 
wanted the funding increased to the five-mill rate. And I want 
to know, Mr. Minister, what did you do about that? You had an 
opinion from the city of Saskatoon, who has some priorities as 
well, to increase the mill rate equivalent to five mills, from four 
mills that you had knocked it down to. What did you do about 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
across the way obviously isn’t too concerned about the Bill 
that’s being presented here today. Typically of the NDP, he 
wants to live back in the past. 
 
But you make mention, certainly, of nursing home construction 
in Saskatoon. I’d point out to you that the government of the 
province is not just building or wasn’t just building nursing 
home beds in the city of Saskatoon. You had indicated a little 
earlier that we have, and I have responsibility, not only for the 
city of Saskatoon but it was happening all over the province. 
 
Maybe you don’t like to talk about priorities, but I guess your 
priorities back at the time you were putting moratoriums on, 
was more of an interest in buying potash mines and this sort of 
thing. So if you want to go back we can probably do that. 
 
But why don’t you take a look at what we’re supposed to be 
discussing today, and that’s amendments to The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Act, something that’s providing a very, very 
good service to the community of Saskatoon today. And I 
would point out that the amendments that have been listed here, 
of course, are ones that were requested by the board of directors 
of MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority), and some that certainly 
have been in need for some time. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that when new Bills, and you people 
were the ones that brought in The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Act initially, and it was a good thing, but at the same time we 
recognize the fact that from time to time these Bills have to be 
updated. And these, of course, basically were at the request of 
the board of directors. 
 
I know that you have pointed out, or one of your colleagues 
pointed out the fact about the change in the funding, and I know 
that funding is always a concern. We never seem to have 
enough money for all of these different projects that we feel 
certainly are very worthwhile. At the same time, I think that 
we’re fortunate, because of the serious problems that we’ve 
seen in the last couple of years, that we have been able to 
maintain the level of funding at least at what it was the year 
before. In many departments and in many areas there had to be 
many cut-backs, and certainly I feel very pleased with the fact 
that the Meewasin Valley Authority did not have its grant cut 
and that we were able to maintain it. 
 

(1515) 
 
And I would hope that as time goes on that we’re certainly 
going to be able to increase it because there is a lot more work 
to be done. Because of the changes and holding their grants as 
they were in the past, there’s no doubt about it that some of the 
projects had to be put on hold. 
 
But I think they are moving ahead. They are doing a lot of 
really good things there. It’s very positive for the city of 
Saskatoon, and as new moneys become available they’ll be able 
to do even more. But I certainly, to this point, congratulate them 
and I would just like to see us move along and deal with the 
amendments we’ve got before us. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I said my 
congratulations to the Meewasin authority in the second 
reading. And even under the circumstances, the restricting 
circumstances which your government has put this authority, 
Meewasin Valley, and other authorities in by their actions, I’ve 
congratulated them on the good job they’ve done, and I look 
forward to a bright future for Meewasin Valley, as well as the 
other authorities in Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s interesting to note that the member says that I’m living 
in the past, because I’ll only talk about this revenue-sharing cut 
that they’ve brought in in April Fool’s Day in 1983. But the 
very . . . One of the main thrusts of this Bill is retroactivity, on 
behalf of the minister who brought the Bill in, and it has to do 
with making right something that they neglected to do a year 
ago. 
 
And I want to find out, Mr. Minister, if the provisions of this 
particular Bill, relating to the fiscal years commencing April 1, 
1987 and ending on March 31, 1988 . . . why it was necessary 
to make this retroactive for that period, because this is one of 
the main features of the minister’s Bill — retroactivity — the 
very thing he accuses me of being in error about, of looking 
back. Well the minister’s looking back, and I want to know why 
he’s got that section in there. It’s 18, on page 7. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the reason that that 
section is in there is to simply cover off the freeze for the two 
years, and they’re outlined, of course, there. This was 
commencing back on April 1 of ’87 and running through until 
the end of March in 1989. This of course had to be included in 
the Bill, and that’s what it covers, is the freeze over that 
particular period of time. Any change or whatever is going to 
happen for the next year, there would have to be another 
amendment, of course, come forward, so this is to cover off 
those two years during the freeze. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Is it there, Mr. Minister . . . Is that 
amendment there because of benign neglect on your part? Is it 
benign neglect or is it just plain sloppiness? Which is it, Mr. 
Minister? Why wasn’t that taken care of before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point 
out to the member that it was neither of what he’s indicating. 
This Bill was introduced last year but the session came to a 
close before it was carried through to its  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1944 
 

completion. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, the session lasted for 
months and months and months. I recall it well. And you had 
plenty of opportunity to deal with this Bill last year. What 
would you have done, Mr. Minister, had the authority insisted, 
or had some public-spirited citizen insisted, that you pay the 
equivalent of five mills last year? What would you have done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out that 
the member opposite is dealing with hypothetical situations. 
That certainly was not the case. This Bill was introduced; there 
were other Bills that had a greater priority, and it did not reach 
the final stages before the session ended. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Was this requested by any of the 
authorities, or this particular authority, this particular 
amendment, or was it a creation of your mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a budgetary 
decision. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that 
had one of the authorities, or this particular authority, applied 
for and insisted on the five mills last year, you would have been 
hard pressed to deny them the five mills. Now, it has to be 
because of, as I say, benign neglect or just plain sloppiness on 
your part because you had an opportunity to bring that Bill 
forward and deal with it at the last session, and you didn’t. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Minister, you suggest to me that 
the New Careers Corporation has provided jobs at Meewasin 
Valley. Well when you’ve got people backed into a corner, as 
you have the unemployed, and especially so in Saskatoon city 
where the unemployment rate is higher than any other major 
city; when you’ve got them backed in the corner and you’re 
kicking the stuffing out of them, you can offer them just about 
any relief that you want and they’re going to take it, rather than 
taking another beating from you on the unemployment 
situation. 
 
Now what you’ve been offering up till only recently, and I’m 
not even sure whether you’ve ceased that now, is mickey mouse 
jobs through the New Careers Corporation. You know, get your 
high-tech future in order, join New Careers. You get two weeks 
of work and then you get off for two weeks. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pick stones . . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — What kind of high-tech jobs are these 
when you’re cutting brush or piling stones and you get two 
weeks of training, two weeks of training, and then you’re off for 
two weeks to look for a job in an employment climate where 
it’s the highest unemployment in the province. And the minister 
stands up and says this is our answer. This is our answer to jobs 
in Saskatoon. Can you imagine that? This is the answer of this 
government. 
 
This government is not planning ahead. It has no master plan 
unless it provides the kind of funding that’s required  

by these authorities. They cannot give the kind of permanency 
to employees that will do a good job for those authorities. And 
there’s no evidence around to show that those employees didn’t 
do a good job for their authorities. 
 
There are good jobs, and the minister should be doing 
everything he can to put those jobs in place, and the way he can 
do it is restore the funding. And I’m surprised that the minister 
has not been able to convince his colleagues to do that. And I 
don’t know why he . . . maybe he didn’t take a presentation to 
treasury board or to the budget consideration that would have 
reconsidered and given these jobs, these good jobs to people of 
Saskatoon, Regina and Moose Jaw, etc. And I want to know 
when the minister is going to consider this matter again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite likes to ramble on and on, and I certainly did not 
suggest that the New Careers Corporation was the answer to 
unemployment in the city of Saskatoon, and he knows that. I 
don’t have any problem with the New Careers Corporation and 
the task that it has set out in trying to find employment and train 
people for different jobs. And I don’t have any doubt as to how 
successful it’s been. I think it’s been very successful. 
 
And certainly I’ve talked to some of the individuals who have 
been involved with the Meewasin Valley Authority — and I 
know the members opposite, of course, are not in favour of any 
kind of welfare reform, and that’s unfortunate — but I happen 
to believe in the programs of the government of the day, and 
feel that they are being very successful and that many of these 
people do go on and find permanent employment following 
their work with authorities such as Meewasin. 
 
Now I would point out again that the other individuals, or the 
other groups that are involved with Meewasin, fully understood 
the situation as to why the grants were maintained at the same 
levels. As a matter of fact, they were quite happy to see the 
shares remain the same. There were probably other alternatives 
that could have been considered, but it might have meant that 
the provincial share might have decreased as a percentage, and 
it would have meant that the city of Saskatoon would have had 
to probably pick up a larger amount. so I would point out that 
the other parties were in full agreement that they would be 
willing to accept the grant as it was the year previous, and I 
think, felt quite fortunate that indeed they did not have a cut. 
 
So these things are all talked out and fully discussed. And I 
would assume that as we move into the budget discussions for 
the coming year, that the same thing will apply, that the 
authority will put forward its budget and its request for grants 
and, as I say, hopefully we’ll be able to give an increase, but 
there’s certainly no guarantee at this time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess the same 
applies to the city of Saskatoon and the University of 
Saskatchewan. When you’ve got them backed into the corner 
and you’re giving them a beating financially . . . and you know, 
you, from the city of Saskatoon you took away, and from urban 
municipalities you took away the  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1945 
 

automatic revenue sharing and you slashed their grants. You did 
the same to the university, and you’ve done the same to 
Meewasin Valley, and you’ve continued it over the years. 
 
And as I suggest, if that’s the best you can do, Mr. Minister, if 
that’s the best you can do for the municipalities, the university 
and Meewasin Valley, I guess we have to accept it, but that 
doesn’t say that we have to like it, Mr. Minister. And I wish that 
you have more influence in cabinet and treasury board than you 
appear to have. It’s unfortunate for Saskatoon that that’s the 
situation we’re in, that your voice is not heard there, that you’re 
not able to get these grants restored. That makes me sad. But I 
guess we can’t do anything about that for the time being. 
 
I can feel confident that in the future when our government has 
something to do with these authorities again, which we had a 
great deal to do with in their original creation, we will give 
them a sympathetic hearing — we’ll give them a sympathetic 
hearing, I can assure the minister of that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go on to the next section following the 
one we’ve just been discussing, about the liability of authority 
or participating parties. And on the representations that were 
made to you with regard to this particular clause, were 
examples cited to illustrate to you the difficult liability 
situations that the authorities had got themselves into because of 
the lack of this kind of a control or legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there were no 
specific cases where this had presented any problem, but I think 
it was a matter that was discussed and raised as a concern that 
there may well be things that could come up in the future where 
other individuals who are involved with Meewasin Valley 
Authority, whether serving on committees or whatever. It’s just 
a matter of expanding, including all of those people, as well as 
the employees. But there had been no specific type of event that 
had taken place that had raised this, not to my knowledge. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you make that comment 
relative to all the authorities, not necessarily specifically 
Meewasin. But it’s a general comment, is it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Okay, Mr. Minister. I can understand the 
importance of this because you have a lot of people that 
contribute a lot of voluntary time to the authority as well, who I 
gather would be protected by the liability part of the statute 
here. 
 
And I want your assurance, Mr. Minister, that what I’m saying 
here is reasonably accurate, that all people who work for the 
authority or contribute their time to the authority would have 
certain liability provisions that they would not previously have 
had, had it not been for this section. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, that is correct, Mr. Chairman. 
As the member has indicated, there are a lot of individuals 
involved with Meewasin who are not paid employees; there are 
a lot of volunteers. And this, of  

course, will protect those volunteers. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — In conclusion, Mr. Minister, I want to 
say how much I appreciate the volunteers and the others in 
Meewasin Valley, and I’m sure other authorities too, of the time 
and effort they’ve put in, especially the volunteers who do it 
because they love the city and the location and they want to 
help. And I know they deserve recognition and credit, and I 
know the authorities try to provide that to them, and we should 
in this legislature do no less than that. 
 
I do want to encourage you, Mr. Minister, to put stronger 
emphasis on the funding of the authority. And I say this not 
specifically to Meewasin but to authorities generally. And I 
think it would be wise to do that. It is a very far-sighted plan in 
each case, and it deserves the support . . . it had the support of 
this legislature in its creation, and it deserves continuing 
support. And I hope, Mr. Minister, that you can put more 
strength into your representations before budget bureau and the 
budget considerations in the next fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to 
thank the hon. member and also add, as well, comments with 
regard to the volunteers. We’re all very proud of the Meewasin 
Valley Authority and the work that it’s doing, and I’m sure that 
we are the envy of many other centres, not only with 
Saskatchewan but also throughout the country. People that visit 
Saskatoon often make comments about the beauty and the parks 
and the facilities that we have along the Saskatchewan River 
through the city, and there’s no doubt a lot of good work is 
being done. 
 
I certainly am very committed to ensuring that we get as much 
money as possible to help out in the provision of more services, 
but at the same time we have to consider that there’s only so 
much money to go around, and we have to do the best that we 
can. But certainly they are doing a lot of good work. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
hope you enjoyed your opportunity to meet with your students. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I may just ask some specific questions about the 
actual dollar amounts involved here and how this Bill will 
affect those actual dollar amounts: what was the actual dollar 
amount in funding in 1986-87 from the province to Wakamow, 
which I therefore assume will be the actual dollar amount that 
will be instituted not only for last year but for the year, the 
funding year to come? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’d like to thank the members opposite  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1946 
 

for their co-operation in giving me leave to visit with my 
students. It’s a big event in their life for them to come and visit 
the Chamber and to visit with their MLA, and thank you very 
much for allowing me the recess. 
 
The funding grant to the Wakamow Valley Authority will be 
$96,600. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I apologize, I was discussing the 
proceedings of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The funding in this year’s budget is 
$96,600. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, that would have been the 
same figure then as in 1986-87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — In rounded dollars they are the same 
figure, yes. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then could you provide me the 
figure . . . if this legislation wasn’t before the House, if the 
freeze was not being put into effect, what would that figure be 
for 1988-89? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I understand $98,300. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So in essence, this aspect of this legislation is 
saving your government something in the neighbourhood of 
$2,000, not quite. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, a rough estimate is $2,207. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So for $2,207 we have a Bill introduced into 
the Saskatchewan legislature to freeze funding. Mr. Minister, do 
you anticipate that you will be bringing a Bill like this again for 
the funding year ’89-90? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, just to put things into perspective, 
Mr. Chairman, and you know, I don’t know what we can 
anticipate; I have no way of being clairvoyant. And although we 
find that we don’t like to do what we must do, if you understand 
the other figures and put it in perspective, you can see where the 
restraint is showing up in the other urban parks, and that’s why, 
in fairness, we affect all of these budgets in the same fashion. 
And as was just discussed in Meewasin, the difference in 
provincial funding was $50,000; with Wascana, that we’ll be 
doing later this day, the difference is $139,000. So that at 
Wakamow, where they’re only hit with approximately $2,000, 
you can see that there’s quite a difference. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Yes, again, Mr. Minister, I think that those 
figures clearly indicate the difference in funding that exists 
between Meewasin, Wascana, Wakamow, and Chinook. No one 
in the city of Moose Jaw would expect that the Wakamow 
funding ought to be on an exact par level with 
Wascana-Meewasin, but we’re hoping, hoping, that in this 
budget year you would begin to at least narrow that gap, and 
that’s not happening. 
 
Mr. Minister, the arrangement, as I understand it, with the 
Chinook authority, is that the funding split is 50-50: 50 from the 
province, 50 from the city and district of Swift  

Current. Mr. Minister, we were hoping, if you weren’t willing 
to change the actual dollar amount at the funding level, that you 
might be willing to look at at least putting Wakamow on a par 
with the Chinook in terms of the split in funding. Currently 
Wakamow, as you know, is 40 per cent funded by the province. 
 
Did you give consideration to bringing a 50 per cent funding 
from the province to put Wakamow on a par with the Chinook 
in Swift Current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, what the member says is 
right. Chinook is at 50 per cent, while Wakamow is at 40 per 
cent. But by the same token, Meewasin in Saskatoon is at forty 
and third per cent. So I suppose that back in the golden days 
when the NDP set up the original percentages, they probably 
fashioned it to some degree after the 40 per cent at Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well again, Mr. Minister, when we begin to 
look at the current situation and the future, and we saw the same 
thing happening with the discussions just a few moments ago in 
regard to Meewasin, the members on your side always want to 
talk about the 1970s. Mr. Minister, I’m asking you: did you 
give consideration in the budget year to change the formula for 
Wakamow to a 50-50 split? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say that 
our discussions regarding the urban parks’ budgets are ongoing, 
and we have good dialogue with them. We recognize the 
problems that exist throughout the authorities in the province, 
and they recognize our problems. And we certainly recognize 
the situation in Moose Jaw and why the member is pushing so 
hard. 
 
And as I’ve said before, they understand that just as soon as the 
government finds itself in a position to do something to alter the 
existing formula with the Wakamow Valley Authority, that will 
be done. Until then we just continue our discussions and our 
deliberations with them and offering them the explanations that, 
as difficult as they might be, they accept. And hopefully one 
day we’ll be in a position, if good times return, or when good 
times return to our province in the resource sector, Mr. 
Chairman, that the urban parks will share, as will the rest of the 
people in the province. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, on another area that affects 
Wakamow that at least I personally hoped you might have 
addressed this year, has to do with the matter of landscape 
maintenance with the Wakamow authority. Just this morning I 
had an opportunity to drive through the valley. We had a severe 
wind in Moose Jaw last night. There’s a fair bit of dead-fall 
from the trees around the valley, and it reminded me this 
morning that someone’s going to have to clean that up, and that 
cost will go to Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it true that Wakamow is the only one of the 
four authorities that today must fund their landscape 
maintenance out of their statutory funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s all part of the 
negotiation process. For instance, in Saskatoon at Meewasin, 
the city picks that up, the maintenance part of  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1947 
 

it. And so far in Wakamow, the city of Moose Jaw, we’ve got to 
negotiate details like that because they’re not prepared to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, of course the problem 
would be somewhat easier to deal with if the entire level of 
funding rose, particularly from the province’s side, as you 
know. The city of Moose Jaw, even in these difficult times — 
and I mean times are as difficult for municipal governments as 
they are for the provincial government, if not more difficult, 
given the kind of cut-backs they’ve had to live with from your 
government. These have not been easy times for municipal 
governments. 
 
But in the case of Wakamow in Moose Jaw, as you well know, 
the city of Moose Jaw has found itself able to maintain the two 
mill limit, its portion of a two mill share, rather than reducing to 
the 1.6 as you have from the provincial side. Clearly the city of 
Moose Jaw does support, with dollars, the Wakamow Valley 
Authority, and they’re to be congratulated for that, and I know 
their support is welcomed by the Wakamow authority. 
 
We come back then again to the funding. Did you give 
consideration in this funding year, Mr. Minister, to at least 
returning to the two mill, to going up from the 1.6 back to the 
initial arrangement that was made those years ago? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said before, that 
when we look at the urban parks budget, they’re looked at 
universally. And I believe that if we went back to what might be 
considered an original agreement in one, we would have to, in 
fairness, look at the original agreements at all. 
 
And as I said, these budgets have been thoroughly discussed 
with all of the authorities, who don’t object strenuously. 
They’re not objecting as much as the member from Moose Jaw 
is. And I find it kind of unique that I enjoy a better relationship 
with the authorities and their members than I do with the 
member from Moose Jaw. 
 
I don’t want to get into a lengthy discussion on what the said 
were municipal cut-backs — that will be dealt with in our next 
Act later in the day — because there are answers for that. and 
whether those cut-backs are real or not are yet to be determined. 
So I don’t want to get into that area. 
 
but I do want to correct something that I mentioned the other 
day, probably in our speech debates, that I must correct. And I 
mentioned that we did make available to Wakamow other 
government programs, and I think I mentioned New Careers. 
That was wrong. It was not New Careers, but rather additional 
funding went to Wakamow through the employment 
development fund. And I want that understood so that there is 
no problem in your mind with that regard. And I apologize for 
my error. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I thank you for that clarification, 
and indeed I realize that that is true, that the special funding of 
last year came through the employment development agency. 
 

Mr. Minister, just while we’re on that point then, will some 
funding be available to Wakamow this year from that same 
employment development agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you see, Mr. Chairman, this is where 
we have been able to help Wakamow, and it doesn’t particularly 
show up in our budget estimate, and in some way does allow a 
little bit of a catch-up situation for the original lack of funding 
that was in place. If we can qualify them for other government 
programs and assistance that the other urban parks don’t 
receive, then to some degree that offsets the original funding. 
 
If the minister in charge . . . and I have brought it to his 
attention, as has the member from Thunder Creek who baby-sits 
problems on behalf of the government for the city of Moose 
Jaw. We have talked to him, and certainly if we are in a position 
to move some of the funding from there into the Wakamow 
Valley Authority, we would be glad to do that. And we’re 
examining those possibilities now. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we are well now into the spring 
season, precariously close to the summer season when activity 
in the valley is at its height. How soon, from your point of view, 
can Wakamow expect a decision on funding from the 
employment development agency or from any other source of 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It’s hard to say, Mr. Chairman, but we’re 
still six weeks away from summer. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you’re going to 
have to correct yourself again. The Minister of Urban Affairs 
has just indicated to the Legislative Assembly that on June 8 
we’re now six weeks away from summer. Perhaps that’s the 
problem, Mr. Chairman, in the province here — we’re 
somewhat behind times with this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, as a member of this legislature who represents the 
community most affected by Wakamow, who geographically 
represents the area in which the majority of the Wakamow 
Valley rests, I encourage you, as the minister responsible for 
Wakamow, to be lobbying your colleagues in cabinet and in 
your government to find that additional support, since you 
wouldn’t do it through your own budget, to find some 
additional support from some other area of government. 
 
Now it’s my understanding that Wakamow this year has made a 
request of at least somewhere in the neighbourhood of $70,000 
in this regard. Is that a request that you think can likely be met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, my 
apologies. Time flies when you’re having a good time. 
Summer, I guess, is only a couple of weeks away. 
 
Yes, I hear what the member is saying, and I will stay in touch 
with our minister in charge. I have been talking to the authority 
people. I know the member of Thunder Creek has been talking 
to the minister as well. And as I mentioned earlier, if there’s 
any way that we can take your requests — and mine for that 
matter, because my  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1948 
 

budget didn’t have the room — but if there’s any way that we 
can help Wakamow by the use of other programs that are 
available for purposes that it may fall within, keeping in mind 
the taxpayers of our province, then certainly we would like to 
do that. And I hear what your request is. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, a few moments ago in our 
discussions you indicated to the House that you get along better 
with the Wakamow board than you do with me. I’m glad you 
said that. You’ve solidified some of my political support in the 
city of Moose Jaw. I’d have been very concerned if you 
indicated to this House that we got along well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to be sure, and I want the House to be 
sure, that the issues that I raise in . . . and have raised when we 
discussed your estimates, and have raised in both our readings 
of this Bill, the second reading, and now in the committee — I 
want to assure you and the House that these are not simply my 
concerns, that they are indeed concerns of Wakamow and that 
of the people of Moose Jaw. And so I’d like to, just for the 
record this afternoon, read a number of quotes into the record 
and ask you to respond to them. 
 
Now this is from a letter that was dated March 11, 1987 from 
the then board chairman of the Wakamow Valley Authority, 
Walter Yakiwchuk, a gentleman whom I’m sure you’ve met 
and know, and from his letter that went to a number of people 
in the city of Moose Jaw, he says: 
 

Among the existing urban park authorities, Wakamow has 
always received the lowest tax base support. We have tried 
in the past to convince the province to at least return to its 
original funding base and preferably to match the city of 
Moose Jaw’s contribution. Simply stated, we have not 
been successful. 

 
At this time, Wakamow board was very concerned that there 
would be yet another cut-back in provincial funding, and so he 
was asking friends of Wakamow and citizens of Moose Jaw to 
write you, sir. He says: 
 

Indeed, because we receive the lowest statutory support, 
an additional major cut-back will seriously jeopardize 
Wakamow’s financial abilities to develop and manage our 
valley projects. 

 
And I know they were happy when they didn’t face that severe 
cut-back that was feared. 
 
And so he, at that time, invited folks to write you personally 
emphasizing how significant Wakamow is to our community 
and emphasizing the need for provincial government funding. 
After receiving Mr. Yakiwchuk’s letter, as you may recall, I 
sent a letter to you to raise those points. You responded to me 
with certain arguments and then copied that letter to the 
Wakamow board and its executive director. At that time, the 
executive director of the Wakamow board wrote a letter to me, 
and you have a copy of this letter, at least a copy was sent to 
Mr. D. Innes, your deputy minister at that time. 
 
And if I may just read one or two paragraphs from the  

letter from the general manager of the Wakamow Valley, 
another individual who I’m sure you know and I’m sure we 
both respect. He identified a number of points in his letter, the 
similar points that I’ve raised in our discussions. He noted: 
 

When Wakamow was established in 1981, a funding mill 
rate equal to two city mills was determined. Meewasin and 
Wascana were operating at five of their city mills for 
substantially more per capita support. It was intended that 
Wakamow’s two mills would be a minimum figure. If any 
change were required, it would be upwards once 
Wakamow got operational. In spite of these dramatic 
differences, a uniform 20 per cent cut was applied in 1983. 
 
Unlike Regina ( he adds in his letter) and Saskatoon, 
Moose Jaw’s mill rate has remained virtually at an even 
level for the past five years. This has resulted in 
Wakamow’s statutory funds remaining at a constant level, 
and Regina and Saskatoon mill rate increases have 
virtually offset the cut-backs to Wascana and Meewasin. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, I can go on with the letter; it’s several pages 
long, and it indicates many of the points that I’ve raised in our 
discussions this afternoon. Mr. Minister, I do this to just 
re-emphasize, to re-emphasize that the concerns that I’m 
bringing to this House are not just simply mine, and they are not 
just somehow political concerns. They are real concerns that are 
being felt and expressed by Moose Jaw people and people 
involved in Wakamow, and that’s a large number of people. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you will again in this budget year, the coming 
budget year now, will again have opportunity to review the 
funding for all of the valley authorities; you’ll have opportunity 
to renegotiate with Wakamow. And so I sincerely hope that you 
will take into account the issues, the issue of the fairness and 
inequity that faces Wakamow, and that next year we won’t see 
this kind of a Bill coming to the House, but that next year we’ll 
see a Bill that substantially improves rather than freezes the 
situation facing Wakamow. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d like you just to respond to those few 
comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d really like to wrap 
this up because, as important as it is, we’re going around in 
circles. But I do appreciate the member mentioning the fact that 
he is concerned for the people. 
 
That is what my concern is, is absolutely for the people, and 
that’s why we do what we must do. As a matter of fact, the 
Wakamow annual meeting is soon, and I hope that this 
legislature will permit me the time away from this Assembly, 
rather than arguing some other committee stage, so that I could 
attend to that annual meeting 
 
But regarding the letters — and I explained publicly at the 
annual meeting that unfortunately all those good people that 
took the time and expense to write, and then took our time and 
expense to respond to, was not necessary. And unfortunately it 
was an unfortunate exercise that was not  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1949 
 

required. And Mr. Yakiwchuk knew that because we had 
discussed on several occasions the funding. 
 
I didn’t need in particular that kind of a lobby put on me. And 
as a matter of fact, as I indicated at the public meeting and the 
annual meeting, that that kind of thing almost hurts rather than 
helps the situation, and it wasn’t necessary. Everybody knows 
the situation. 
 
And you can get into the whole funding formula and how it’s in 
existence and why it’s in existence and the assessments of 
Moose Jaw and all the rest, how it affects the mill rate, and it 
simply gets back to the original thing: the original deal was set 
wrong, and when we hoped to be in a position to improve on 
that, we found that we weren’t in that position. 
 
They understood that. They understood how we’re trying to 
help them by giving them additional funding through other 
areas and other programs of the government. They’re looking 
forward to the day that our budget situation improves so that we 
can help them. 
 
And I’m glad that it’s on record. It is on record. And unlike 
what the NDP may have chosen to do in the future at the time 
they drew up the original agreement, there was nothing there to 
be found that held out any hope. Here was the formula; here 
was the legislation; you live by it. 
 
We’re trying to improve that. Everybody understands that. It 
will be done just as soon as possible. Everybody knows that. 
There is no lobby necessary, there are no demands necessary, 
and discussion and negotiation and consultation will take us to 
where we all want to get to. 
 
In the meantime, all that this hassle will do, or all that the letter 
writing campaign will do, is probably deter the many, many 
good volunteers that go out and assist at that project and see 
that things get done and get things done that wouldn’t ordinarily 
be done or couldn’t be done without their help. 
 
And I’m must pleased as punch to see how the volunteers and 
the people of Moose Jaw get behind the authority, do indeed 
help, and see that the Wakamow Valley Authority is operating 
well and efficiently as best they can under the circumstances, 
knowing that one day, just as soon as we can, we will be in a 
position to renegotiate the whole financial structure for them. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — well, Mr. Minister, I thought we were moving 
to a bit of a conclusion in our discussion, but perhaps I was 
wrong, because what we have just witnessed, Mr. Chairman, is 
a minister of the Crown stand in this House and say that he 
doesn’t want to receive letters from the people of 
Saskatchewan. Don’t you send me letters, he says, because that 
just might irk me and I might just turn on you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, is that the attitude of this minister? Is 
that the attitude of this government? Perhaps it is. I mean, this 
minister is building a bit of a reputation — maybe more than a 
bit of a reputation in this province — for not listening, for not 
listening to the people of  

Saskatchewan when they want to talk to him about the ward 
system; for not listening when they want to talk about store 
hours; and now he stands in the House today and says that 
people ought not to send him letters because it just might irk 
him. 
 
He talks about the volunteers who work for Wakamow. Mr. 
Chairman, I can assure you that many of the letters he received 
— and it sounds, from what he said today, that they were 
substantial in number — that many of those letters came from 
those very same volunteers who are giving hours and hours and 
hours of their time because they love the valley and they love 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it your position that Saskatchewan residents, 
the residents of the constituency I represent, and other 
constituencies, ought not to be sending you letters? Is that your 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I didn’t say that, Mr. Chairman, and it’s 
unfortunate that the member takes that position. The people 
from Moose Jaw understand very well where this minister is 
coming from. I don’t believe that I have the enemies that he 
says I do. They understand our position. They see me 
frequently. I frequent Moose Jaw an awful lot. I visit their 
chambers. 
 
We’ll get into the ward system and the store hours at the proper 
time. I’m talking Wakamow Valley. I’m talking the hundreds 
and hundreds of volunteers that give of their time to do that, and 
I was just simply mentioning the fact, and it was no threat. And 
he shouldn’t put words in my mouth or we will be arguing this 
Bill until the snow flies. 
 
And I can defend myself in Moose Jaw very easily, and I don’t 
have any problem doing that. And I did receive many, many 
letters. And at the public meeting, I simply explained that that 
was not necessary for them to trouble themselves with that. And 
I get lots of letters, not only against the ward system, for 
instance, but for the ward system. And I don’t mind receiving 
letters, and they can write all they want. 
 
What I simply said, Mr. Chairman, was in the case of 
Wakamow Valley it wasn’t necessary, because I knew the 
problem; the authority members knew the problem — we had 
discussed the problem more than several times. I discussed it 
openly and publicly in Moose Jaw, not here in the Chamber 
where nobody sees us, but out there with the real people, the 
people involved with it, the people that work at it — not in 
shame, but in pride of what our government is doing, and in 
pride of what the people are doing themselves. 
 
And I congratulated them publicly and openly, as I do here, as I 
have done. As I said, Wakamow Valley is an example for the 
other urban parks around the province. 
 
So don’t go putting words in my mouth about me being hated or 
about me being arrogant or about me not listening. This 
government continues to consult and will continue to consult, 
and does consult and does correspond. So if you want to get off 
half-cocked and go start putting words in people’s mouths or 
supplying misleading statements and all the rest of it again, as 
you always have a tendency to do over there, instead of  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1950 
 

talking openly and freely about the truth, then we will be here 
arguing this Bill for a long time. And I don’t mind doing that, 
because I’m ready to put in a long, hot summer and work on it 
till the snow flies. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, that makes two of us — 
that makes two of us. Perhaps we will be exchanging Christmas 
greetings in this legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you stand in this House, and you said, not 
moments ago, that the folks in Moose Jaw who are concerned 
about the Wakamow Valley should not have troubled 
themselves to write you because you understand the problems. 
Well then I ask, if you understand the problems, why haven’t 
you dealt with the problems? What have you done to deal with 
the problems? And the answer is: nothing. 
 
If you know the problems, why aren’t you dealing with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if I could control the price 
of oil throughout the world, if I could control subsidies 
throughout the world, if I could increase the price of grain 
throughout the world, if I could sell our forest products 
throughout the world, if I could market our potash throughout 
the world at proper prices, if I could make it rain, then I suppose 
I could give Wakamow and all the urban parks all the funding 
that they would like. 
 
But until then, until then, Mr. Chairman, all I can do is talk to 
the authorities and discuss and negotiate — which we are doing 
and which they understand — and which they are prepared, 
under the circumstances, to go along with. And it’s just about 
that simple and they understand, and it’s unfortunate that you 
don’t. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, it’s just about this simple, it’s 
just about this simple. If you can get a leash on the spending of 
your government and patronage appointments, if you’d get a 
handle on the advertising budget of your government, if you’d 
get a handle on some of the other waste and mismanagement 
that’s so typical of your budget, there would be, Mr. Minister, 
ample, ample, ample funding for not only the Wakamow Valley 
Authority but for all of the valley authorities in our province. 
 
Mr. Minister, this afternoon I shared with you concerns of the 
people of Moose Jaw, concerns of the Wakamow Valley board. 
I asked you if you would give serious consideration to those 
concerns. I’m going to ask you that one more time. In your 
budgeting and in your negotiations for the coming year, will 
you give serious concern, concern that will effect some action, 
to the issues that we’ve discussed this afternoon, the issues that 
have been presented to you by letter and by lobby? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe that 
the negotiations are between the member and I in this 
Assembly. I believe the negotiations belong where they are: 
between the minister and the authority. And I can tell the 
member that discussions with Wakamow Valley and this 
government were going on about funding matters well before he 
was elected and sat in this Assembly. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: Yes. Mr. Minister, a couple of questions before 
we get to the main issue which is item no. 5. The minister can 
handle this in any fashion the minister wants. I can deal with the 
items on a section by section basis, or we can deal with it all 
under no. 1. With respect . . . and I’m assuming we’re dealing 
with all the issues under section no. 1. Mr. Minister, with 
respect to 14.1, I am wondering what immediate use do you 
plan on making of this section? Do you have some immediate 
use of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as times move along on the 
Wascana Centre, we find ourselves with changing times and we 
find it necessary to appoint other committees to deal with 
matters such as heritage sites and conservation and the like. 
And this will simply extend the powers to the authority to move 
along with the times and establish committees as is required, as 
time goes by, I suppose is the best way to describe it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, with respect to section 35.1, 
I’m wondering . . . I wasn’t aware that any of the streets or 
highways within the Wascana Centre were in fact provincial 
highways. Which one are we referring to here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The bypass. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You’re not seriously contemplating closing 
the bypass without the consent of the Department of Highways, 
are you? What do you plan on doing with the bypass? You’re 
not going to close . . . the marginal note says, road closure. 
You’re not going to close the bypass without the consent of the 
Department of Highways, are you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — In reading the explanatory notes, I suppose 
is, it says in there, Mr. Chairman, “Notwithstanding The 
Highways and Transportation Act”. 
 
And then if you go down to clause 5, it excludes any portion of 
a provincial highway or an extension of a provincial highway 
within Wascana Centre. So that although I mentioned the 
bypass as an example, it’s excluded from the closure part of it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My more substantive questions, Mr. 
Minister, as you may have gathered, relate to section 5, the 
amendment to section 56.1. 
 
Mr. Minister, I had pointed out to you the other day that the 
formula used to be based on four mills. Your government 
reduced that to one and a half in 1985-86, and I may say that 
had been the formula since the  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1951 
 

mid-’70s — four mills. Your government reduced the criteria 
by which the funding of the other authorities was to be 
measured, to a mill and a half — in essence reduced it to 40 per 
cent of its former funding, and then in ’86-87, held it at that; 
’87-88 it crept back up to 1.6 mills; ’88-89 to 1.7 mills, and 
now is to be frozen there. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you have any plans to restore the level of 
funding of the Wascana Centre to the level at which it once 
was, or is it going to be permanently frozen at this artificially 
low level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I suppose all I can do in response to 
that question, Mr. Chairman, is say that in our continued 
dialogue with the authority and with the partners, the city and 
the university, the funding formula seems to be satisfactory to 
our partners under and given the existing circumstances to all. I 
think that under the circumstances they, too, saw it as a 
welcome relief. We are, as you’ve noticed in the paper, 
presently redoing the long-term master plan for the Wascana 
Centre Authority, and it may very well be that in the near future 
a funding formula for the new master plan could be changed 
because the three partners would agree to the changes. And it’s 
part of the ongoing and continual process. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I do not know what the other 
two partners said. I doubt very much, given the relationship and 
given the vindictive way this government has approached any 
person or institution which opposes them, I doubt very much, 
Mr. Minister, that they would publicly say that they disagree 
with you on it. Both the other two institutions receive very 
substantial grants from this government. I’m not suggesting that 
the city of Regina has lived under the thumb of this government 
and marched to the beat of its every request, but suffice it to 
say, you do not here truly have a truly independent authority. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to take a moment, if I may, to illustrate 
the extent to which this funding has fallen behind. In April of 
1982 the consumer price index was 107. It’s now 139.5 — I got 
those figures from Statistics Canada. That represents a 30 per 
cent increase in inflation since you people took office, or a 30 
per cent decrease in the value of a dollar, which is to say the 
same thing. 
 
During that period of time, Mr. Minister, in ’81-82 the total 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan was 2.4 billion; it’s 
now 3.6. Your spending has gone up by 50 per cent. 
 
During that period, Mr. Minister, the spending in the authority 
has gone up by a negligible amount. The general grant has gone 
up by less than 1 per cent; the grant for maintenance for the 
grounds has gone up by 4 per cent — a really negligible amount 
when you consider that there’s been 30 per cent inflation over 
that period of time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder when you’re going to restore the level of 
funding to the level at which it once was and, by so doing, 
restore this centre as the place of great beauty  

that it once was. And which I have said, Mr. Minister, on past 
occasions — I know this is a subjective judgement which 
doesn’t really admit of any sort of empirical proof — but this 
place is not the centre it once was, it is not in the condition it 
once was, the maintenance is not what it once was, and it is not 
the place of great beauty that it once was. And I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, when you’re going to restore it by restoring the 
funding to what it once was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll spend a little bit more 
time in my response than I would like, but as I would the 
member to understand some of the situation and hopefully keep 
this out of the realm of politics and certainly keep it out of 
bickering. I don’t want to get involved in that, and they’re 
tempting me to get angry, but I won’t. 
 
But Wascana Centre, Mr. Chairman, Wascana Centre truly is an 
independent authority. I know that the board members would 
feel hurt, is the best way to describe it, and so would the 
partners, to hear the comments of the member from Regina 
Centre that it isn’t a truly independent authority, because it is. 
 
For instance, in the last year I’ve had the pleasure and the 
honour of being the chairman of the Wascana Centre Authority, 
because it happened to be the government’s turn. It’s rotated 
amongst the three partners. The president of the university will 
be the next chairman, and following that will be the mayor of 
the city of Regina. So that as a result, I have a very close 
working relationship with the partners and with the entire board 
authority of which two city aldermen sit. 
 
The budget is a continual discussion in my performance in my 
duties as the chairman. And I can tell you that in spite of the 
withdrawal of funding from the three partners over the last 
couple of years, it hasn’t affected the operation; and the board 
authority, including the two aldermen and the mayor, are aware 
of that. 
 
As a matter of fact, we have had a surplus in the last two years 
— a surplus. So that surplus is set aside and has nothing to do 
with the expansion plans for Wascana Centre, the development 
plans for Wascana Centre, and indeed absolutely nothing to do 
with the maintenance. 
 
And I’ll point this out again: when you speak about the 
maintenance around this building, Wascana Centre Authority 
acts as a third party, a contractor, to the Minister of Finance, 
who, as a result of his budget — it’s not a cut but his spending 
— he says: here, this is what we’re going to spend on 
maintenance this year; what services can you provide? The 
Wascana Centre Authority then comes along and says, all right, 
for those funds, as an independent contractor, here is the service 
that we will provide. 
 
Now we say — as a customer of theirs, which is what we are — 
where can we save dollars without affecting anything? So they 
will pick a plot of land that isn’t even watered, that has no 
sprinkler systems, that has nothing, that is barely maintained, 
and they say: this level is not planted; there’s no use of 
spending any of your money there because nobody would 
notice the difference anyhow. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1952 
 

Or you might get into the area of street sweeping; you might get 
into the area of snow removal; whatever the government does. 
And it has nothing to do with what you’re saying, that it’s in the 
worst shape that it’s ever been in. And that is just a derogatory 
remark on the poor people that work so hard trying to maintain 
the beautiful grounds around this legislature above all odds. 
 
We have had a drought. I mean, I don’t have to point that out to 
you. We have had no rain. Understandably, grass will not turn 
green without water. Not all of the areas are maintained under 
sprinklers, and have to be hand watered. 
 
The budgets have not affected that maintenance schedule; 
Mother Nature has. And the maintenance schedule and the 
maintenance standards, Mr. Chairman, are identical this day as 
the day the authority was set up. So when you’re slamming the 
appearance, you’re slamming the workers that are providing the 
same service that has been provided over the last 25 years. 
 
I suppose that covers pretty near all of the observations and 
comments of the member. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There’s no point in continuing this 
indefinitely. I just will wrap up the comment, and my comments 
— with one exception, I guess; I have one more section I want 
to go to — wrap up my comments on this section by saying, 
Mr. Minister, that we disagree very strongly on this. And we 
register our opposition to the freezing of funding year after year 
after year after year on these centres. 
 
Mr. Minister, it has . . . as I’ve said, inflation has decreased the 
purchasing power of the dollar by 30 per cent. Spending of this 
government, in a total sense, has gone up by 50 per cent; the 
freezing . . . the spending on the centre has gone up by less than 
1 per cent. Mr. Minister, your standards may be the same, but 
the resources with which they work are not. 
 
Mr. Minister, section 66, the amendment to section 66 — what 
are you intending to accomplish by this? I frankly don’t see 
why the employees of the authority and the officers of the 
authority shouldn’t be liable on the same basis everyone else is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, this has been discussed at 
the authority level with the board for quite some time now. And 
what we’re doing here is extending legal protection that is given 
currently to the members — officers or employees of the 
authority; to include further the certain participating parties — 
the architect planner, the landscape adviser, the architectural 
advisory committee, the engineering committee, and other 
committees that are appointed by the authority because they’re 
provided for by the Act and they perform responsibilities on 
behalf of the authority. They’re all volunteers, and they provide 
this. 
 
And we believe that it’s just, you know, a natural extension of 
the legal protection that is given to the paid people that should 
go to the volunteers. I mean, after all, if you want to get a good 
class of volunteers, I think that you  

should be able to provide them the same provision that you 
provide for the rest of the employees. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, on my left is my 
deputy, Ron Kesslar, and behind him in Ron Zukowsky, in 
charge of policy. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Chairperson, I want to start out by saying 
that our side of the House simply does not buy this legislation. 
This legislation has nothing to do with protecting the interests 
of consumers, and it has everything to do with protecting the 
interests of financial institutions, as I will show in my remarks 
this afternoon. 
 
I want to say that this is shoddy, second-class legislation, 
particularly when it comes from the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs. The amendments to this legislation, the cost of credit 
legislation, are certainly needed. But the amendments put forth 
by the government are not the amendments that effect the 
proper disclosure of the cost of credit. These amendments are in 
some respects worse than no amendments at all. There is a 
sense in which it would be better for the interests of consumers 
if no amendments were proposed by this government in this 
legislation. 
 
This legislation makes consumers second-class citizens by 
virtue of the PC government’s commitment to the raw forces of 
the market-place, by virtue of its preferential option for 
protecting the interests of the financial institutions and not those 
of ordinary Saskatchewan families who are borrowing at 
variable interest rates. 
 
This legislation reveals the laissez-faire capitalist attitude of 
this government. It leaves consumers dangling in the faces of 
deregulation. Effectively, there is no protection for consumers 
in this legislation, but there is certainly protection for the 
financial institutions. There’s provision to assist them when it 
comes to disclosure of credit costs. 
 
Effectively, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, Chairperson 
. . . excuse me; a little bit of confusion there. Effectively, Mr. 
Chairperson, there is no means for consumers to even really 
effectively find out what they will be paying for their use of 
credit. And this legislation, let me remind you, is An Act to 
amend The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act and these 
amendments don’t effect the cost of credit disclosure. 
 
Now I want to put this into a context before I get to remarks 
specifically related to Bill 21 itself. This background 
perspective, or this context is vitally  
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1953 
 

important to understand if we are to appreciate the deficiencies 
of this particular piece of legislation. And it has to do with the 
questions of regulation in the financial sector across the country 
that are presently being raised in the House of Commons and 
elsewhere. 
 
(1630) 
 
I have in front of me a clipping from The Globe and Mail of 
June 2 that talks about the Royal Bank’s first-half profits for 
1988 jumping by 30 per cent. The Royal Bank of Canada 
showing a 30 per cent profit gain for the first half of 1988. And 
it goes on to talk about similar gains for the Toronto Dominion 
Bank and the Bank of Nova Scotia, and to comment that the 
Royal Bank’s profit rose to 297 million from a restated $228 
million profit a year earlier. Clearly at issue across the country 
are the rising profit figures for the financial institutions. 
 
And I have with me figures for the chartered bank, service 
charges, and this homes in a little bit more directly to the issue 
of the cost of credit disclosure when we’re talking about service 
charges effected by financial institutions. 
 
In this case we’re talking about the five chartered banks 
operating in Canada and their service charges for 1987. For the 
Toronto Dominion Bank, $138 million worth of service charges 
for last year; for the Canadian Imperial Bank, $235 million 
worth of service charges; for the Scotiabank, $113 million; the 
Bank of Montreal, $283 million; the Royal Bank, $365 million; 
for a grand total of $1.134 billion in service charges. 
 
And this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, represents an increase of over 20 
per cent in service fees assessed to consumers of financial 
services in the big five chartered banks here in Canada. 
 
And furthermore, these service charges don’t include fees 
assessed for foreign exchange, for credit card fees, for loan fees, 
securities commissions, letters of acceptance, guarantee fees, 
and all sorts of other fees. These are just the basic service fees. 
And it’s been estimated that the average Canadian household 
will now pay from 160 to $300 per household in financial 
service fees to their financial institution where they do their 
savings, conduct their chequing account, and the like. 
 
So when it comes to legislation that is dealing with the cost of 
credit disclosure, it’s of the essence that the government 
proposing this legislation takes to heart the interests of 
Saskatchewan consumers, those people who are doing the 
borrowing, and not simply the interests of those people who are 
doing the lending. 
 
I’ll also indicate one more minor point to just substantiate how 
important the regulation of the financial sector has become in 
our day and age. It was just on June 1, that in The Edmonton 
Journal, there was an article on “Credit card rates baffling 
consumers.” That’s the name of the title of the article. And the 
article concludes with the observation that since 1977, the 
volume of credit card transactions in Canada has increased by 
an average of 15 per cent each year. That’s an average increase 
of 15 per cent in credit card transactions over the course of the 
last 10 or 11 years. 
 

And I think it needs to be pointed out at this point, that with 
respect to this Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, we’re dealing with 
. . . among other companies that are to be regulated by this 
legislation, Canadian Tire Acceptance corporation. And anyone 
who holds a Canadian Tire credit card will be familiar with the 
Canadian Tire Acceptance corporation. 
 
What they might not be so familiar with is a report from last 
month, in The Globe and Mail, that Canadian Tire Acceptance 
corporation, their credit division, recorded a 29 per cent profit 
for the past year. And this 29 per cent increase in profitability 
for the credit division far surpassed the revenue increase of 13 
per cent for Canadian Tire Acceptance corporation. 
 
The acceptance corporation - let’s talk about profits for a 
minute — made a pre-tax profit of 25.5 million in 1987, 
accounting for 13 per cent of Canadian Tire’s total profit. So 
clearly we have before us with this legislation, a matter of very 
pointed, practical concern for Saskatchewan consumers, of 
variable interest rate loans. 
 
And I think it’s fair to point out that the minister himself, in his 
opening remarks has indicated, and I quote: 
 
Consumer demand for financial products with variable interest 
rate loans is substantial. Such rates expand consumer choice in 
financing. 
 
Well if we take his words as truth that the demand for variable 
interest rate loans is expanding with consumers, then it 
behooves a responsible government to deal with the issue of 
credit disclosure. And I’m going to be dealing with the 
negligence and the shortcomings in this particular legislation 
that don’t protect the interests of Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to continue by saying that at 
the very least, that at the very least Saskatchewan consumers 
ought to be able to look at this legislation and point to 
something in it, something in the legislation that speaks to 
consumer protection. And do we find it in this legislation? No 
we don’t. There is precious little that speaks to consumer 
protection in this legislation; there’s considerable that speaks to 
the protection of the financial institutions and their interests. 
 
And as I alluded earlier, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, the issue of 
bank service charges and the regulation of financial institutions 
continues to be more and more in the forefront of the Canadian 
population and of Canadian legislators — legislators who are 
responsible to the interests of consumers, and responsive to the 
interests of consumers. 
 
It was just on Monday of this week on June 6 that the House of 
Commons Finance Committee tabled their report or their Bill 
which would set a precedent by forcing financial institutions to 
eliminate some of their service charges. Now obviously this Bill 
drew furious reaction from the vested interests of the financial 
community and particularly those of the big five banks whose 
profits and whose gouging of consumers I’ve mentioned earlier 
in my remarks. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1954 
 

Little wonder then, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, little wonder then 
that this government in Saskatchewan doesn’t dare to tackle the 
interests of consumers. The federal politicians are doing that 
and are responsible in addressing the issues of consumer 
concern and protecting consumers from unfair service charges, 
are studying the issue of effective and efficient cost of credit 
disclosure. 
 
And yet, what does this minister and what does this government 
do? It brings in cost of credit disclosure legislation that scarcely 
effects disclosure at all, in fact, legislation that begs the 
question. 
 
I want to continue by indicating that it was non other than the 
Minister of Finance federally, Mr. Michael Wilson, who 
proclaimed his interest in the report based on its call for 
consumer protection measures to be written into the Bank Act, 
to be written into the Bank Act federally. 
 
And it’s section 201 of the federal Bank Act that has been under 
review in Ottawa these last weeks and months. In fact the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance and 
Economic Affairs has been having hearings with the expressed 
purpose of looking at charges for personal financial services. 
 
And I would just like to read into the record, so that the people 
of Saskatchewan fully understand what responsible legislators 
in Ottawa are doing with respect to issues that are contained in 
this cost of credit disclosure legislation, what responsible 
federal legislators are doing with these issues. They’re studying 
them; they’re not rushing in haste to protect the interests of the 
financial institutions. 
 
And I would like to quote from the order of reference for the 
federal committee: 
 

Witnesses will be called at the discretion of the Chair, and 
the committee will review representations concerning the 
adequacy of section 201 of the Bank Act, and regulations 
thereunder to determine whether: 

 
(a) present regulations ensure that the customer has 

sufficient knowledge of charges for the keeping of an 
account. 

 
(b) posting the notice in a readily accessible place in the 

branches of a bank is a fair and reasonable way of 
notifying customers of changes in charges for the 
keeping of an account. 

 
And I would say, parenthetically, here that this is precisely the 
issue that’s at stake in section 3 of this Bill, whether the posting 
of notice in a readily accessible place is, in fact, a fair and 
reasonable way of effecting disclosure. 
 
The Minister of Consumer Affairs would lead us to believe with 
this legislation that in fact that is the case, that just simply by 
virtue of posting a notice in a public place that the financial 
institution effects disclosure and consumers are protected. This 
side of the House says that is not the  

case. It is not nearly so simple or simplistic as posting a notice 
if you’re to protect the interests of Saskatchewan consumers. 
And the federal legislators, in their order of reference, are 
addressing that particular issue very, very squarely and 
deliberately. 
 
To continue, and I quote: 
 

(c) any new charges for the keeping of an account can be 
effected without prior consent of the customer in 
whose name the account is kept. 

 
(d) a right to written notification of changes in charges 

and a right to advanced authorization of new charges 
can be waived by consumers. 

 
(e) current charges and recent changes in charges for the 

keeping of an account are reasonable and fair. 
 
And I would say, parenthetically here, that it’s precisely the use 
of the term “reasonable”, again in section 3 of this legislation 
that, practically speaking, effects no protection for 
Saskatchewan consumers. And simply by virtue of changing 
that word “reasonable” in section 3 once or twice, the minister 
responsible could have protected the interests of Saskatchewan 
consumers and effected disclosure at the same time by simply 
changing the terminology “reasonable” into “pre-agreed”, but it 
was too much trouble, too much trouble, and, dare I say, 
perhaps too much of a preferential option on behalf of 
consumers and not enough of a give-away to the financial 
institutions. 
 
(1645) 
 
So we see very clearly where the interest of this minister are in 
protecting Saskatchewan consumers; where he can’t even make 
a minuscule change, a reasonable change that clearly effects 
disclosure on the front end of things by virtue of a term like 
“pre-agreed”, so the consumers know where they stand, other 
than saying “reasonable”, as this legislation does. 
 
And so I can say to the Minister of Consumer Affairs: Minister 
of Consumer Affairs, you be reasonable and protect the 
interests of Saskatchewan consumers. And your interpretation 
of what reasonable is is going to differ very, very widely from 
my interpretation of what reasonable protection for 
Saskatchewan consumers is. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, 
that this legislation is not reasonable protection for the interests 
of Saskatchewan consumers, and I think that if Saskatchewan 
consumers knew about this legislation, they would smell the rat, 
and they would insist on “pre-agreed” being written into this 
legislation so that their interests would be more adequately 
protected. 
 
This is a betrayal of Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan 
consumers of financial affairs, as my colleague from Saskatoon 
Eastview has indicated. It’s an abrogation of ministerial 
responsibility. I say it is an abomination to bring in legislation 
that affects, that purports to effect the cost of closure discredit, 
and can’t even use a simple term like “pre-agreed” to effect that 
disclosure on the front end. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1955 
 

And as I’ve been saying, Mr. Chairperson, the federal 
legislators know fully well that they have an obligation to 
protect the interests of the Canadian public before they have an 
interest to protect the private interests of the Canadian financial 
community. 
 
And I’ll just conclude by again quoting from the term of 
reference, for this federal finance committee: 
 

The purpose of this review is to determine whether section 
201 of the Bank Act, and the regulations pursuant thereto, 
are in need of revision. The increasing role of non-bank 
financial institutions in the provision of retail banking 
services, and the intended future application of section 201 
to these institutions, is recognized. 

 
Very clearly, Mr. Chairperson, very clearly the federal 
legislators know the importance of looking at the role, not only 
of conventional financial institutions such as the chartered 
banks, the credit unions, or the trust companies, but the federal 
legislators are looking at the effectiveness and the need for 
revision to section 201 of the Bank Act with respect to 
non-conventional, non-traditional, non-bank financial 
institutions. 
 
And what might those institutions be? Some of the very 
institutions that are regulated provincially by this legislation, 
some of the very institutions that this Progressive Conservative 
government opposite bears responsibility to regulate, but it 
chooses not to with Bill 21. 
 
And so I say that this legislation, although it is not well-known 
to Saskatchewan public, is very central to their interests when it 
comes to the issues of financial service charges, adequate 
disclosure of those service charges, and the issues pertaining to 
deregulation of financial services that this provincial 
government is to committed to, as we have seen not only in this 
legislation but with respect to its action taken with Principal 
Trust. 
 
Really an abandoning of the interests of consumers, a 
laissez-faire kind of attitude toward the market place. We’ll let 
the institutions do what they want to do unless and until they’re 
actually caught in the act of robbery, and sometimes even then 
we won’t stop them. 
 
Now are there options for the minister? Are there options when 
it comes to the question of disclosure of the cost of credit when 
it comes to Bill 21? Well there are several possible ways that 
the minister or the financial institutions, by way of regulation, 
can effect cost of credit disclosure. One option is to do what’s 
done with the credit card rate. There is simply no change in the 
rate in credit cards unless and until you have received written 
notice of that change. 
 
Is that what’s put forth as the option here? Is that the option 
acted on in Bill 21, that there’s no change in the rate unless and 
until written notice has been received? Hardly. Hardly the 
option pursued here, because that would put too much of a 
burden on the lender. Oh, we mustn’t have that. We’ll let the 
. . . that would limit the freedom of the lender. And so we’ll let 
them provide  

written notice after the fact. 
 
A second option would be to simply post notice or have no 
notice at all of any change in the cost of credit for the borrower. 
The minister here has gone half-way. He said that, well, we 
can’t have no disclosure at all; that wouldn’t be fair to the 
borrower. What we’ll do is we’ll allow for the posting of notice 
in the place of business. And what we effectively have with that 
kind of decision is that the borrower now bears responsibility 
for disclosure of the cost of credit to himself or herself. 
 
Now I would like to say, and this is of the essence, Mr. 
Chairperson, that another option — and this would have been 
the preferred option, the simple solution — the third option 
would be to require in the legislation itself that changes in the 
cost of credit are only allowed within a certain scope; in other 
words, to set some parameter in the legislation itself such that 
the public knows, the financial institutions know, that there 
shall not be increases in variable interest rates beyond X 
percentage point. 
 
What that percentage point ought to be is open to debate. But 
what that kind of provision would have done, had it been 
inserted in section . . . in this legislation, what that would have 
done, it would have allowed for consumers to be ensured of 
notification and of disclosure of the cost of credit when there 
was a variable interest rate change. 
 
And what we’re talking about with variable interest rate 
changes are rapid changes, potentially rapid changes in the 
interest rate, based on it being pegged to the prime rate at the 
Bank of Canada or the prime rate of some other financial 
institution. This can change weekly; it could possibly change 
even more often. 
 
The point is that we’re talking about variable interest rate loans; 
we’re talking about loans that, for the most part now, the 
interest rates are relatively stable. And so the issue isn’t quite as 
pointed as it might have been, let us say, six or seven years ago, 
or as it might be six or seven months from now. 
 
Therefore the need, for the sake of the future, is to put some 
kind of parameter or context in how much these variable 
interest rate loans can float. 
 
And so in the legislation itself, to say that the interest rate shall 
not exceed more than 2 per cent or 3 per cent or 4 per cent 
without written notice being served to the borrower, or 
consumer of services, would have effected disclosure of the 
cost of credit in a far more adequate way than the provision that 
we find in this legislation. 
 
That would have been fair and positive for the lender. It also 
would have been equitable for the borrower. The lender would 
have been relieved from the burden of providing written notice 
for even minor changes, but the significant point would be that 
the borrower’s mind would be jogged by that written notice 
received when, let’s say, the interest rate increased by 2 per 
cent, and the borrower could then make an informed decision as 
to whether to keep that variable interest rate loan, or to move on 
the trail of another financial institution and to check what that 
interest rate loan might be at that point. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1956 
 

But it’s precisely the deregulation policies of this PC 
government that abandon that kind of provision and, in the 
process, abandon Saskatchewan consumers and protection for 
their interests. What we have is a return to the raw forces of the 
market-place, implicit faith in the forces of capitalism and the 
financial institutions to serve the interests of Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And I say, and members on this side of the House say, that 
simply isn’t going to happen if you trust naively in the 
unbridled forces of the market-place. If you trust in the interest 
of the foxes to protect the interests of the chickens, it’s just not 
going to happen. 
 
And therein, I say, is a positive role for the government to make 
sure, when it brings in legislation that purports to affect the cost 
of credit disclosure, that that legislation in fact does effect cost 
of credit disclosure. A fee is always what the financial 
institutions want. A profit is always what the financial 
institutions want. And there’s nothing wrong with a profit, but 
there is something wrong when Saskatchewan consumers aren’t 
entitled to know what they are paying for particular financial 
services. And there’s something even more wrong when their 
own government does not bring in legislation which protects 
their interests. It’s simply that simple, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
The consumer ought to be able — ought to be able — to point 
to something in this legislation that protects their interests 
adequately. They ought to be able to point to something that 
effects cost of credit disclosure. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Being near 5 o’clock the 
committee will report progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I move the Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1988 

1957 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
In the Hansard No. 54A Tuesday, June 7, 1988 the word 
“employment” in the second-last line on page 1905 should read 
“unemployment”. 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 


