


















































June 13, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 13, 1988 
 

2037 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased this 
afternoon to introduce to you and to other members of the 
legislature, a group of 29 grade 8 students sitting in the west 
gallery. They are from Silverwood High School in Saskatoon 
Mayfair constituency. They’re accompanied today by their 
teacher Ron Carlson, and bus driver Greg Johannson. I certainly 
hope that these students will find the session interesting and 
educational, and I trust that they’ll have a safe journey on their 
way back to Saskatoon later today. 
 
I look forward to meeting with this group at 2:30 following 
question period, and I’d ask all members of the legislature to 
give a warm welcome to these students from Silverwood High 
School in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to take this opportunity to introduce to you, and through 
you to other members of this legislature, a group of 33 students 
from grade 5 from the town of Clavet. I would like to introduce 
to you their teacher Joanne Magneson, chaperon Karen 
Sperling, and the bus driver Les Buettner. And I hope that the 
students have had an enjoyable time thus far on their trip to 
Regina. 
 
I hope that they find this legislature very informative and 
interesting, and I look forward to meeting with them at 
approximately 3 o’clock for pictures, drinks and a discussion. 
 
I would like to ask all members in the Legislative Assembly to 
welcome these students in our midst this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s a please to 
introduce to you, and to members of the Assembly, 39 students, 
grade 4 from Outlook School, Outlook, Saskatchewan. They are 
sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied, Mr. 
Speaker, by their teachers Sheri Dutchek, Barbara Peardon, and 
chaperons June Haug, Sheila Gibson, Lois Pederson, Joanne 
Simmonson and the bus driver Laurie Joyes. I’ll be meeting 
with this here group, Mr. Speaker, at 2:30 for pictures and 
questions and drinks, which I always look forward to. 
 
I wish to thank the Outlook students, Mr. Speaker, for being 
here today. Outlook, I find, is well represented here each and 
every year since I’ve been an MLA — usually two or three 
groups a year. So I ask all members to join with me in the usual 
manner in welcoming the Outlook group here. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I would also like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to the House a group of 23 grade 6 students from my 
home town of Cupar. They are accompanied by their teacher 
Mrs. Schmidt, also by Mrs. Boha and Mrs. Nameth as 
chaperons. 
 
I’m certainly pleased to have students from my home town here 
this afternoon to view the proceedings of question period and to 
have a tour of the building, and I do look forward to meeting 
with them later for questions and pictures. Please welcome 
these students from Cupar. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I would also like to take this opportunity to 
introduce two other people, formerly from my home town, who 
have retired and they are living here in Regina. I might say that 
when I was growing up they were more or less neighbours of 
ours, and the families know each other very well. I’m very 
pleased to have them here visiting this afternoon. Mr. Dolha 
tells me that he was here years ago when he was in the army, 
and he’s back again for the first time with his wife. 
 
They are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. Please welcome them 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Life-styles Promotion 
 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, will you confirm that your 
government intends to launch on June 25 a promotional 
program called “Everybody Wins” and that the advertising 
budget for this campaign will be in the vicinity of $2 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there will be a 
launch soon of a healthy life-styles and health promotion 
campaign, and there’s no question that that’s . . . And I’m quite 
surprised that anyone would have any questions about it, 
frankly, because members of the opposition and all groups in 
the health sector across Saskatchewan have been asking for 
measures that would promote preventive health that would 
promote all of that kind of thing across the society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that will happen; there will be a launch of a 
program . . . I don’t confirm the exact date because I don’t have 
it before me, but there will be a launch of a healthy life-styles 
program. 
 
Ms. Simard: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
the school-based children’s dental plan was preventative health 
at its best, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Experience tells us, Mr. Minister, that your 
advertising campaigns are really political ads poorly  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2038 
 

disguised as being ads for the benefit of the public. I would like 
to know, Mr. Minister, who the winners are in regard to this: the 
people who are waiting to get hospital beds, are they the 
winners. The people who can’t afford needed medication, are 
they the winners, Mr. Minister? What about the dental 
therapists who were summarily fired; are they the winners? 
Who are the winners in this “everybody’s the winner” 
campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member, before seeing any of the 
advertising that comes forward . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order. Order. Order. I would just like to ask hon. 
members to give the minister an opportunity to answer the 
question. I know that many people feel they have the answer to 
it, but the minister’s been asked to answer, now let him answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member, before seeing any of the advertising that will come 
forward, is condemning the advertising before she sees it. 
 
She says, who are the winners in a healthy life-styles program? 
Mr. Speaker, the winners in a healthy life-styles program are 
the whole society, but specifically, the winners can be these 
kinds of folks in our society; young people who have lost their 
way as a result of the abuse of drugs and alcohol — those 
people can be the winners if we can change that to whatever 
degree is possible — the life-style that those young people lead; 
people in families who are not able to cope with the stress of 
everyday living, and so on. 
 
Now in the Mental Health Association and others that tell us 
those are the people who will be winners on a healthy life-styles 
program that promotes good family life and good family 
organizations, that promotes the reduction of stressful living, 
those kinds of things. Those are the winners, Mr. Speaker. The 
winners are seniors who take advantage of fitness and exercise 
programs. Those are the winners in that kind of a program, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a word, the whole society is a winner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
what about the children who are going hungry in Regina and 
across Saskatchewan? The experience tells us, Mr. Minister, as 
I said before, that your advertising campaigns are largely 
political ads in disguise. 
 
In light of your government’s massive cut-backs in the field of 
health care, how can you justify spending the taxpayers’ money 
for another PC exercise aimed at addressing your political 
problems rather than the real health care problems in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it is the role of this society 
and, we believe, the role of this government to take a leadership 
role, to take a leadership role in the  

promotion of healthy life-styles, of life-styles which will change 
the thinking of people as to the way in which they conduct 
themselves. 
 
The world is calling for . . . the whole society is, all the sectors 
within the health community and, frankly, the former critic of 
health care, last year in the estimates, if that member would care 
to look back in Hansard, last year in the estimates as well, the 
former Health critic. And we had an exchange here and a 
discussion regarding the promotion of healthy life-styles and 
how that very thing is what this society needs and what the 
Department of Health should be focusing upon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, will be focusing upon healthy life-styles; we 
make no apology for that. We do that because all of the 
elements across the sector in the total health sector have been 
asking us to do just that. And we are not the only jurisdiction 
that is moving to that emphasis, Mr. Speaker. All jurisdictions 
are moving to that emphasis. We will move on that emphasis. 
 
It’s interesting that the member condemns the advertising 
campaign before she sees one of the ads. Mr. Speaker, I predict 
to you and to the public of Saskatchewan that those ads will in 
fact address the kind of healthy life-styles that all people in this 
society and all generations will want to see, not only for 
themselves but for their families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’ll 
tell you what some good preventative health care is: get people 
their needed medication; get them their cancer treatment in time 
when they need it, not three months after it’s scheduled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — You decimated, Mr. Minister, you decimated 
the children’s school-based dental plan, which I said earlier was 
excellent preventative health care in Saskatchewan. Tell me, 
Mr. Minister: where is your credibility on the issue of 
preventative health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what the member is 
suggesting, what she’s really saying is to continue the practice 
of crisis health care, and obviously we need to do that. 
Obviously there will need to be, as the challenges that we face 
in health care, as a wider society, are the same challenges that 
have been there for some time, and those challenges are 
becoming greater. 
 
No one will deny that. That member may deny it; her colleague 
who was the health critic didn’t deny it last year; other members 
of that caucus haven’t denied it. No one on this side of the 
House denies that preventive health care and preventive health, 
in terms of a promotion of healthier life-styles, is the way to go. 
And that’s the case all across North America, and that will be 
the case here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2039 
 

Possible SGI Rate Increases 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
since February of this year we’ve been attempting to get from 
your government a statement to the people of Saskatchewan 
regarding your plans for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) rate increases for this year. So far both you and the 
minister responsible have indicated that there are rate increases 
coming, but you haven’t elaborated. Mr. Speaker, will you 
today tell us when those rate increases and coming and what 
they will be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe I said to the 
hon. member that several proposals on various utilities, 
including SGI, had come before the boards of directors and 
before cabinet and cabinet planning, and we were examining 
them. And obviously when the recommendations come forward, 
we will be able to review them in some detail and make 
appropriate announcements. 
 
I would say to the hon. member, and I will reiterate that the 
NDP government of Manitoba was defeated because of their 
mismanagement of auto insurance rates and other kinds of 
things tied to utilities. I can say clearly to the hon. member, we 
will not make the same mistakes. It’s one of the reasons that the 
NDP have lost, frankly, in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
when I get into that they speak from their seat, and the children 
know that, Mr. Speaker. They are afraid to sit and listen to the 
truth. 
 
I just ask them, for the sake of all the public, Mr. Speaker, 
listen, listen to the members opposite; they can’t sit and listen 
and play by the rules of the House, and the whole province 
knows that. 
 
I will say to the hon. members . . . Mr. Speaker, listen to them 
— I want all the kids listening — if you were in school doing 
this, do you know what: your teacher would ask you to sit down 
and behave yourself. That’s what you would ask them to do, 
and it’s about time you two smartened up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really about time 
somebody got a hold of the members opposite and ask them to 
play . . . here they go again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here 
they go again. There are rules in this legislature and they’re 
afraid to play by them. As soon as they hear anything going on 
they have to chirp. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, perform for the children; Mr. Speaker, 
let the member from Quill Lakes perform for the children. He’s 
been doing it all his life. That’s the only thing he understands, 
rather, Mr. Speaker, than anything to do with the legislature. 
Children, see what it’s like! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. I want the children of 
Saskatchewan to know that every time the Premier . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I think we 
should just all kind of settle down. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. I want the children of 
Saskatchewan to know that every time the Premier of 
Saskatchewan wishes to avoid a question he goes on at some 
length on all kinds of topics. That is the way this Premier deals 
with the kinds of questions that are asked by Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, will you show enough respect 
for the people of our province and give them this information, 
or will they be like all of the other increases that have happened 
in this province; for instance, the STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) increases, they’re only announced 
when our officials opposition lets the people know what’s going 
on in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I have advised this 
Assembly and the members opposite on many occasions is that 
we don’t change tax on gasoline any more, as the opposition 
did, and pay for SGI through extra tax. We’re the only province 
in this country — and I want the children to know that — the 
only province where you don’t have to pay tax on gasoline. 
They had to in Manitoba, they had to in Alberta, they have to all 
across the country, but not here. 
 
My answer to the hon. member is: we have protected people 
with respect to insurance rate increases and in terms of utility 
increases . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and if the hon. 
members will just behave themself and listen, we can go 
through all the kinds of things that we have done to protect 
young people . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
Order. I think all hon. members should just kind of get a hold of 
themselves and we’ll get back to a good question period. And I 
think hurling insults across the floor is not in keeping with the 
dignity of this House, and hon. members realize that, and I 
know they will refrain from doing so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate that, as I’m sure every teacher in the gallery 
appreciates the fact that once in a while somebody has to make 
sure that there is decorum in the class-room, and the same 
applies to the legislature. 
 
I just point out to the hon. member, we will make sure that our 
rates here are not as high as they were and are in Manitoba, and 
we will not make the same mistakes as the former government 
did here so people were absolutely fed up with it. We know that 
right now you don’t have to pay tax on clothes and children’s 
clothes and generally for the public under $300. We made sure 
those kinds of benefits are passed on to the public and only too 
glad to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. The Premier of  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2040 
 

Saskatchewan has once again avoided the question, and when 
you do that, Mr. Premier, you are showing disrespect for the 
people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — On May 3, when talking about your 
government’s proposed $25 per vehicle surcharge, you said, 
Mr. Premier, and I quote: 
 

The suggestion that was brought forward to cabinet with 
respect to a $25 surcharge was just a suggestion. We sent 
it back and we said, bring us some others. 

 
End of quote. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, the other options are laid out in the same 
cabinet document, and they are: a 10 per cent increase this July 
1, a further 10 per cent January 1, and 4 per cent January 1, 
1990; or, a major increase of 21 per cent January 1 of next year, 
followed by a 4 per cent increase in 1990. Which one is it, Mr. 
Premier — a 24 per cent increase phased in from next month, or 
a 25 per cent increased phased in come January 1, 1989? Which 
one is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just said to the hon. 
member that in the province of Saskatchewan we are very 
careful with respect to utility rate increases, and we’re not going 
to make the same mistakes that your government made or 
they’ve made in Manitoba. And the suggestions being brought 
forward, that you go through, were two. There are others. And 
when we have a chance to review them all, we’ll report to the 
legislature and indeed to the public. 

 
Complaints re PCS Officials 

 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and it concerns the letter from Gina Digness, 
dated June 1 of this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, you did exactly what everyone expected of you 
— you whitewashed your senior management. You received a 
letter from Paul Schoenhals and from John Gugulyn saying that 
they behaviour was exemplary, so you simply announce last 
Friday afternoon that the matter is closed. 
 
Now is that how little you care, Mr. Minister, about what goes 
on between your employees and the public of Saskatchewan? Is 
that going to be the extent of your looking into the matter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I did indicate to the people 
through the media on Friday afternoon that I had talked to both 
employees of the potash corporation, Mr. Schoenhals and Mr. 
Gugulyn. They gave me their side of the story, Mr. Speaker. I 
did indicate that in a situation like this I’m not surprised to have 
different versions of the  

situation. 
 
I do advise the hon. member, with respect, that the meeting 
referred to by Mrs. Digness, which constituted, I believe, two or 
three paragraphs in her letter, was a meeting of some two hours, 
Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think that the public should ignore the 
fact, nor the hon. member, that there was a lengthy meeting 
with the potash corporation, that they were prepared to meet, 
that they did meet. And I wouldn’t expect, in circumstances like 
this, that we would have anything other than two very different 
versions of the meeting. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. I’d just like to call 
the hon. members to attention. Let the member behind you ask 
the question. Order. Order. The hon. member has been in the 
House a long time, and I know he realizes that constant 
interruptions are not in keeping with the proper behaviour of 
members, and I ask him to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, can you tell us if 
you were in contact with Mrs. Digness to get her side of the 
story after your meeting with Mr. Schoenhals? And have you 
been in touch with the other women, the three other women 
who accompanied Mrs. Digness when she met with Mr. 
Gugulyn at this two-hour meeting you’re talking about, to get 
their version of the events? 
 
Are you just going to leave it like this, Mr. Minister? Is that 
how slipshod your investigation into this complaint is going to 
be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think it fair to say, and I hope the hon. 
member doesn’t forget this, that this was well discussed in the 
media. I believe Mrs. Digness has been on a couple of times 
with her version of the events. She’s made allegations, and I 
note and I have indicated to the media that I would reply to her 
letter. 
 
I do suggest to the hon. member that again, in a situation like 
this, the potash corporation did meet, very senior officials did 
meet with the people referred to, explained the potash 
corporation’s position. And I think the hon. member should 
recall too that I believe Mrs. Digness indicated that Mr. 
Gugulyn treated her respectfully, and her delegation. I would 
hope that that fact is not forgotten by the opposition as they 
pursue the matter. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. We’re certainly 
not forgetting anything, Mr. Minister, including the fact that 
Mrs. Digness raised some very serious allegations, particularly 
with respect to Mr. Schoenhals, but also with respect to Mr. 
Gugulyn. 
 
What I’d like you to do, Minister, with all due respect to you, is 
to assure this House that your office will undertake a more 
comprehensive investigation than the one that you’ve 
undertaken, including an interview with the women involved, 
and report the results of that investigation to this Assembly at 
the earliest possible date, and not simply whitewash the matter 
the way it appears you’ve done to this point. 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2041 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the parties 
have had the opportunity and taken advantage of media outlets, 
media coverage. The story has been taken to the media on 
numerous occasions, certainly within their right, and I did 
commit to this Assembly that I would interview and meet with 
the two people from the potash corporation. I’ve reported to the 
public, and I’ve indicated that I don’t think that this is 
resolvable from that point of view, that, as I say, I have talked 
to the officials, and I’m quite prepared to leave it at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Migration of Young People From Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is directed to the minister for Human Resources, 
Labour and Employment. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government’s record with regards to the net 
loss of Saskatchewan young people is both well-known and 
quite frankly deplorable. In May of this year, Saskatchewan lost 
700 people who moved out of our province. So far this year, 
over 10,000 people have left the province of Saskatchewan, and 
as a matter of fact, Mr. Minister, exactly 77 per cent, nearly four 
out of every five of those people who have left the province of 
Saskatchewan are 35 years old or younger. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister: when is your government going to 
get serious about this brain drain, about this youth drain, about 
this energy drain of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great 
inconsistency here in the question. First of all, Saskatchewan 
has the second lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And when this government moves to 
diversify the economy of Saskatchewan, the opposition is 
critical of a paper mill, or critical of an upgrader. They’re 
critical of bacon plants; they’re critical of everything that 
provides jobs for young people in Saskatchewan. So unless they 
are prepared to allow business to establish in Saskatchewan, 
create jobs for young people, allow the opportunity for young 
people to start their own businesses, then they cannot have it 
both ways. This government is trying to assist people to provide 
their own jobs, bring in business to assist them to provide jobs, 
and we are being successful in the second lowest rate in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New questions, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
citing statistics may do a whole lot to help you feel better, but 
I’ll tell you, it doesn’t do a thing for the 34,000 unemployed in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Minister, anybody can have a low unemployment rate if 
what you’re doing is chasing workers out of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — You will know, Mr. Minister, that in May of this 
year the latest employment figures indicate that the work force 
in this province has dropped by a thousand as compared to the 
same month a year ago, and that’s a continuation of a trend 
that’s been constant for the past three years. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister: what concrete proposal do you 
have to deal with this problem? Don’t march out your litany 
that you just marched out before telling us what has failed. 
What new programs do you have in mind for those 34,000 
unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, there are 2,500 people 
employed at the upgrader construction site; there are 
approximately 700 at maximum at Weyerhaeuser in Prince 
Albert; there are 140 at the bacon plant. I don’t know how 
many, there might be another 100 or so at the trailer plant in 
North Battleford. Right in the member’s own constituency of 
Moose Jaw there should be approximately 60 people at Phillips 
Cable. 
 
These are all diversifications of this government, and I can tell 
you that there aren’t retired people working on those jobs. 
Those are young people working at those jobs, and we’re going 
to continue those kinds of programs, even if the opposition is 
opposed to those kind of programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if 
you want to get specific, let’s get specific. In the first part of 
this year, the city of Saskatoon alone lost some 600 jobs 
through major company lay-offs. That’s just in one city in this 
province, Mr. Minister. And I ask you, when are you going to 
admit that your government has failed miserably in job creation, 
develop a new strategy that will create jobs? I ask you that 
question, and quite frankly, Mr. Minister, the 34,000 
unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan wait with bated 
breath to hear your response to this question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the city of 
Saskatoon is the fastest growing city in Canada, and new 
diversification of 200 jobs at Intercontinental Packers. The 
members opposite are opposed to that again. 
 
They want to close down the uranium mines. Where do we 
employ those people that are working there now? They don’t 
want any jobs in northern Saskatchewan either. They don’t 
want any jobs in southern Saskatchewan. They don’t want us to 
build the Shand power plant. And the member opposite knows 
that there will be jobs created there. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2042 
 

In addition, jobs in manufacturing, as has been announced by 
the member responsible for SaskPower, so there’ll be 
manufacturing jobs. Marubeni is making the turbines in 
Saskatoon. 
 
All of those things add up to jobs, and to the members opposite 
they add up to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, private 
business. That’s a dirty word to them. To us they add up to jobs 
for the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, your record of employment is a 
failed record, and the people of Saskatchewan know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Your record of people moving out of this 
province, again is a failed record, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know that. I asked you, Mr. Minister, to be 
specific, not to trot out your litany of failed programs; those are 
well known. 
 
I ask you one more time: will you admit that your employment 
programs have failed? Will you admit that the loss of 
Saskatchewan people, particularly our young, talented, 
energetic people has failed? And will you outline to the people 
of Saskatchewan what vision, if any, that you and your 
government have to create employment for people in 
Saskatchewan who want to be working? Will you outline that 
for those 34,000 who are listening very carefully to your 
remarks here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to outline the 
government programs that will continue to create these jobs: 
public participation, WESTBRIDGE computers hiring 200 
people, 200 educated young people in Saskatchewan, continued 
diversification. And the numbers go on and on and on. Actual 
projects, not statistics, but actual projects where actual people 
are working. 
 
This is a record that that government opposite could not match 
even when they bought potash mines. That government, when 
they were government, the NDP, they bought potash mines and 
created no jobs, spent hundreds of millions of dollars to export 
our jobs to New Brunswick. Instead we are having the money 
spent in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 37  

— An Act to provide for Security for Saskatchewan Family 
Farms be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak on Bill 37, which I think everyone, every farmer 
in a rural community in this province was expecting something 
from this government after months and months and months of 
asking by farmers and farm groups, farm leaders from this side 
of the House, and the list goes on and on. Everyone was asking 
for and expecting some type of a program under which we 
could see farmers have their debt restructured over a period of 
time in order that they would eventually see their way out of the 
crisis that we’re now in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have approximately 63,000 farmers in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I once more remind the 
hon. member not to interfere when someone is speaking, and I 
think he should adhere to that request. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, we have about 63,000 farmers in 
Saskatchewan carrying a debt load of approximately six and a 
half billion dollars. The government’s own numbers show that 
11 per cent of the farmers in this province are insolvent and 28 
per cent are in serious cash flow difficulty, adding up to almost 
40 per cent of the farmers in this province who are having 
considerable problem meeting their obligations on a day-to-day 
basis when it comes to their farming operations. 
 
The result of this, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re seeing the face of 
this province change. We are seeing farm families forced off the 
land. We are seeing services in town being cut because it’s not 
viable to maintain that service in the town if the farm 
population isn’t there. 
 
Debts create a burden, Mr. Speaker. It creates a burden not only 
on the farmers, but also on the small-business men and women 
of this province. Debt also creates stress, and stress creates 
violence. And that’s what we’re seeing in the rural part of this 
province — a deterioration of the quality of life. 
 
And when this government stands up and introduces a major 
piece of legislation, we would expect, Mr. Speaker, that it 
would somehow address this problem. But has it? 
 
The problems are debt. The problem is actual depopulation of 
rural Saskatchewan, and indeed the whole province in general. 
And also compounding on that is the stress factor that we do not 
see in this province, but we know it’s there from talking to 
people privately and talking to people who are involved in 
stress management. 
 
My question is: what does this Bill do to correct those problems 
that are facing these people in Saskatchewan? What does it do 
to help out those farm families and those people in the rural 
areas, in towns and villages, who are up against something that 
they can no longer handle, Mr. Speaker — the six and a half 
billion farm debt going through the farmer to the business 
person, right through the social fabric of rural Saskatchewan? 
And I say, Mr.  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2043 
 

Speaker, I think this Bill does very little. 
 
The problem is that the debt for many has become totally 
unmanageable. It is to the point where the income no longer is 
sufficient enough to maintain that way of life, to maintain that 
farm, to maintain that small business in that small town. It has 
become a burden that they can no longer handle. 
 
Farmers in this situation are looking at solutions. They fully 
expected that the government would come down with some 
long-term program, a long-term fixed interest rate, and also 
probably necessary to set aside a portion of that debt. 
 
And if the government was serious about addressing the debt 
problem, they would do that. They would take the initiative to 
create a long-term program, a long-term low interest fixed rate, 
fixed rate low interest program, and setting aside a portion of 
the debt so that not only the farmer would be put on relatively 
stable ground, but the small-business person in the rural 
communities would be put on a more stable ground, and indeed 
the financial institution would be able to sit down with the 
farmer and say, okay, here’s the plan; over a period of time 
we’re going to be able to work this out. 
 
We have seen nothing of that. We have been waiting and 
waiting and nothing has come. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all have a responsibility for this crisis 
that we’re in, and it must be shared by all people of this country 
and indeed all people of the province. We shouldn’t expect, Mr. 
Speaker, the taxpayers, for example, to bail out the total debt 
that farmers are facing right now, and we don’t expect that. We 
don’t expect the financial institutions to totally swallow a 
portion of the debt that would help farmers get back on their 
feet, but they must be part of the solution. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, we can’t expect farmers, at this point 
in time, to be able to get out from under this serious debt, and 
indeed if they could, Mr. Speaker, they would be doing that 
right now. But the truth is, the reality is that the debt is there, 
the crisis is there, and we need a solution. 
 
We know that solving the debt problem has to be a joint effort. 
Farmers, financial institutions, and the provincial and the 
federal government — we all must work together to share the 
responsibility to ensure that rural Saskatchewan, and indeed 
Saskatchewan in general, continues to exist. And, Mr. Speaker, 
if we don’t do that, we are going to see a continued 
depopulation in this province, and a continued depopulation of 
this province means that we will be going further and further 
into the hands . . . or into the position of being a have-not 
province. 
 
And to ensure that rural Saskatchewan continues to exist, we 
have to jointly take charge. And I also would like to say that the 
economists of this country, especially the agri-economists, 
should also somehow take responsibility, but I’m not sure at 
this point in time how we get that to come about. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill puts on a three-year moratorium on 
foreclosure on home quarters. At first glance you might say, 
well that would be a positive move. The problem comes when 
we ask, what are the parallel programs that are accompanying 
this moratorium? What are the ramifications of this 
moratorium? And, Mr. Speaker, I say to you and to the other 
side of the House, and indeed to all people of Saskatchewan, 
that a moratorium is only as good as the program that follows it 
up or the program that parallels it to ensure that the moratorium 
will have some benefit in the long run. 
 
I can just take a look at the Farm Credit Corporation as an 
example. Farm Credit Corporation had a moratorium on, and 
they had it on it over a number of months. But the problem was, 
Mr. Speaker, that there was nothing paralleling that moratorium 
to ensure that those farmers, at the end of the moratorium, 
would be better off or would be in a better position to go to 
their financial . . . to look at their financial situation and say, yes 
indeed, I can see my way clear of this. 
 
But no, that didn’t happen. We were expecting a restructuring 
with the federal moratorium, restructuring of debt or long-term 
interest rate or something that was concrete. But we saw 
nothing. We saw the moratorium come off, and all we had was 
a delaying of the problem. Farmers were sitting back expecting 
something to happen, but nothing happened. And this is the 
same problem that we’re looking at today. 
 
A moratorium will be simply a stay of execution for many of 
those farmers. And I believe that without a parallel program this 
moratorium will also be simply a stay of execution. Putting off 
something for three years won’t solve the problem unless 
you’re going to take the problem and restructure that debt so 
that all involved can see themselves clear of it. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, it can compound the problem. For 
example, let’s say that I as a farmer have $100,000 debt owing 
on my home quarter, and I’m going to be in a position where 
that moratorium will help me; $100,000 over three years, 
compounded, Mr. Speaker — simple arithmetic will tell you 
that that, over the three years, will add up to nearly $150,000. 
And $100,000 is not a great, large debt held by many farmers. 
 
At the end of three years I’m owing now $150 million because 
of the accumulated interest. What has this done to help me? It’s 
a band-aid solution with no parallel program to ensure that at 
the end of that time, I will simply not just slide off the edge and 
lose my farm anyway. 
 
And added to that, there’s three more years of stress under 
which I am waiting, sitting back waiting for the government and 
the financial institution and myself to be able to sit down and 
say, this is the method under which I can restructure that debt 
and so I can see my way clear but keep my land; the institution 
can see their way clear but can get some return on their money; 
and indeed the government will see that the farmers and the 
social fabric of this province are maintained and stay in place. 
That’s what we need. But this moratorium does not address 
that. It’s a band-aid that goes only part way. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2044 
 

(1445) 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, a moratorium is simply as good as the 
program that parallels it or follows it up. And because of its 
incompleteness, the moratorium has brought about another 
problem, and that is availability of credit from lending 
institutions. 
 
There are wide-ranging reasons that farmers are facing the 
trouble they’re in today. And in fact you can almost say there’s 
as many reasons as there are farmers, because the situations are 
very different but they all have an underlying theme. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that underlying theme is that, I would say, most 
farmers rely on credit. 
 
Farming is a business under which you have to have operating 
credit because the industry relies on world markets, it relies on 
availability of getting your product to market. So you have to 
have credit to tie you over to those periods of time under which 
you can’t sell your crop, until you can. So credit and farming 
are synonymous for the most part. 
 
It doesn’t matter if you’re deep in debt or if you have a fairly 
good equity-to-asset ratio . . . debt/equity ratio rather, you still 
rely on credit. And this must be the underlying theme that this 
government has to look at, the availability of credit. Because if 
the possibility is there that the credit could be cut back, and then 
how does the farmer operate? It doesn’t matter, as I said, if he’s 
in relatively good financial shape, he still relies on credit; or if 
he’s in poor financial shape, he also needs the credit, operating 
credit to run his business. 
 
As I said, we rely on the world market and all the fluctuations, 
so credit and farming are synonymous. We have seen already 
the ramifications Bill 37 has caused Farm Credit Corporation to 
cut back from lending 100 per cent on the home quarter to 25 
per cent on the home quarter. Other lending institutions may 
follow suit. We don’t know. And this, Mr. Speaker, is bad news 
for those people who rely on credit as a way of continuing their 
operation. 
 
Let’s, for example, let’s talk about an intensive livestock 
operation, where on the home quarter are all the buildings and 
the assets that the farmer basically needs and uses in order to 
get credit to continue that operation. But there is a possibility 
that credit won’t be there, Mr. Speaker, that person is putting 
his livelihood in jeopardy, is having his livelihood put in 
jeopardy for him by this Bill. Any intensive livestock operation, 
whether it be beef or chickens or poultry or hogs or whatever it 
is, and if that person can’t get the credit, where does he turn to 
continue his farming operation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if credit is denied, the whole operation, as I said, 
will be put in jeopardy, and this hardly seems fair. Many 
ranchers have a home quarter and lease the major part of their 
grazing. What does that do to them if they no longer have 
opportunity to get full credit on that home quarter? Does it not 
put them in jeopardy? 
 
What this does is put not only the farmers but the lending 
institutions in a state of insecurity. Instead of creating 
legislation that would give farmers and institutions and  

indeed the rural communities a sense of security that they could 
work themselves out of a problem, it simply throws more 
insecurity into the problem. There’s no restructuring, there’s no 
long-term plans. What we have are fears and suspicions of 
what’s yet to come. 
 
It really doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker, what statements the 
Premier or the ministers over there say, the groundwork has 
already been done. And I believe the decisions will finally be 
made . . . will be made, I should say, in the long run in the 
courts. Indeed the courts will have final say and nothing in the 
Bill leads me to believe that farmers have more protection. I 
think in the end run, over a period of time, I can see nothing 
that will stop the foreclosure of farm land by institutions 
because there’s nothing in there to stop it. All we’re doing is 
band-aiding the solution. It’s like propping up a man who’s 
been run over with a steamroller, with some wet spaghetti. It’s 
an attempt, but it doesn’t do the job. And I say, Mr. Speaker, in 
the end run the farmers will be the losers. It’s just simply going 
to take a little longer. 
 
I would like to talk now for a minute about the mediation 
process, albeit not new. The question is, who will the mediators 
be and what will their mandate be? A serious solution, Mr. 
Speaker, would be for this government to give the Farm Land 
Security Board some power, some power to impose just and fair 
settlements. After all, those are the people who have knowledge 
of the industry, they’re active in the industry or have been 
active in the industry, and they know what the situations are. 
All this government would have had to do was give that Farm 
Land Security Board added powers to impose fair and just 
settlements. 
 
But already we’re seeing another voice of authority that’s 
coming into this and it’s not the Farm Land Security Board. 
There’ll be further costs involved. We’re going to hire 
mediators and we’re going to hire manager-mediators, but 
nothing to say that the farmers will benefit in the end. 
 
The mediation process contained in this Bill still rests on the 
voluntary acceptance of the proposed settlement by financial 
institutions. It is still one-sided. If a farmer is deemed to be 
negotiating in bad faith, the court can allow foreclosure; if the 
court . . . if the creditor is negotiating in bad faith, then the court 
can only suggest further . . . order further mediation; if the 
board says the farmer is misallocating his funds, then he can be 
foreclosed upon. But if the board reports unfavourably to the 
lender, then the court can only say that there’ll be a one-year 
stay of proceedings. 
 
In the meantime, the farmer’s debt continues to pile up. You 
see, Mr. Speaker, there’s no solution involved here. It is simply 
a band-aid remedy. 
 
The other part of this whole process is the retroactivity aspect. 
Lenders, farmers who negotiated mortgages in good faith, are 
now asking . . . are now saying the rules have been changed in 
the middle of the stream. And what’s next? How is an 
institution or a farmer supposed to know now what is to come? 
If the retroactivity of this legislation is deemed to be one that in 
some respects favours the lender, or in other respects favours 
the farmer,  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2045 
 

then how are either one of them to know where they will be in 
the end when it comes to the court. 
 
And what’s to stop this government from again changing the 
rules? That’s the questions that are being asked. This 
government has created an air of uncertainty for lenders and an 
air of uncertainty for farmers. And again I say it has nothing to 
address the serious problem of debt that we have in this 
province. 
 
As I say, lenders will be asking what the next move is and 
farmers are saying, why another band-aid solution? Why not go 
the whole nine yards and develop a restructuring program 
whereby we don’t have to worry about mediators or 
retroactivity or anything that’s involved in the Bill, that they’ll 
be able to sit down with their financial institution and develop a 
10-year or 20-year game plan under which they can work out 
from this tremendous debt load, with all people taking 
responsibilities. 
 
One other small item, or I don’t know how small it is, Mr. 
Speaker, is the question of co-signers. We see now where the 
co-signers are supposedly having no . . . have no obligation 
under this new legislation, but we’re not sure if that’s true. 
There’s some opinion that the co-signer will be able to be sued 
in order to make up the difference between the value of the land 
under question and the total debt. We don’t know that. This 
could give a false sense of security for co-signers. 
 
The other thing it could do is, if this legislation is as it appears 
to be, giving . . . letting the co-signers off the hook, what about 
financial institutions? If I as a farmer who have somebody 
backing my program, my mortgage, I can say, well let’s let it 
go; let’s let them foreclose on me. I’ll get the . . . I have first 
right of refusal. So I bought my land at $100,000 a quarter; 
foreclosure action goes through at today’s values of half or less; 
the institution has to write down the loan, and the co-signer can 
turn around and come back in help the person buy that land. 
 
Now I say, is that fair? In the short run some people may say, 
okay, that’s fine, but what about in the long run when the 
institutions all of a sudden realize that they can’t afford this? 
What will happen to the credit? Will other people be put in 
jeopardy because of that? 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this program . . . And the minister, 
when speaking of it, said, we have to find common ground. 
Well, I agree. But he’s not doing that with this Bill. Common 
ground would be for the institution and the farmer to be able to 
sit down and work out a deal with the aid of the government . . . 
with the aid of a government program. Institutions are not 
willing to take the full burden. Farmers are not willing to take 
the risk of losing their ability to borrow capital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also increases the foreign ownership of 
Saskatchewan farm land, and I think that we in this province 
have seen in the past years that the program we had for 10 acres 
of ownership by non-residents worked very well. 
 
The member opposite, when explaining it, said, well now we 
can see sons or daughters in Toronto come and buy the home 
quarter and help the family farm out. Well is  

that the solution to the debt crisis that we’re in? I mean, is that 
what he’s going to use as part of the program to get farmers out 
of debt? If it is, Mr. Speaker, it’s very ill-conceived. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this opens the door to lack of, loss of, 
control by Saskatchewan people. It opens the door to lack of 
control in Saskatchewan farm land by Saskatchewan residents, 
and it falls right in line with this government’s touting of free 
trade. Because when free trade comes along, what’s to top — 
that’s just the first step — what’s to stop them from bumping it 
up from 320 acres to 1,000 acres or beyond? The door has been 
opened. 
 
But in the end run, Mr. Speaker, I think this whole program sets 
up the possibility for this government to bring back in their 
ill-conceived, ill-received program of equity financing. If they 
can put financial institutions in a position where they are 
insecure in their mortgages, where they will be foreclosing after 
a period of three years in some cases — in some cases more 
immediate because people can’t get the capital to continue — 
then we will see farm land going into the hands of institutions. 
 
After that, Mr. Speaker, it would be very easy for this 
government to promote the equity financing regime that they 
have tried so desperately to get through and has been refused by 
the people of this province. Because the lending institutions 
then, whether it be credit unions or banks, would be just happy 
to get rid of that land. 
 
So I think this is a back-door approach for this government to 
try to bring in equity financing under the fudged legislation, so 
that they’d create the environment that this would be possible. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say, the farmers of this 
province, the small-business people in rural Saskatchewan, and 
indeed in the cities of this province, do not see a solution in this 
Bill. There are band-aids; there’s no doubt about it. But why, I 
ask you, would the government not take the full step forward 
and address the problem of restructuring debt? You’ll never 
solve the debt problem in this province, Mr. Speaker, by 
band-aid remedies, and we’ve seen one after another after 
another here, because the government refuses to take to task the 
problem. It refuses to stand fully behind farmers and allow them 
to continue farming in their operation and to adjust that debt in 
a manner necessary to continue that operation. 
 
With the six and a half billion debt problem in this province, we 
see not only farmers, we see small-business people affected. As 
the credit situation gets worse, the debt situation gets worse, we 
are seeing more and more farmers rely on their suppliers, their 
fuel suppliers, their fertilizer suppliers, or other suppliers, to 
carry part of that debt. And that simply is not fair to those 
people because they cannot afford it either. 
 
But this is what’s happening, and the government refuses to 
stand behind that farm operation to restructure debt in order that 
all those people can eventually work their way clear of this 
debt. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2046 
 

Under this legislation, Mr. Speaker, I do not see how a farmer 
in rural Saskatchewan will be any better off five years from 
now than he is right now. We will have gone through this whole 
process, and many of the ramifications of this Bill we are 
already seeing; there are many that we have not seen yet. And 
as I said, I think they will be not seen until it goes to court. 
 
But the bottom line is that there is no way that this legislation 
solves the debt crisis. And I ask, why not? We have seen this 
government time and time again, whether it be in the field of 
education, whether it be in the field of health, or whether it be 
in the field of health of agriculture, bringing out partial 
solutions, bring out band-aid programs that do not reflect the 
needs of the people of this province. 
 
Farmers today, Mr. Speaker, are in a position where they cannot 
go on much longer. In fact, I’m amazed to see how long they 
can hang on. It’s an endurance test out there. We have the 
problem that some farmers are in relatively good financial 
shape. But, Mr. Speaker, I say this government, even though 
they would like to get rid of those 40 per cent at the bottom of 
the scale, all we’re doing is creating more and more debt, 
because we’re not addressing the problem. 
 
If we don’t have a program whereby we support the price of the 
product, whereby we can control the input of the product, 
whereby we can have the financial institution work with the 
farmer and with the government to restructure that debt, then 
we don’t have a solution. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t this government, 
after all the time that it’s had, after all the so-called negotiations 
and meeting with the federal government in Ottawa, who carry 
between the two of them half of the debt of Saskatchewan 
farmers — they carry half the debt — why would they not 
simply go out there and say, okay, we will take the lead in debt 
restructuring; we don’t have to write it down; we don’t have to 
have the taxpayers carry the whole load because we know the 
farmer has responsibilities, we know the taxpayer has 
responsibilities, and we know the institutions have 
responsibilities? 
 
(1500) 
 
Why would this government and the federal government, 
carrying half the debt, not go to those people who are in serious 
financial trouble with a program saying, okay, we understand 
that your costs are high, that your returns are low, but over a 
period of time we can work this out? 
 
We have seen the federal government not decrease their interest 
rates, but increase them — Farm Credit Corporation. We have 
seen the provincial government, through the production loan, 
not decrease interest rates but increase them. I think that tells 
us, Mr. Speaker, the direction this government is going. They 
can talk for hours and hours and hours about how they stand 
four-square behind farmers, but when you add up all the facts, it 
shows that they’re letting them down terribly. 
 
We can look at the livestock program, the livestock cash 
advance — they cut back 70 per cent. How does that help 
restructure the debt of this province? How does that help  

that person, who has a hundred head of livestock and who has a 
grain operation, get out of his debt problems? They’re actually 
asking for farmers with livestock to now pay back 30 per cent 
of that cash advance. 
 
In times when grain prices are low, cattle prices are just starting 
to make . . . are making gains, and that farmers may have the 
opportunity to use the livestock sector maybe to subsidize the 
grain sector, at least to advance himself a little bit. The 
government says, oh no, boys, we’re going to cut you back. 
 
And not only that, what did they turn around and do in the last 
budget? They’re going to give $8 million for partnerships in 
corporations — $8 million per operation — to enhance the 
livestock industry. There is another clear indicator of the 
direction of this government: we’re going to cut out the small 
livestock operation and we’re going to go into the megaproject, 
because we don’t need those guys; because the majority of 
those people with livestock herds are the small farmer. 
 
We’re not a province of huge feedlots, although there are some. 
And they’re necessary to some degree, but the major portion of 
the livestock industry in this province is built around the small, 
intensive farming operation with grain, with cattle, with hogs, 
but this government doesn’t want that. And if they did want 
that, they could simply say, look, we are gong to continue with 
a livestock enhancement program. We’re not going to give $8 
million per operation for those megaprojects, but we’ll support 
the ordinary farmer. 
 
But they’re not doing that. We have seen other indications of 
that, Mr. Speaker, whether it be in the hog industry, whether it 
be in the poultry industry, whether it be in the dairy industry. 
This government’s lack of support for supply management, the 
only programs in this province whereby a farmer can actually 
sit down and figure out his cost of production and what he’s 
going to receive for that, this government won’t support it. 
 
I asked you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why not? Why, with the 
consultation, why, with influence of the federal government, 
why, with the influence of this provincial government, would 
they not stand behind the farming operation, readjust the debt? 
And I say, because they just don’t want to. I think the mandate 
of this government is to simply try to get rid of those, I quote, 
“inefficient farmers,” because that’s what they think they are. 
Anybody with a debt load, according to this government, is 
inefficient. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that is not altogether true. Like 
any other business, farmers . . . farming is like any other 
business. There are people who are going to make it, and there’s 
people who’re not going to make it. But it’s got nothing right 
now to do with efficiency or inefficiency. It’s got to do with this 
tremendous debt load that we have hanging over our heads, 
brought about, I might add, by the general economy as it was a 
few years ago, by the lending institutions, by the farmers going 
out and getting more land, by the government not standing up 
and saying, we have a program to ensure that this will be able to 
be paid back. We don’t have that. 
 
And all I can say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that until this  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2047 
 

government, with all its power to restructure half the debt in 
this province — half the debt in this province; with the federal 
government, with all its ability to stand behind the livestock 
industry, the grains industry, and in general, the rural part of 
this province; and with all its touting about how we’re going to 
stand up here for farmers and all we’ve done in the past, it just 
doesn’t wash. And farmers are understanding that. 
 
They have no program for land transfer right now. How does 
that assist a farmer who’s trying to retire with a high debt? Is 
there any provision for that farmer to retire and have someone 
else’s son or a neighbour take over that land? — that want to 
take over that land. But due to the crisis situation — and they 
want to farm . . . They can look ahead and they can say, well 
why should I? Although I want to farm; the land is there; I can 
keep it in the family . . . But there’s nobody supporting them. 
And yet this government stands up and says, yes, we’re 
standing behind farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not true, and this Bill proves 
that. If this government wanted to stand up and help farmers, 
they would have not brought down a piece of legislation that 
was a band-aid remedy. They would have stood up and brought 
legislation in that said: we are going to restructure the debt; we 
are going to give low interest rates instead of increasing interest 
rates; we’re going to set aside portion of the debt instead of 
having it all fall on the shoulders, without having farmer and 
the institution being able to sit down and say, yes, there is a 
light at the end of the tunnel. But they refuse to do that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to say that despite all 
the rhetoric I hear from this government, despite the programs 
that we have seen come and the programs that we’ve seen go, 
standing up for the farmers, when you add all the pieces of the 
. . . when you put all the pieces of the puzzle together, it shows 
clearly that this government intends to get rid of a number of 
farmers. It intends to move the livestock industry into the 
megaproject industry. 
 
Unfortunately, I don’t know if this is the intent, but it’s going to 
wreck the social fabric of rural Saskatchewan. It’s going to 
wipe out a lot of small business men in rural towns. And I don’t 
think that we should stand here and say that that should be 
possible, because in Saskatchewan we need that fabric, and in 
Saskatchewan we need legislation that maintains that fabric. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just don’t think a band-aid solution is going 
far enough to alleviate the debt crisis in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take this 
occasion to comment in respect to the Bill 37 that’s before us. 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as I look at the 
purpose of the Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I do agree with 
the purpose is . . . any one can agree with, for the purpose of the 
Bill as set out is to afford protection against loss of their 
farmers. The purpose of the Bill, let me repeat, is to afford 
protection to farmers against the loss of their farms. 
 
Now all of us are concerned with what is going on in the  

agricultural economy. The government set up a task force of 
MLAs that went around on a road show . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Dog and pony. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Dog and pony, that cost and did a symposium, 
that probably spent over a million dollars profiling what they 
were going to do for the farmers of this province/ And then they 
came back with a report to this legislature, and what they 
indicated is that basically there’s not very much they can do. 
 
And this was reiterated by the Minister of Finance in the budget 
address, where he indicated that debt is the crisis facing 
agriculture, is clearly what he set out. But he went on to say, 
and he talked to the press and he said, it’s too big a problem for 
the provincial treasury to solve. 
 
Now if debt is the crisis, you have to ask yourself: what is the 
magnitude of that crisis? In Canada today, agriculture faces a 
$24 billion debt. Saskatchewan alone has one-quarter of that 
debt — $6.5 billion. In the government’s own report that they 
tabled in this legislature, they said that 11 per cent of the 
farmers are insolvent. And they went on to say that 28 per cent 
of the farmers have a serious cash flow problem. 
 
There we are looking at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at close to 40 per 
cent of our farmers that either are insolvent or have a serious 
cash flow. And here comes a government who is supposed to be 
the friend of the farmer, which has not addressed the problem, 
because I doubt if the minister can stand up in this legislature 
and say that this piece of legislature is going to save the 11 per 
cent of insolvent farmers, because it isn’t. 
 
And I doubt if the Minister of Justice can stand up and say that 
this Bill is going to save the 28 per cent that have a serious cash 
flow. Because the problem with the cash flow is a result of 
many young farmers having bought land at a very high price, 
caught up in significant interest rates, and having had the 
commodities, the price of the commodities drop seriously. 
 
I don’t want to leave the impression that it’s an easy problem 
that we face. But I don’t think any government can come before 
the legislature and be hypocritical about initiating a Bill that 
they say is going to save the farmers from loss of their farm 
land. Because unless the government, jointly with the federal 
government, addresses the problem of the magnitude of the debt 
and, as my colleague from Humboldt has indicated, a massive 
restructuring of debt, this Bill, at most, will delay the agony and 
the inevitable result, and that is a massive exodus of farmers 
driven from the farms. 
 
This Bill will not solve the problems of the debt crisis, and the 
minister should address that and be honest. We had a Farm 
Security Act brought in 1985, and I want to read what The Farm 
Security Act . . . and this is a development from that. They set 
up a Farm Land Security Board which was going to help 
mediate the debt of the farmer, delay the foreclosure actions. 
 
And I want to tell you what that Farm Land Security Board did 
since beginning January 1, ’85 to the end of March  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2048 
 

’88. There were 2,251 foreclosure notices filed on 1,806 
farmers, almost 800 cases not handled yet. So out of the 1,061 
cases — this is under their previous farm legislation — 106 
recommendations from the Farm Land Security Board to the 
court that the farmers should not be foreclosed. Starting with 
the 1,806 farmers, 2,251 notices, and from 1985 until March of 
’88, 106 recommendations is the total by the Farm Land 
Security Board recommending no action of foreclosure against 
the farmer — 106 during 1985, ’86, ’87, till March of ’88. 
 
There were 475 cases mediated and agreements reached, some 
of which were highly favourable to the lender — 289 reports to 
the court favoured the lender — 106, remember, for the farmer; 
289 for the lender or for the banks, their friends, the real friends 
of the members opposite. Almost 3:1 in favour of the banks. 
And this was their model legislation that they put out in 1985 
— going to save all the farmers. 
 
And so what does their board do under the Farm Security Act? 
They make a report, three times as many in favour of the banks 
in respect to the farmers. 
 
(1515) 
 
And what they want to do here is continue that. That’s what 
they’re saying. We’re going to have a Farm Land Security 
Board, a farm land loan board. And then they’re going to add 
yet another piece to the jungle, and they’re going to put a 
mediator in. Now that is going to really solve the problems of 
the 11 per cent who are insolvent, the 28 per cent with serious 
cash flow. 
 
You know, when we take a look at the magnitude of the debt 
here in Saskatchewan, we find that we have major lenders, 
which we have indicated to this House before. The Royal Bank 
has somewhere around $1.2 billion. The credit union movement 
has somewhere around 865 million, I was advised. And the two 
governments, the federal government and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, hold about one-half of the total debt held by 
farmers. 
 
And do you mean to say to me here today that if the two levels 
of government were serious about the agricultural problem, 
holding one-half of the $6.5 billion debt, that they couldn’t 
restructure that debt? I don’t believe it for a minute. 
 
But I’ll tell you, their commitment is not there, and that’s the 
problem. And the problem is that the government has used a lot 
of rhetoric indicating how it’s going to work and save the . . . 
and they are friends of the farmer, they say. 
 
But let’s take a look at their lack of management, their 
programs that they have put out. They had a production loan 
program which was very opportune; 1985, when farmers were 
still getting by, not as bad off as they are today. But they put 
$1.2 billion out to every farmer in Saskatchewan, because they 
said, you have to reward success. And even the Premier of this 
province had his hand out and received the production loan. 
 
Now there’s a lot of planning by a government that would put 
$1.2 billion out with a very large proportion of that  

$1.2 billion going to farmers who are absolutely without any 
debt. But you had to reward success they said, you had to be 
fair, and so they had a universal program. But the consequences 
of it is that they got $1.2 billion out, they can’t address the real 
problem facing the young generation farmers that got into 
farming, and the commodity prices have dropped and interest 
rates continue to rise. 
 
And so I say the problem that we’re facing here today is really 
vitally important to the future outlook of Saskatchewan. We 
have to decide here whether we’re going to save a new 
generation of farmers or whether we’re going to let the 
market-place dictate and the banks dictate, and that foreign 
investment come and purchase that land. Because unless we 
deal with the immediate problem of restructuring debt, this Bill 
cannot save the farmers from ultimate destruction, bankruptcy, 
and being run off the farm. 
 
And I don’t think the minister can purport that it does. But what 
he did do is hold a press conference and said, it’s going to save 
the farmers. And let’s take a look and . . . We’ve talked to a 
number of farmers around this province and they aren’t quite 
sure, nor are some of the credit unions who have taken an 
opportunity to look at the Bill. 
 
And I want to say that from my viewpoint, that the 
consultations with the credit union movement has been limited 
in respect to the government, unless if they think that they can 
go to Credit Union Central and that constitutes total 
consultation. But there’s a lot of credit unions that first receive 
any indication of this Bill on or about May 14 is the earliest . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ten days before it was introduced. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Ten days before it was introduced. And then 
they had another conference call on May 17, and then on May 
25 it was introduced. Now that’s consultation. 
 
I want to say that we have taken a look at some of the other 
misguided programs that the provincial government has 
launched. They said they’re the friends of the farmers, and they 
launched a cash advance for cattlemen per head at $125. But lo 
and behold, when the farmers and the cattlemen are in the 
greater crisis, what does this government do? It decreases the 
cash advance to 70 per cent of the initial, and what they do is 
start collecting it in the most difficult time. 
 
What did they do with the production loan? They didn’t extend 
it and just had the interest paid at 6 per cent? No, no, to those 
least able to pay, what this government did was to demand a 
renegotiation of that production loan and charge them nine and 
three-quarters per cent. Now that’s going to help them further 
— that 11 per cent that are insolvent and the 28 per cent that 
have serious debt. Those are remarkable forward planning by 
this government, and they should be congratulated. 
 
You know, we’ve asked the Premier, who’s the Minister of 
Agriculture — and I’m surprised that he isn’t putting this Bill 
through so that we could discuss the whole general range — but 
we’ve asked him, and we’ve asked  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2049 
 

this minister here and other ministers whether or not they had 
serious discussions with the federal government in order to 
provide a restructuring of the debt in agriculture here in 
Saskatchewan. And we have received no reply. 
 
And I think it’s incumbent upon the government to come 
forward and to talk with the federal government . . . I’ll tell you, 
more farmers are going to be lost in Saskatchewan, as high as in 
the 30s under the past Tory government — that’s how bad, 
because their agenda is not . . . (inaudible) . . . protecting small 
farmers and family farmers, their agenda is to work in 
conjunction with the banks, dump them for foreign investors, 
the guys from Hong Kong and United States, because the free 
trade deal provides that the United States can come in up to 
$150 million of capital, unrestricted, and can invest in our farm 
lands. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are some 
concerns in respect to the Bill. There are farmers and there are 
financial institutions and, from all reports that I hear, and there 
may be exceptions to every rule, but that the credit unions in 
general have been working, they’re dealing on the local level. 
The board there who approves the loans knows the credibility 
and the viability of each of the operators. And throughout the 
years what they have done is to develop that relationship, 
unique I guess, because you don’t generally have it with 
financial institutions, because bank managers change and credit 
managers change. But very often the credit union movement, in 
particular, certainly know their clientele in the area that they’re 
dealing with. And I’m not saying that they’re perfect, but I say 
that in general the board and the manager knows the people 
they’re dealing with. 
 
And what does this government do? Under the most adverse 
conditions with farmers, the credit union has become a very 
major lender in the agricultural field — some 865 million, if my 
figure is correct. They’ve worked out loans with farmers, they 
have extended credit to the maximum, and they’ve operated 
under a given set of rules. And now along comes the Minister of 
Justice and he says, I’ll fix it for the farmers; I’ll change the 
rules that the farmer and the credit union manager and the credit 
union board worked out to mutual satisfaction. But a bureaucrat 
knows best. He knows what he can do now, and so what he 
does is he says, I don’t care what you did before, and I don’t 
care why you gave out that line of credit; the rules on this Bill 
now apply retroactively. 
 
An Hon. Member: — New set of rules. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New set of rules. After the farmers and the 
credit unions, to maximize the benefit for the farmers, you 
come and change the rules, and you say that helps the farmers. 
You have to ask yourself: will it not, in fact, have a 
counter-effect? I mean, if institutions like the credit union . . . 
and I’m talking about . . . who know their local clientele, and 
suddenly they make loans to farmers on the basis of the 
knowledge and co-signers, and then you change the rule 
retroactively, what is the possible effect that that type of 
approach will have? Well one of the fears that it has is that it’s 
going to harm the farmers more than the financial institutions, 
because retroactivity, they’re afraid it changes the rules in 
mid-stream; and secondly, if you can have retroactivity today, 
then what happens if they change the rules and start extending 
credit  

tomorrow; are you going to have retroactivity again? 
 
So all I’m saying is those are the questions that are raised. And 
I can use the credit union movement because I’m familiar with 
it, because I don’t deal to a large extent with the banks. But I 
can only say that I don’t know of any other organization, any 
other organization that better know their clientele, of a local 
board of farmers and business men, say in Muenster, with a 
credit union manager that was born and raised in that area. And 
the bureaucrat and the Minister of Justice is going to come 
along and he’s going to say, I’m going to change the rules 
because it’s politically expedient for me. Pretend to help the 
farmers, that’s what it is. This is a pretence. 
 
And I want to say, similarly, this is from farmers; member from 
Arm River, I’d like you to get up and debate in this here, 
because many of the farmers in your area are telling us that this 
legislation could adversely affect them, not help them. 
 
And I want to talk in respect of the provision affecting the 
homestead. And I ask again the minister to clarify, and we will 
go through section by section when we get into Committee of 
the Whole. But I talked to a young farmer, intensive operation. 
Most of the operation is on the home quarter which he owns; 
the rest is leased land. His credit is his homestead. Intensive in 
hogs, intensive in cattle, and he says, if . . . he says now that a 
homestead can no longer be foreclosed on if there’s good faith 
— or the clause that is used here — the basic policy that will be 
adopted, I’m told, by both banks and by credit unions, is that 
homesteads no longer will be used as security for loans. I ask 
you: have you addressed that problem, and how is it going to 
help that intensive operator? 
 
If I look around in the St. Gregor and Annaheim area, massively 
intensive operations, great hog production area in 
Saskatchewan. And there they have father-son operations and 
they work together and they set up large hog operations on the 
father’s home quarter. And there’s substantial debt in financing 
it, but they’re able to do it on the basis that the home quarter, 
the whole home quarter, has been able to be put up for security. 
And so I raise to the minister: if institutions decide, as a result 
of your retroactivity, as a result of some of the changes in the 
responsibilities of those who co-sign, in respect to your 
legislation affecting homesteads, are you going to really be 
helping farmers, or will it be a detriment? Because many of 
them have been able to use the homestead in financing their 
operation. 
 
And all I can say is, I don’t know what your information is, but 
the financial institutions that we have talked to indicate that this 
provision could have a negative effect in so far as providing 
loans to farmers, and could, in fact, precipitate a drying up of 
credit, in respect, as it relates to the home quarter. 
 
(1530) 
 
I want to say that I am appalled that here we should be dealing 
with the farm debt crisis, the $6.5 billion. We should be 
seriously addressing the 11 per cent of insolvent. We should be 
addressing the 28 per cent serious cash flow. And the minister 
puts out this Bill  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2050 
 

and gets headlines that he’s going to really help the farmers. 
 
And on the very next week, or within a few days, the Farm 
Credit Corporation, which is a federal farm loaning institution, 
indicates that its first reaction to the Bill is that it’s going to cut 
back the amount of security to 25 per cent on the home quarter. 
Now I don’t know, Mr. Minister, if you think that that 
announcement by the Farm Credit Corporation is going to be of 
assistance to the farmers. I’d like you to be able to answer that, 
because farmers tell me it’s negative. 
 
So those are the concerns, and clearly what it indicates is that 
the minister, the provincial government, and the federal 
government, I guess, are not prepared at this time — maybe 
they’re waiting until there’s an election call — to make an 
announcement. I hear by the grape-vine that the federal 
government are starting to think about drafting some legislation 
in respect to debt restructuring. 
 
I’d like to know whether the minister has had any contact with 
them, and whether or not that rumour is incorrect . . . is correct. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well ask him, ask him in committee. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — But I don’t think that . . . I’ll deal with it how I 
like. I don’t need the Minister of Finance . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well let him answer then. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m raising them, and if I want to raise them, 
I’ll raise them. And those are the concerns, and this is a major 
problem whether you want to address it or not. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that is the ultimate solution, is 
getting the federal government to combine with the provincial 
government and working out a sensible method of restructuring 
of debt so we save the young generation of farmers who are 
about to lose their livelihood. 
 
And I say that in light of what the federal government is doing. 
In the last week, to win a by-election in Quebec, they have 
dropped about $2 billion — $2 billion. And here we sit and look 
at a Saskatchewan vital industry, and not a single word from the 
provincial government or the federal government that they will 
in fact come to grips with the major problem of restructuring 
debt. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister — and I’ll go through this in detail 
with you, but I’ve had concerns sent in to me by various credit 
unions across the province indicating those basic concerns — 
and so I say to you, we all agree with the stated purpose of the 
Act, to afford protection to farmers against the loss of their 
farm. But I’ll tell you, this Bill — just as the farm security Bill 
that you passed previously and the record I report to you — is 
not going to resolve the major problem of servicing massive 
debt with low commodity prices. And So I ask you: are you 
intending . . . I ask you, and I will ask you in the Committee of 
the Whole, whether or not you are indeed looking at a 
subsequent proposal of restructuring of debt in conjunction with 
the federal government. 
 

I say that this is a major piece of legislation, and it’s my 
understanding that various financial institutions are meeting — 
some are meeting today — in respect to the reviewing it, and 
certainly in respect to the credit union movement. I think that 
need . . . are has to be taken here, Mr. Minister. Well while your 
intent in the legislation we agree with — and certainly on this 
side of the House let there be no doubt that we stand 
four-square behind the farmers of Saskatchewan, and we will 
co-operate, I can assure you, in any legitimate way to deal with 
a major problem confronting Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
But it’s a vital piece of legislation and while . . . And I can tell 
you of an experience, Mr. Minister, and you were here in the 
House — when the interest rates were high, we brought in a 
piece of legislation in respect to Home Owners’ Protection Act, 
and it served somewhat of the same purpose, where it was 
legislating that financial institutions could not take away the 
home from people that had a mortgage and were buying a 
home. 
 
And I’ll tell you, The Home Owners’ Protection Act — and you 
may have reviewed that when you were putting this piece of 
legislation together — I’ll tell you, the intention was sound, but 
I’ll tell you, the result was not as great as what was anticipated. 
And contrary to helping people, many of the financial 
institutions, as a result of the legislation — and I don’t think the 
credit unions will, but I don’t entirely trust your friends, the 
banks; that if they get an opportunity, that they’ll take a run and 
reduce their involvement in agriculture. So I ask you, that 
we’ve had some experience in respect to it . . . the nature of the 
problem, that there be no doubt is that some of this debt just has 
to be restructured. And otherwise it’s not possible to save our 
young farmers. 
 
I want just to summarize the concerns that we have picked up, 
for what they’re worth, and I’ll go into details as the sections 
are dealt with. But some are concerned, as I said, in respect to 
the homestead provision; some are concerned in respect to 
releasing the co-signers; some are concerned in respect to the 
appointment of a single mediator and what happens if he’s 
biased, and what effects does it have e- those are some 
concerns. 
 
The other concerns is that the rules keep changing in the middle 
of the game, and it’s difficult for financial institutions, even 
who have been dealing with the farmers in good faith and who 
have developed a portfolio, to suddenly have retroactive 
legislation which changes the position of their portfolio and, as 
a consequence, changes what they can do in the future. 
 
But let there be no doubt, the financial institutions are not, I’ll 
say, our concern; our concern is the farmers. But let us be sure 
that the legislation that you’re putting forward will not indeed 
dry up credit at a time when we need more credit. And those are 
the concerns. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that as I have said, we are 
consulting and drawing near to the end of the consulting 
process, but we have a little more consulting to do. And so at 
this time I’m going to ask to adjourn the debate and to adjourn 
the debate because we’re consulting. This is a major piece of 
legislation, and I’m asking to adjourn the debate. And I’ll tell 
you, just in talking in respect to this,  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2051 
 

Mr. Deputy Deputy Chairman, I want to propose, indicate that 
I’ll be asking for an adjournment, just to indicate to the House 
that the members opposite are indicating a refusal to adjourn 
debate on a major piece of legislation affecting the 
Saskatchewan farmers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s 
right, four times. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the major institution in Saskatchewan today 
are meeting in respect to this Bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The credit union movement. And they’re asking us and denying 
a possible adjournment. 
 
This is a government that has lost touch, Mr. Speaker, have lot 
touch with the real concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. 
They want to ram it through. Well if you want to ram it through, 
then let’s go on and let’s start discussing in detail some of the 
representations and concerns of the people of this province. 
 
And I’ll tell you, it’s really quite a feat here to see a government 
that has brought down 50 pieces of legislation in the last two 
weeks, a government so disorganized here in this legislature 
that has 23 Bills at stage of second reading, 15 of which are not 
even printed. Now that is an administration that should be proud 
of its effort. 
 
And I want to say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . you’re not the 
speaker, so just . . . I have the floor. I want to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, again, that the major institution that has been working 
with the farmers, that was founded by the farmers and business 
men when the banks deserted them, the credit unions. 
 
Today, throughout this province, they are having delegates from 
every credit union or credit union district in this province to 
deal with this Bill. And I’ll tell you, we want the input from the 
credit unions. And I don’t think that it’s fair to deny 
consultation, because I’ve indicated to you that that’s all that we 
want is their consultation, complete their consultation, and you 
will get the co-operation in respect to this. 
 
There is no intention to forestall this Bill, because all of us here 
are as concerned as you are in respect to the farmers’ plight in 
Saskatchewan. And so I say, Mr. Speaker, there are other 
concerns that I want to address, and that’s in respect to the 
foreign ownership provision of the Bill where they have 
indicated that for some weak, half-baked excuse that they want 
to open up the right of foreign ownership in extending it from 
10 to 320 acres, or a half section. 
 
And the excuse that they give in respect to the opening up the 
foreign ownership of land in Saskatchewan is weak at best, and 
the farmers of Saskatchewan won’t believe them. Because 
obviously, as my colleague has indicated, their intent is to get 
out from under this, not by addressing it as governments at two 
levels, but rather to bail out of the problem through an equity 
financing corporation which has been rejected throughout this 
province, which was sponsored by the Credit Union Central, 
was rejected by the small credit unions throughout this 
province, and what they want to do now is to come in through 
the back door. 
 

This Bill, I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while its purpose 
we agree with, we want to make absolutely sure that we have an 
opportunity to consult with farm organizations . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, come on, adjourn debate. Why are 
you ragging the puck? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s okay for you to say, because you don’t 
care. You don’t care about farmers any more. You sit there and 
laugh. And here, you know, consultation . . . that’s what the 
Deputy Premier says. He says, consultation is of no concern to 
him, no concern whatsoever. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Great recovery. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I don’t have to recover with what’s across the 
way. I mean, the Minister of Finance, it would take a lot of 
recovery to get yourself mired out of the disrespect that the 
financial community has for you. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are a number of 
other programs which really indicates no plan and no direction 
by this government. I talked to some financial institutions in 
respect to the farm purchase program which this government 
put in shortly after they came into office . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, its good one. You ask the farmers who 
have invested, and the financial institutions who helped to 
finance the farm purchase of land for young farmers, and they 
said, we agree with the particular program. 
 
(1545) 
 
But what has changed now is that retroactivity of the Bill is 
going to affect the basic security that many of the financial 
institutions had worked out with the farmers and those that were 
selling the land. And many of the farm purchase programs were 
a transfer, intergenerational transfer. And both were satisfied. 
Both the farmer who had bought, the son; the father who had 
sold, and the financial institution. And I talk here about credit 
unions because I know very little about the workings of the 
banks, because that’s your friends, not ours. 
 
So in winding up my comments in respect to this, I want to 
indicate again to the people of Saskatchewan that major Bill, if 
this Bill in fact to the satisfaction of the farmers and in 
satisfaction to the credit union movement working in the 
interests of the farmers, if our consultation indicates that it is 
going to be beneficial, then certainly we have full intentions of 
proceeding as rapidly as possible. But I tell you that it is our 
intention, whether it’s yours or not, to have consultation. And 
accordingly, I move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 50 — An Act 
respecting the Control of Distribution and the Consumption 
of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2052 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure 
to be able to resume remarks on Bill 50, having had the last few 
days to discuss the Bill with those who are concerned about this 
Bill, including hotel owners who have some deep concerns 
about this Bill, and including individuals who have concerns 
about the use, the abuse, I might say, of alcohol in our province. 
I’ve had some time to study the legislation myself, and so I’m 
happy to be able to resume some remarks. And I hope members 
on the opposite side, particularly those in the front bench, will 
pay attention to what I have to say here this afternoon. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about those in the second row? 
I’m paying attention. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well the second row should listen too, 
particularly the Minister of Urban Affairs, who has a habit not 
of listening. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Third row . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Third row doesn’t matter. Mr. Deputy Deputy 
Speaker, I think just in passing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
like to point out the delay that we’ve seen in the introduction of 
this legislation. You will recall, having been here, that a Bill, a 
very similar Bill, was introduced into this House a year ago in 
last year’s session. It was left then to die on the order paper. 
The Bill that we have today is substantially the same Bill, with 
very few changes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill, therefore, could easily have been 
introduced in the third week of this session. It could have been 
introduced in early April. That would have given members of 
this House and the public in Saskatchewan ample opportunity to 
study and consider the Bill. In fact, this Bill was introduced, 
given first reading, on June 1 — June 1 — and, I might add, 
given first reading with a vast amount of other legislation. Some 
50-some Bills have been introduced in this House in the last 
two weeks. A Bill that was essentially ready when this session 
began and not introduced until June 1. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that indicates three things to me. It 
indicates, first of all, that this government does not want public 
scrutiny or public debate about this particular piece of 
legislation. It indicates to me that this government simply wants 
to take this Alcohol Control Bill and ram it through this House. 
It says to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And the member from Morse seems to question what I say. 
Well we’ll be anxious to hear his comments on this Bill. We’ll 
be anxious to hear his comments on this Alcohol Control Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says to me that there’s something about 
this Bill that the government wants to hide; that the government 
wants to keep from public scrutiny and debate; that the 
government just wants to push through this House. The Bill 
could have been introduced here in the third week of this 
session. And I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why did we wait 
until June 1 to see this Bill? 
 
My assumption that this government intends or wants to hide 
some significant changes introduced by this Bill is  

confirmed for me in some press reports that have covered the 
Bill. And I refer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to an article from The 
Fort Qu’Appelle Times, and an article appears there which is 
either a press release from the Deputy Premier, or an interview 
in which the Deputy Premier is quoted as saying, “I believe the 
legislation is fair, responsible, and flexible enough to allow new 
concepts in the hotel industry.” Then the article goes on to 
discuss the highlights of the new Act. 
 
And the highlights discussed in this, whether it was an 
interview or a press release, the most substantive part of this 
Bill, the most controversial aspects of this Bill are not 
mentioned, not mentioned by the Deputy Premier in his either 
interview or news release. 
 
Now why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would the Deputy Premier not 
inform the people of Saskatchewan the real consequences of 
this Bill 50? Well I’m only led to conclude that they do not 
want public scrutiny, they do not want debate, they just want to 
push this Bill through with the hopes that Saskatchewan 
residents are not aware of the real substantive change which is 
contained in this Bill. 
 
And they are two, they are two, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they 
have been addressed by my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake and 
other members on this side of the House will want to also 
address them. They are two. 
 
There is a substantial move in this Bill from legislation to 
regulation. So much of what governs the sale and distribution of 
alcoholic beverages in our province now is governed by 
legislation, which means for changes to occur, those changes 
must come to this House and be subject to public scrutiny and 
public debate. This Bill moves many of those decisions from 
this House into the field of regulation, into the field of the 
cabinet, behind closed doors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where no 
public scrutiny or no public debate can happen. That’s the first 
substantial change of this Bill. 
 
And the second, the second substantial change is that this Bill 
opens the way to the franchising out of liquor sales, to the 
franchised liquor sale concept for Saskatchewan which is 
entirely new and, I submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, entirely 
foreign to this province. Both of these substantial changes I 
have found to be unpopular with the people that I have been 
able to talk to in the last week, unpopular both with those who 
are involved currently in the sale of alcoholic beverages — and 
by that I mean hotel owners, primarily, liquor board employees 
— and unpopular with people who are concerned and in the 
field of drug and alcohol abuse and treatment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that many of my colleagues here 
will want to speak on these changes, and they will address in 
turn very particularly the effect of this legislation, for instance, 
on the hotel owners of Saskatchewan, and particularly rural 
Saskatchewan. My colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake has 
addressed some of these concerns. 
 
The question I want to deal with in my remarks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, surrounds this one question. Does this  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2053 
 

legislation hinder or help in the problem, which is recognized 
universally in this House, of drug and alcohol abuse in our 
province? Does this legislation hinder or help the problem? Is 
this legislation something that we, as legislators, can say is a 
positive thing for Saskatchewan’s young people, a positive 
thing for Saskatchewan families? Is it a positive thing in our 
battle against abuse, or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it legislation 
which will simply in the long run compound the problem that 
makes the problems worse? That’s the question I wish to 
address — the specific question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And having looked at this question, and having looked at the 
legislation, and having talked to individuals and professionals in 
the field, my conclusion is that a greater reliance on regulations 
and a dwindling of legislative authority . . . my conclusion is 
that the franchising out of liquor sales in Saskatchewan with 
absolutely no limit on the number of franchises, with the 
franchises being chosen by this cabinet . . . my conclusion is 
that this legislation is not a positive step for Saskatchewan’s 
youth or for Saskatchewan’s families; it’s not a positive 
direction in our efforts to battle alcohol and drug abuse in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my opinion this legislation in fact opens 
the doors to some very negative consequences, and I’d like to 
outline my reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think it’s notable 
that at the same time we are debating Bill 50, which opens the 
way for franchised liquor sales in Saskatchewan, at the very 
same time we are debating this Bill, we have the minister of 
privatization going about the province suggesting that he wishes 
to privatize all the current liquor board stores, to turn all of the 
current liquor board stores into private operations. 
 
And so it becomes very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government has set itself a goal for the sale and distribution of 
alcoholic beverages in our province. And that goal is to put the 
lot of it into private hands, to remove it from government 
control and to put the sale and the distribution of alcoholic 
beverages into the hands of private entrepreneurs, whether it be 
through the privatization of the current Liquor Board stores or, 
on the other hand, through the franchising out of alcohol sales 
made possible by this Bill No. 50. 
 
That’s the government’s agenda. It almost would seem that this 
government would like to treat alcohol no different than the sale 
of hamburgers or the sale of used cars. It’s just one more 
commodity that ought to go onto the open market, into the free 
market, free enterprise system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my contention is this: because there will 
always be — no matter what our best intentions — because 
there will always be problems associated with the use of 
alcohol, and because governments will always be expected to 
pick up the cost of those problems, it is my contention that 
governments therefore ought to garner the revenues from the 
sale of alcoholic beverages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s estimated . . . Mr. new Deputy Deputy 
Speaker, it’s estimated that in Canada that it costs over $21 
million a day as a result of alcohol abuse. That’s the cost per 
day — over $21 million in terms of productivity  

loss, in terms of absenteeism, in terms of a lower work morale, 
in terms of accidents on the job — $21 million a day; that’s 
what it costs Canadians. 
 
In statistics I’ve been able to garner from our own SADAC 
(Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) in 
Saskatchewan — and these are the latest we have — in 1986, 
3,031 drivers in this province were involved in alcohol related 
accidents; 3,-31 drivers in alcohol related accidents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the costs of alcohol abuse return to 
government. The government is expected to bear those costs; 
government is expected to provide the rehabilitation; 
government is expected to provide the preventative programs; 
government is expected to provide the health care. 
 
If we take liquor sales and privatize the lot, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we stand to lose substantial revenues, revenues which 
I believe ought to be used for treatment and prevention and for 
health care. These are not insignificant revenues, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Let me just refer to the revenues from the Liquor Board to the 
province of Saskatchewan over the last number of years. In 
1982, revenues from the Liquor Board were $49 million to the 
treasury of Saskatchewan; in 1983, $110 million; in 1984, $79 
million; in 1985, $71 million; in 1986, revenues to the province 
of Saskatchewan from the Liquor Board were $84 million; in 
1987, $140 million; in 1988, predicted 122.5; and predicted 
1989, $150 million. Since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the 
Liquor Board, revenues to the province of Saskatchewan to 
1989 will be $805 million — almost eight-tenths of a billion 
dollars. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we privatize, if we franchise out liquor 
sales in this province as this government has set as a goal, we 
are going to sacrifice substantial revenues. And I ask, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if we’re going to lose that kind of income as a 
province, then where will the money come from to fund 
treatment centres like Whitespruce? Where will the money 
come from to fund treatment centres like the Angus Campbell 
in Moose Jaw, and Calder in Saskatoon, and St. Joseph’s in 
Estevan? Where will the money come from to fund the 
Wascana Hospitals, the long-term rehabilitation centres? Where 
will the money come from for education? Where will the 
money come from for social services to care for families who 
suffer because of a loved one’s abuse of alcohol? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the franchising option which is now 
available through this Bill, combined with this government’s 
wholesale plunge into privatization, which now will include 
Liquor Board stores and liquor sales, may well cost this 
province millions of dollars; the provincial treasury, millions 
and millions of dollars — dollars which I believe are so 
desperately needed for the treatment and the prevention of 
alcohol abuse. 
 
And I look forward to when members of this government will 
stand in this House and defend the loss of this kind of revenue 
to the provincial treasury. I look forward to  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2054 
 

members entering this debate and responding to that question. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask you and members of this House, 
what will be the likely effect of the privatization of liquor sales 
in Saskatchewan on consumption? What will be the likely effect 
on Saskatchewan young people? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me just describe the current situation in 
Saskatchewan. These again are figures from SADAC. They’re 
dated May 1987. They are taken from a national health survey 
of drug and alcohol abuse across Canada. And interestingly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was not able to get the most recent 
figures on consumption in this province because they’re not 
available to SADAC because the Liquor Board has not made 
them yet available. 
 
These then are figures that date back to 1985, which are about 
as recent as we can get. In 1985, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 
estimated that there were 46,000 — 46,000 — problem drinkers 
in Saskatchewan; 46,000 people, substantially more than the 
population of the city which I come from — 46,000 problem 
drinkers. In 1985 it was estimated there were 586,000 moderate 
drinkers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question I ask is that if this Bill passes, if we 
see the wholesale privatization and franchising of liquor sales in 
Saskatchewan, are we going to see more of those moderate 
drinkers, more of the 586,000 moderate drinkers, moved into 
the category of problem drinkers — moved into the 46,000? 
 
You’ll find it interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that of the 
46,000 problem drinkers in Saskatchewan, almost half — 
almost half of that number — 47 per cent of that number, were 
people aged 15 to 24. Half of the problem drinkers in 
Saskatchewan, about 23,000 young people in Saskatchewan, are 
described as having a problem with alcohol. 
 
Now I ask: does this Bill, does the franchising out of liquor 
sales and the privatization of liquor distribution in this province, 
does that help the problem or does it compound the problem? 
And I’m given to believe it compounds the problem, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Let’s just imagine the situation. Let’s just imagine the situation, 
if this government has its way and we see the total privatization, 
franchising out of liquor sales in Saskatchewan. Let’s just 
imagine the situation. 
 
Well the liquor sales in that situation now will be for private 
profit of the retailer. That will be the first goal of the retailer, to 
earn his or her private profit. That’s understandable. Everybody 
understands it. That’ll be the first goal. And so it’s very 
conceivable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what we’re going to 
have is a market that’s flooded with retailers. Everyone will 
want a franchise. Of course everyone will want a franchise. Of 
course everyone will want in on the lucrative trade. It’s 
conceivable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we will end up having a 
liquor outlet in every corner of every town in Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve all been to Small Town, United 
States, you know the small towns that have one grain elevator 
and one garage and one store and five liquor outlets. We’ve all 
been there. We’ve seen that. It’s conceivable, it’s conceivable 
we’ll have that same kind of situation in Saskatchewan. It’s 
conceivable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re going to have 
off-sale in pizza parlours. It’s conceivable we’re going to have 
off-sale in the corner confectionary. Perhaps it’s more than 
conceivable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps it’s arguable, 
perhaps it’s predictable. 
 
The franchising out of liquor board sales, the privatization of 
the liquor stores, is that going to help or hinder in our fight 
against alcohol and drug abuse? I tell you, it’s going to put a lot 
of pressure on small retailers to get into the business. And if 
sales are for profit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if sales are for profit, 
surely we’re going to see heavier advertising of alcoholic 
beverages, surely we’re going to see price cutting in an effort to 
get a part of the market, surely we’re going to see discount sales 
on booze. 
 
In the situation today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have hotel 
owners and liquor board stores who are responsible for the sale 
of alcoholic beverages. And they are responsible, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They are conscious of their role in not selling to 
minors. But imagine the situation if we’ve got the small corner 
store that has teenagers that work behind the counter and 
you’ve got other teenagers coming in to buy. Are they going to 
be as careful? Are they going to be as responsible? Are they 
going to say to their friends; no, I can’t sell you a 12 pack 
because you’re not old enough? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I come down Albert Street and I see a big 
billboard in front of one of the hotels on Albert Street 
advertising canned beer, cheapest in town. Are we going to see 
that kind of billboard in front of every corner store and every 
pizza parlour? What’s the impact of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
on our society? What’s the impact of that kind of thing on 
Saskatchewan society, and what’s the impact on Saskatchewan 
young people, and what’s the impact on Saskatchewan 
families? Is that the kind of province we want? Is that the kind 
of province you want? 
 
Well I say it’s not the kind of province I want, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We have a system today that meets consumer demand, 
that for the most part meets consumer desires. Even with the 
system we’ve got, we struggle with the problems. The last thing 
we need in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is increased 
accessibility. The last thing we need is discounting of alcohol 
prices. The last thing we need is heavier advertising. The last 
thing we need to do, in my judgement, is to sacrifice the 
revenue into private hands. The last thing we need to do in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to compound the problem that 
already exists. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those reasons I will not be able to 
support this Bill. And let me just draw to some conclusion in 
this. By describing what can only be described as the hypocrisy 
of the government opposite, today in question period the 
Minister of Health talks about the young people of 
Saskatchewan who have fallen astray, and indicates his great 
concern for the young people of  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2055 
 

Saskatchewan who are caught in the web of alcohol abuse. 
 
On the other hand, we have the Premier of this province at 
Whitespruce, opening a drug and alcohol treatment centre for 
young people, and we have congratulated this government on 
that development. The very day the Premier’s at Whitespruce 
opening, this legislation’s being introduced in the House. 
 
We have the Premier at Whitespruce describing the problems of 
alcohol and drug abuse in our society on a par with the drought 
that we faced this spring; we have the Premier up at 
Whitespruce talking about the arms race and comparing the 
arms race, and solving the arms race, with the difficulty in 
solving the problem of abuse among young people in 
Saskatchewan; we have a Premier and a government who try 
and foster the image that they stand for Saskatchewan young 
people and they stand for Saskatchewan families; we’ve got a 
Premier who, from a luxury yacht out in British Columbia, 
issues a communiqué with his three partners from western 
Canada. Let me quote the first paragraph of the communiqué. 
He says: 
 

The rapid pace of change in family and working lives is 
placing particularly intense pressures on today’s youth and 
their families. These pressures have resulted in an 
alarming increase in drug and alcohol abuse. 

 
The Premier talks about an alarming increase in drug and 
alcohol abuse. At the same time, this is the Premier, this is the 
government, that legalized the beer and wine ads for television 
and the media, and this is the government that refuses to take 
them off. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the same Premier who 
now . . . and the same government, who now wants to privatize 
the liquor stores. This is the same Premier and the same 
government who now wants to have franchised booze sales all 
across Saskatchewan. This is the same Premier and the same 
government that brings into this House an At which, in my 
judgement, can only compound the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you just simply can’t believe what they say when 
you see what they do, and their attitudes and their actions can 
only be described as hypocritical. 
 
And so I think that Bill 50, this Alcohol Control Act, or should 
we describe it as alcohol out-of-control Act, this Bill 50 will be 
a test for members of this government, a test for certain 
members of this government, and we’ll just see about their 
commitment to Saskatchewan families. 
 
How many of them will stand up in this debate and defend 
private liquor sales? How many of them will stand up in this 
debate and defend price-cutting and advertising and promotion, 
more outlets and competition for liquor sales in this province? 
Will the member for Rosthern stand up in this debate and 
defend these policies of his government? Will the member for 
Rosetown, the Minister of the Environment, will he stand up 
and defend these policies in this debate? Will the member from 
Morse? Will the member for Moosomin? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this Bill will be a test for  

these members, a test of their commitment to the Saskatchewan 
young people, and the Saskatchewan families they so much like 
to talk about. 
 
Will the member from Arm River stand up and defend this 
legislation in this House? And what will they do when it comes 
time to vote, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Are they going to vote for 
this? Are they going to vote for this? Well we’ll see, Mr. 
Speaker. And so I sincerely hope that members opposite, on this 
occasion, will listen to their conscience, will listen to what they 
know is right and will not listen to their party whip, but will 
stand and take a stand on this issue, even though it may go 
contrary to the desires of some of their front bench. 
 
I ask members opposite, this time put the interests of 
Saskatchewan young people first, put the interests of 
Saskatchewan families first, say no, say no to this Bill, say no 
particularly to the provisions that’ll see the franchising out of 
liquor sales in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I end by just a plea to members opposite; I 
hope they will do what is right, do what is right. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be recognized, and I welcome you back to the Chair 
as well. I’m sure your presence will contribute to decorum in 
the conduct of this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Moose Jaw South has raised a 
number of pertinent points related to the debate on this Bill 
before us, Bill 50, allowing for the piratization of liquor stores 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to the points that he 
raised, and he and I, being both from Moose Jaw, have had 
opportunity to share our views and to consult with constituents. 
And I find myself, Mr. Speaker, sharing a great number . . . in 
fact, I would say all of the views that were put forth by the 
member from Moose Jaw South. 
 
He, in his career, has often found himself dealing with people 
who were suffering from problems related to the use, and more 
seriously, the abuse of alcohol in our society. And prior to 
coming to this Legislative Assembly, through my career as 
well, I am pleased to say that I have had opportunity to be 
involved in dealing with social problems related to the use and 
the abuse of alcohol, and most specifically as it relates to the 
use in combination with operation of a motor vehicle. 
 
It is my view, Mr. Speaker, that when this Legislative Assembly 
deals with a matter such as the distribution of alcohol in our 
society, that that is not just a passing phenomenon over which 
we can leap lightly. It is something that we must all take 
seriously, and we have to think very, very carefully about the 
social implications of this Bill. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I stand in my place today to 
raise some concerns, some of which will be similar, some of 
which will be different from those that the member from Moose 
Jaw South raised. I raise them not in  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2056 
 

an aggressive kind of manner today, because it is my hope that 
the debate on this Bill will be a reasoned debate that will allow 
members on both sides of the House to give very careful 
consideration of the implications and to draw conclusions that 
will not represent partisan political relationships, but will 
represent a decision that each of us sees in the best interests of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all let me say this, Mr. Speaker, that it is my view that 
this Bill before us is an outright contradiction between many of 
the other messages attempting to be sent by the Government of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
On the one hand, as my colleague from Moose Jaw South said, 
we have, with perhaps a larger amount of fanfare than is really 
necessary, but yet at the same time a very significant step was 
taken just a few days ago with the official opening of the 
Whitespruce treatment centre for young people here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s a treatment centre that is long 
overdue. 
 
I certainly concur and support with the provision of this kind of 
necessary service for the young people in our province suffering 
from addiction. And it is appropriate that the Premier and the 
Minister of Health and others should talk about the significance 
of that treatment centre to deal with some very crucial problems 
affecting young people today. 
 
Well I’m certain there is no one of us in this Legislative 
Assembly who has not been touched personally, and probably 
several times, either through our careers or our friendships and 
personal relationships, by the problems related to alcohol abuse 
and dependency in our province. It is a major health care issue 
that does need to be addressed. 
 
But it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it needs to be addressed 
more than through the provision of just a single facility, to say 
there it is; we’ve got this facility; now we’re doing what we 
need to be doing. Those of us who come to this Legislative 
Assembly have a responsibility to look at the implications of 
related kinds of legislation and how it either facilitates drug 
abuse and dependency or how it may deter from that and 
therefore create what we would all consider to be a healthier 
kind of society. 
 
I find it kind of odd that we are introducing Whitespruce centre 
and at the same time, as my colleague from Moose Jaw South 
said, on the very same day, that we’re introducing this Bill to 
allow for the piratization of liquor stores. And I want to outline 
what the implications of that are. 
 
I find it also, Mr. Speaker, odd that this very same government 
is the government that brought to the people of Saskatchewan, 
booze ads. And is there any one of us here who has children 
who has hasn’t had the experience of our children humming the 
beer commercial tunes and the words? And contrary to a 
promise that was made when booze ads were first allowed some 
five years ago, that they would never be shown when children 
were watching, I challenge any member to turn on a sports 
activity on their television and find that activity presented 
without a booze ad. 
 

And so at the same time we have within our society a 
promotion of the message allowing these ads, the message 
being that to have a good time, to engage in athletic activities, 
that booze has to be a necessary part of that. And this Bill, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in my mind, is more consistent with 
that initiative of the Government of Saskatchewan, the booze ad 
initiative, than it is with the Whitespruce ad, or with the 
Whitespruce initiative, I should say. And that’s the part that 
alarms me about this Bill. 
 
Now as we look at the problems related to alcohol in our 
society, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker, you will be aware, you 
may very well be aware that about 10 years ago there was very 
significant research done here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
The government of the day was dealing through the Aware 
program, with a public awareness program to try and influence 
the health attitudes towards alcohol consumption. 
 
And I recall very clearly, Mr. Speaker, attending a workshop 
related to research at that time which spelled out very clearly 
that there is a relationship between access to booze and the use 
of booze. And that’s logical and it’s not surprising that research 
would say that. The more booze is available, the more it’s going 
to be used. It’s a research fact; it’s also common sense tells us 
that. 
 
Research also tells us, Mr. Speaker, that the greater the use of 
alcohol, the greater the abuse of alcohol. And again, it’s kind of 
odd that we have to have a researcher to tell us that, but to 
simply confirm what we all know by way of common sense. 
 
And then the final step, Mr. Speaker, is that the research told us 
of all that there is a relationship between the abuse of alcohol 
and the dependency, or alcohol addiction. And again that’s not 
a fact that we need a researcher to tell us. Common sense tells 
us from our own experience, the more booze is accessible, the 
more it is used, the greater the abuse and the greater the 
addiction. 
 
And it’s with that kind of concern, Mr. Speaker, related to the 
accessibility of alcohol in our society, which is a clear 
implication, a clear implication of this Bill, that I stand and 
express my concerns today. 
 
Now this Bill will allow for, and the most significant part of this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, is it will allow for a large increase in the 
number of liquor franchises allowed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In fact, if I’m reading it correctly, it places no 
limits on the number of private franchises, no limits at all. The 
previous Act did have limits, but this Act takes away any limits 
on the number of liquor outlets that can operate in the province 
of Saskatchewan, operate privately, piratize liquor outlets, Mr. 
Speaker, with the consequence being an increased competition 
for liquor sales. 
 
And so what we’re going to see, I predict, Mr. Speaker, if this 
Bill is passed, is that we will see in the province of 
Saskatchewan, begin with great enthusiasm, the battle for the 
booze buck. The battle for the booze buck is what’s going to be 
on. Because, Mr. Speaker, rather than having people working in 
liquor stores now being paid a salary to do their job and to do 
their job according to the  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2057 
 

regulations and the law, we will be having liquor outlets all 
across Saskatchewan in every corner eventually, I suspect — 
every corner across Saskatchewan, we will have liquor outlets 
that are being operated for a profit. 
 
Now what’s that mean? Again it’s obvious, and we don’t need 
researchers to tell us. Common sense says that when you’re 
operating for a profit, then you have a vested interest in selling 
more. The more you sell, the more you make; therefore, the 
battle for the booze buck by private operators across the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we can anticipate with that, Mr. Speaker, price wars. And 
price wars again to attract the consumer and to make booze that 
much more accessible to all people of Saskatchewan. And again 
we go back to, accessibility eventually leads to increase in 
alcohol addiction. 
 
There will be a temptation, I predict, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m not 
totally naive by the ways of the world, and I suspect that 
therefore we would find a temptation to sell some of that booze 
illegally simply because there is the profit motive in place and 
that people are not, who are working in those stores, who are 
operating those stores — are not operating for a salary to 
operate according to the rules, but on the profit motive. And the 
more you sell, the more you make. 
 
And my fear, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, is that booze will 
become more readily available to young people who are not 
legally entitled to purchase alcohol, through back-door sales. 
And I don’t think that’s a characteristic of alcohol purchase that 
the people of Saskatchewan are clamouring to see. 
 
As my colleague from Moose Jaw South pointed out, and we’ve 
already seen it to some degree, an increase yet, yet a greater 
increase in the advertising, encouraging people to use alcohol, 
to purchase alcohol, and encouraging people to equate the use 
of alcohol with good times and with a positive kind of life-style 
and encouraging people to draw that kind of relationship. 
 
And it’s only common sense: if you have a product and you 
want to sell it, you advertise. What do you do in advertising? 
You advertise to increase the consumption, so as to increase the 
sales, and therefore the profit. 
 
There is also . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you equate that with the 5 per 
cent decrease in the consumption of alcohol in North America? 
It doesn’t make sense. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The member from Regina Wascana has some 
very interesting statistics that he would like to share with this 
House, and so I encourage you, member from Wascana, I 
encourage you to enter into this debate to share these statistics 
with us and to tell me and to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
how you and your colleagues see this piratization of liquor 
outlets in the province of Saskatchewan, encouraging increased 
consumption, making booze more acceptable as an investment 
in their long-term health. I look forward to hearing that message 
from you defended in any way that you choose. 
 

And it’s been kind of characteristic of the debate on this Bill so 
far, sir, that the members on the government side opposite have 
sat silently — catcalls, and you yip and you yap from your seat, 
but I challenge you to stand and enter into this debate and tell 
the people of Saskatchewan where you stand. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, either a good number of members opposite 
would appear to have a great deal of interest in this topic — and 
if they are as supportive and would like to be in support of, on 
the record, supportive on the record of the position that they 
espouse in this Bill, then I encourage them to stand in their 
places and let their constituents know where they stand and how 
they support this Bill. 
 
I’d like to now, Mr. Speaker, turn to deal with the issue of jobs. 
As I said before, the practice in Saskatchewan today, largely, is 
that people are employed in liquor stores to deal with the 
dispensing of liquor according to the regulations and the law of 
the land. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, the situation is one that 
we have a good number of liquor store employees who have 
stable employment and with decent pay. And those are people 
who contribute to the economy in their various communities 
across the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to understand the implications of 
this Bill, we have to look also in the context of a Bill that 
everyone is anticipating to arrive in this Legislative Assembly 
whenever the Minister of Labour decides that he is going to 
have the . . . allow the people of Saskatchewan to take a look at 
it. I’m referring to The Trade Union Act. 
 
Now it’s no secret, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that 
employees in liquor stores across the province of Saskatchewan 
are members of the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union. They’re civil servants; they have a union. Everybody 
that I talk to anticipates that in the near future we will be 
finding some amendments or some changes affecting people 
who are organized employees. 
 
And I hesitate to raise this issue because I do understand it is 
anticipating what may happen. And so I can’t comment on what 
will happen, I can’t forecast, but let me raise a concern about 
what could happen if amendments are made to The Trade 
Union Act which will eliminate successor rights, successor 
rights if operations are sold off. 
 
In other words, if it should happen, Mr. Speaker, that changes 
are made to The Trade Union Act so that liquor stores can be 
sold off but the employees and their collective agreement don’t 
go with them — which is the law in Saskatchewan today, that 
I’m afraid, I am afraid may be up for change — if that should 
happen, then, Mr. Speaker, what we do find in Saskatchewan is 
that we do find a situation where we have a number of 
long-term employees with very stable employment and good 
working conditions, who are good citizens and contributors to 
the economy in their communities, either without jobs or 
looking at jobs which offer minimum wage. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2058 
 

And that would be the practice consistent with the piratization 
experience related to initiatives of this government so far. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, I simply raise the alarm that follows so 
frequently. We saw it with the piratization of the Saskatchewan 
technical institutes to the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology, when the Minister of Education stood 
in this House and explained that one thing that would happen 
with this new piratized technical system in Saskatchewan was 
that employees would lose their rights to take their collective 
agreement with them with the new employer. 
 
(1630) 
 
And so the pattern has been set. I mean, I’m not looking for 
bogymen. I’m not looking for dark horses in closets here, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m referring to a practice that has happened. It has 
happened twice already in this Legislative Assembly related to 
the piratization initiatives of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The question I have is: how come 
there’s only 15 people out to Moose Jaw at a privatization 
meeting? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The Minister of Education yaps from his seat, 
and he knows that I tell the truth. He knows that, Mr. Speaker. 
And I encourage him to enter into this debate, along with his 
colleague from Regina Wascana, to tell your constituents just 
how you stand on this Bill and how you look forward to the 
benefits of this Bill being increased access to alcohol, leading 
eventually to the abuse of the use of alcohol and problems 
related to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would just like to call 
on all members to allow the debate to proceed without undue 
interference. And as we all know in this House, the odd 
interruption is permitted. Due to the nature of the House, 
however, we must try not to step across the bounds of good 
behaviour, and some members, I believe, are doing that now. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate that very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
calling to order the odd member from Weyburn for his 
interjections here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at this piratization of liquor stores 
in Saskatchewan, we have to ask ourselves, who is going to get 
those franchises, that unlimited number of franchises across the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Now is it likely, when we look at the track record of this 
government, that there will be ads and people will be invited to 
apply, and on some objective measurement those outlets . . . the 
franchises will be designated for outlets? Highly unlikely, I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have in Saskatchewan today a government which has made 
patronage an art. And I have a fear, Mr. Speaker, that what we 
have here is yet another initiative to make tailor-made 
patronage in the province of Saskatchewan. When I look at the 
record, I can conclude nothing else — wide open for 
tailor-made patronage, with no limits to the numbers of outlets. 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, in this Bill, without the 
requirement to have a guest room in close proximity to this 
liquor dispensing  

outlet. 
 
Now we all know, and the legislation in Saskatchewan today is, 
if you’re going to serve liquor, you have to have either an eating 
establishment or you have to have, in close proximity, the 
availability of guest rooms. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what this piece of legislation says is that 
that is no longer a criteria. These franchises of unlimited 
numbers will be available to whomever the minister designates, 
in whatever number he designates, without the requirement to 
have a guest room — without the requirement to have a guest 
room in close proximity. 
 
And what does that tell me, Mr. Speaker? What that tells me is 
that the American model of driving through some small town 
that is in the process of disappearing as we . . . is being risked in 
rural Saskatchewan today in that American model. And we’ve 
all seen it. We drive through a small town that’s got one garage, 
one general store, and three bars — is the one that we can look 
forward to in the province of Saskatchewan if this Bill goes 
through, because there is absolutely nothing in this Bill to 
prevent that scenario in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
say, shame, Mr. Speaker — I say, shame. That is not the vision, 
that is not the vision of small town Saskatchewan that the 
people of Saskatchewan want. 
 
But when I look at this Bill in the context as well, Mr. Speaker, 
of The Urban Municipality Act, I say, when we put these things 
together, we have a potentially ominous — potentially ominous 
— scenario that faces the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now why do I say that? Another Bill before this House right 
now is The Urban Municipality Act. What does The Urban 
Municipality Act permit if approved? It permits for the 
possibility of wide open shopping, including on Sundays. And 
when you look through that particular Act, Mr. Speaker, of the 
things that can be permitted on Sundays, you’ll find that one of 
the things that can be permitted is the sale of liquor — the sale 
of liquor, the sale of liquor — in The Urban Municipality Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to be terribly brilliant to put 
these things together. If you have the possibility, as authorized 
in this Act, for the minister in charge to designate any number 
of franchises he wants, to whomever he wants, including to 
restaurants and pizza parlours which can be open on Sundays, 
Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely, with the legislation before the 
Assembly today, there is absolutely nothing to prohibit the 
off-sale of alcohol beverages on Sundays in the province of 
Saskatchewan — and when you tie that in with the fear about 
changes to The Trade Union Act, being operated out of 
businesses that are paying people minimum wage. 
 
And I put those things together, Mr. Speaker, and I asked 
myself: is that the kind of Saskatchewan that the people of 
Saskatchewan sent us to serve in this Legislative Assembly? Is 
that the kind of Saskatchewan? Did the people of Saskatchewan 
say, get into that Legislative Assembly and get us a situation 
where we can have liquor stores on every corner selling booze 
on Sundays and paying people minimum wage? Is that what the 
people  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2059 
 

sent us to this Assembly to say? I say no, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is one of the flaws of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — An ominous scenario — an ominous scenario 
when you look at the realities. And ain’t that a lovely picture; 
ain’t that a lovely picture for the people of Saskatchewan today? 
 
Well, as my colleague from Moose Jaw South pointed out as 
well, Mr. Speaker, there is another problem related to this Bill, 
and it has to do with the potential for revenues. Since 1982 the 
province of Saskatchewan has generated some $800 million 
worth of revenues through the sale of booze. And I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is a princely sum. I mean, what the heck, I 
mean, I guess we could look at it the other way and say, well, 
that’s less than the actual deficit in the 1986 with this PC 
government, but that is a princely sum, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I suggest as well that it is a revenue source from which we 
need every penny we can get, apologies to no one — apologies 
to no one. The sale of booze as a source of generating revenue 
for the province of Saskatchewan is something for which none 
of us need apologize. And we need every penny we can get, not 
only to deal with the implications of the abuse and the addiction 
from the use of alcohol but from all of our social needs in this 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And my fear, Mr. Speaker, is that through this piratization, 
through this piratization of liquor outlets in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that a very important and substantial revenue to 
the province of Saskatchewan will be lost. 
 
Another significant characteristic of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 
that it will move much more control over the operations of the 
distribution of alcohol to regulation instead of by legislation. 
And what, in effect, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, is that if this 
Bill is carried, this debate . . . this Legislative Assembly will 
have seen its last debate related to the distribution of alcohol in 
our society today, because the specifics related to the 
distribution of alcohol, if this Bill is carried, will be made by 
regulations issued behind closed cabinet doors. And I don’t 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan 
mandated any of us, when making decisions that affect the 
social structure of Saskatchewan, to make one decision now, 
and then allow for the decisions thereafter to be made behind 
closed cabinet door. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, although you know on the surface it 
may not appear to have a great deal to do with the social 
structure of Saskatchewan, in my view does. It has to do with 
fair employment; it has to do with the enforcement of 
regulations and laws so that the distribution is according to the 
will of the Legislative Assembly; it has to do with opening up 
and providing unlimited access. I believe . . . I think we’re 
going to find liquor stores on every corner. One of the members 
opposite — I’m not sure if he was jesting or not — said to me, 
he’s interested in having two. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow for liquor stores on every 
corner in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what it  

allows for. No restrictions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That is the stupidest thing I ever heard 
. . . 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Ah, the member from Weyburn says that’s the 
stupidest thing he ever heard, and I agree; it is the stupidest 
thing I ever heard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And you put it in here. I wonder, to the Minister 
of Education, I mean, we’ve had a whole raft of the stupidest 
things you’ve ever heard in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
We had the Minister of Finance saying he was thinking about a 
phone book for all the province of Saskatchewan. A few days 
later the Deputy Premier stood and said he thought that was the 
dumbest idea he ever heard. Now we have the minister putting 
forth . . . another minister putting forth this piratization of liquor 
stores Bill, and we have the Minister of Education saying that’s 
one of the stupidest things that he ever heard, to allow for the 
unlimited availability of booze through potentially, through 
potentially a liquor store on every corner. 
 
But I challenge you, sir, I challenge you, if you were convinced 
that this is the right thing, to stand and defend it. And I 
challenge you to point out the part of this Bill that places limits 
on the number of franchises, the number of outlets, that can 
exist in the province of Saskatchewan. I say to you, sir, it’s not 
there, and therefore I agree, it’s one of the stupidest things that I 
ever heard as well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to seeing members opposite 
stand on their hind legs in this Assembly and to communicate to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to their constituents back home 
just why they support this Bill which provides for the 
piratization of liquor stores and the availability of liquor, 
including on Sundays, including putting workers in a place, into 
a position where they’re working for minimum wage, and 
including the possibility of liquor stores on every corner. 
 
Now I would be very comfortable, Mr. Speaker, if someone 
from that side could stand up and say to this House, to me, that 
I’m wrong, that my interpretation is incorrect, and to point the 
place in the Bill where it says that there will be limits, and to 
point to the place in the Bill which says that it does not allow 
for patronage appointments, and to point to the place in the Bill 
which guarantees that liquor store employees who are currently 
working at jobs will be allowed to continue to work with the 
same wages and the same benefits and the same collective 
agreement. 
 
I challenge the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to stand and 
point to the specific parts of the legislation that provide that 
assurance for the kind of social structure in the province of 
Saskatchewan that I think Saskatchewan people want, 
Saskatchewan people who have a vested interest in the family 
structure and in healthy living, people who have made an 
historical statement about the importance of health care in this 
province and who recognize, Mr. Speaker, that one of the 
greatest health  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2060 
 

problems in the province of Saskatchewan today relates to the 
abusive use of alcohol, and the addiction. 
 
Those are the concerns, Mr. Speaker, those are the concerns that 
I have. I look forward to hearing from members opposite, and I 
will watch very carefully how they vote when it comes to 
voting related to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I conclude by saying that what we have 
before us here is a Bill laden with problems, laden with 
problems; which needs much more review; and which requires, 
Mr. Bill . . . by its implications, the opportunity for 
Saskatchewan people to have input — not just those who are 
directly affected, like hoteliers, and certainly their input is 
valued and important and welcome, but on the broader scope as 
well, Mr. Speaker, all of Saskatchewan people who have a 
vested interest in the social structure of our province. 
 
This Bill requires that kind of opportunity by Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker, and accordingly, I will now move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1645) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 62 — An Act 
respecting Securities in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 55 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I think a few chosen words are in 
order on this Bill. This Bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . as 
the member chirps from his seat again, Minister of Urban 
Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill on public participation is more 
aptly called, as my member from Moose Jaw indicates, 
probably the Bill should be called piratization, but more 
commonly referred to as privatization. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill hits at the heart of Saskatchewan. It 
simply destroys the way Saskatchewan has been developed over 
the years. This particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, changes how we 
have developed Saskatchewan over the history, where we look 
at the private sector and the public sector and the co-operative 
sector in helping us to develop our land-locked economy. 
 
This particular Bill gives the Minister of Public Participation, or 
privatization, gives him sweeping powers — powers, Mr. 
Speaker, which would allow him and his cabinet colleagues to 
not bring before this House  

the deals that they make in selling off our Crown corporations 
and our other assets that we have come to respect in this 
province. 
 
This is, Mr. Speaker, a very sweeping Bill. And what concerns 
me more, Mr. Speaker, what concerns me more about this Bill 
is the hidden agenda of this government — the hidden agenda. 
They have told us time and time again, and the minister for 
Public Participation has told the people of this province not to 
worry; I will consult with you; before any deal is made, you 
will be consulted and I will discuss in detail with you what the 
plans of the government are. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that those are simply not the facts. 
And we can enumerate countless examples where this minister 
says one thing, and does entirely the other. Sask Minerals is a 
very good example. 
 
Sask Minerals. The minister goes out to Chaplin. He tells the 
employees that well, yes, it could be privatized any day now. 
He gives them exactly no indication who would purchase Sask 
Minerals. He doesn’t tell them at all what the price will be. He 
doesn’t ask them if the employees may be interested in using 
the co-operative method of buying Sask Minerals and running it 
themselves. 
 
No, what does the minister do? He assures them: don’t worry 
about your jobs; I will protect your jobs and I will have you 
people participate intimately; and from step number one, the 
first step in this whole process, you will be involved in the 
privatization of Sask Mineral. What did they learn the next 
week? That the Sask Minerals plant at Chaplin has been sold to 
an out-of-province firm — absolutely no consultation 
whatsoever, none whatsoever. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the only thing that we can assume from the 
members opposite is that they will follow their ideological bent 
in privatizing every Crown corporation there is. And I will refer 
to that a little bit later when I talk about Madsen Pirie, the chief 
consultant or adviser to Margaret Thatcher in London, England, 
who the government . . . I’m not sure whether they brought him 
out here, but certainly had a lot of influence in getting Madsen 
Pirie out here. And some of the members opposite, the cabinet 
members, were at the meeting that took place at the Centre of 
the Arts here in Regina. 
 
And I want to, Mr. Speaker, read some of the statements made 
by Madsen Pirie and the fundamental philosophy that is behind 
this privatization taking place today in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the United Kingdom is the forerunner of this 
whole business of privatization. And the members opposite 
want the people of Saskatchewan, or want to let the people of 
Saskatchewan know that everything is going well with 
privatization in the United Kingdom, which is simply not true, 
which is simply not true. 
 
The philosophy that’s behind this, and the strategy that is 
behind this is simply not only to play on the greed of 
individuals but to say to them: well if you become a capitalist, 
you can make a quick buck at the expense of the other people of 
this province and you can become a  
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2061 
 

little capitalist on your own. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what has happened, of course, is that in many 
of the examples in the United Kingdom where shares were sold 
to the ordinary individuals — and these shares, by the way, as 
Madsen Pirie indicates you’ve got to sell them at a below value 
so that the individual experiences a good increase and makes a 
fair amount of money, but what the individual has done, of 
course, in most cases, has simply resold them. And what has 
happened is that the . . . And the same as the minister . . . as the 
member from Kindersley indicated I’m wrong. But the same 
thing that happened here in Saskoil — the same thing that 
happened in Saskoil — that today, Mr. Speaker, we have three 
out of four shares owned by people outside of this province. 
And you can’t do anything about that, Mr. Speaker, when you 
sell shares and they go on the Toronto Stock Exchange, 
anybody can sell and anybody can buy. 
 
And of course what has happened is that the shares are 
concentrated in the hands of very few people outside this 
province. And when Saskoil made a profit here last year and 
this year, where did all our dividends go? Did they stay in the 
province? No, 75 per cent of them went outside the province 
and most of them went to Ontario. Most of them went to 
Ontario. 
 
And so this whole theory, this whole business of privatizing to 
make the individuals in the province own the business 
personally — we already owned them publicly — but each 
individual can then own them, hasn’t worked. Because as the 
individual can see that he or she can make a quick buck, they 
sell it on the stock exchange and those shares again get 
concentrated in very few hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will go back to Saskoil a little bit later and what 
it actually . . . what actually has happened to Saskoil. Sask 
Minerals was exactly the same thing. Over the years Sask 
Minerals, I think except for one year, made a very handsome 
profit. And they paid their royalties, they paid their taxes, and it 
was a very good Crown corporation for this province and paid 
handsomely into the public coffers. 
 
So what have they done? They went and sold Sask Minerals for 
about $12.5 million, way below the estimated value of Sask 
Minerals. Sask Minerals was evaluated at least twice that by the 
government opposite a few years ago. So the company that 
bought it got a very good deal. And they’d be, well, 
economically irresponsible if they didn’t purchase it. What I 
can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is that the members opposite 
who claim to be those expert business people, why they would 
sell, why they would sell Sask Minerals for half the evaluated 
cost to a firm outside the province. That doesn’t make sense. 
But, Mr. Speaker, neither did the selling off of the highway 
equipment. 
 
I’ll give you one example. I know of a construction owner who 
happened to be at that highway sale. And there was a DC-9 for 
sale. So he went to the government officials who was there and 
said, what’s wrong with this machine; you’ve only got it 
advertised at 30-some thousand dollars. And the government 
officials said, look, there’s nothing  

wrong with this machine; in fact we just put $30,000 worth of 
repairs into it. Well, the guy said, it doesn’t make sense. You’re 
selling it for $32,000, and you put $30,000 worth of repairs into 
it. Well, he says, the government wants to sell it. So this 
construction guy, this construction owners, bought the DC-9 for 
$32,000. Now is that a good deal for the people of this 
province? Those are the business people over there. They sold 
that DC-9 for $2,000. Doesn’t really make sense, but that’s how 
they . . . Well I can’t follow it; it just doesn’t make sense. 
Highway equipment that was valued at 40 or $50 million, sold 
for between 5 and $6 million at the most. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I ask anyone to drive on our highways today, 
drive on our highways today and see the shape they’re in. No. 
11 Highway from Saskatoon to Regina is a scandal, is an 
absolute scandal. You drive over there, I’ll tell you . . . and the 
minister on the Environment, of course — many cabinet 
ministers over there won’t know because they fly over them; 
they don’t drive them. Well if you drive them, if you drive 
them, Mr. Minister, then you would have to agree with me that 
the road from Saskatoon to Regina is atrocious. Now the one 
from Regina to Saskatoon going the other way isn’t nearly as 
bad, but the one from Saskatoon to Regina is a scandal. You 
know, it makes me ashamed that I belong to this province and 
that we’ve allowed our highways to deteriorate to that extent. 
 
I ask the members also to drive on No. 5 that is just being 
repaired east . . . west of Humboldt. I just happened to come 
across that highway, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday night when I 
went to visit my father in the St. Mary’s Villa in Humboldt. 
What do we have? A brand-new highway and it goes like this, 
Mr. Speaker. And you drive over it and you can’t believe it — 
you can’t believe the shape that highway is in. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, has just been constructed. It’s a shame that the 
taxpayers of this province would put out this kind of money for 
that kind of quality of highway that we are getting. They simply 
don’t stand up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, why is the government opposite so bent on 
privatizing all the Crown corporations? Well I think one of the 
main reasons is, Mr. Speaker, that they listened to the expert, 
the expert from the United Kingdom, and that is Pirie, Madsen 
Pirie. And Madsen Pirie, when he was here, says the following: 
 

“All Crowns should be sold,” free market supporter says. 
 

And a number of the cabinet minister opposite, I believe the 
Deputy Premier was at that meeting, if I remember correctly. It 
was reported in the paper that he . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Were you there? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — No, it was reported in the paper that you were 
there . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, it wasn’t. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t reported that I was there. 
  



 
June 13, 1988 

 

2062 
 

 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I think they said that . . . yes, I’m pretty 
sure that they said that you were there. They said they couldn’t 
miss you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why, why are they so bent on it? Well, because 
they’re taking their advice from Madsen Pirie. And Madsen 
Pirie said that every Crown corporation should be sold, and he 
says this: 
 

Fundamentally, the best thing to do is to get rid of all 
Crown corporations,” he said during an interview prior to 
his speech. “In general, the worst way to privatize a Crown 
corporation is to sell it to a single buyer. That way you 
only satisfy one party. Instead, management and workers 
should be offered discount shares and no one should be 
fired,” he said. And a reduction of the work force should 
be accomplished through retirement incentives and the 
transfer to private sector. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have seen some of those steps being 
followed and that kind of strategy being followed by the 
members opposite, except they haven’t followed some of his 
suggestions. And that’s why they have really got a lot of people 
angry at them. 
 
When the privatized the dental program, the school dental 
program, what did they do? They fired close to 400 people. 
They herded them into a room — they never consulted with 
them — they herded them into the room and said: your job is 
finished; take your stuff and leave. That’s exactly the way they 
dealt with the people of this province in privatizing the dental 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing is, as Madsen Pirie says, 
when you privatize, make sure that the program you offer is 
better than the program you had. Well in the dental program, of 
course, it wasn’t true. The members opposite weren’t ready for 
privatizing the dental program, and they abolished an excellent 
program which served over 300 communities in this province, 
and when, as admitted by the Premier in the House here the 
other day, now they only have dentists in 79 centres in the 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, that kind of privatization doesn’t 
work. It simply doesn’t work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the United Kingdom, in the United 
Kingdom . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House now stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


