


















































May 4, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 4, 1988 
 

1057 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you, 33 grade 7 and 8 
students from Buena Vista School in the centre of my riding in 
Saskatoon Nutana. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 
D’Eon, and chaperons, Darlene Hamilton, Carol Dalke and 
Linda Krukewich. 
 
I will be meeting with the students after question period for 
pictures and drinks. And I would ask all members of the 
legislature to welcome my guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Shortage of Radio-Therapy Technicians 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier 
of Saskatchewan, and it deals with the very serious problems at 
the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic, problems being faced by cancer 
patients and their families. 
 
These problems were brought to my attention in a very real way 
by one of my constituents. You will know that there are three 
out of the ten radio-therapy technology positions at the clinic 
that are now vacant, and two more soon will become vacant. 
Because your government has failed to deal with the problem, 
there is now, for the first time ever in the history of 
Saskatchewan, 75 cancer patients waiting for radio-therapy 
treatment. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you tell us, and the people of this province, 
particularly those with cancer, what you’re planning on doing 
about that problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 
Minister of Health addressed the question, either yesterday or 
the day before, with respect to the cancer clinic. 
 
He did go on to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is a brand-new 
facility. And we are in the process, Mr. Speaker, of dealing with 
the line-ups at hospitals on all fronts. And as the hon. member 
knows, in Saskatoon the line-ups are going down, the bed 
closures are becoming smaller, and in fact we see now in some 
hospitals there won’t be any closures at all. That’s a very good 
sign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as result of the allocation of day surgery and many other 
things we’re doing towards specialists, it’s going to get better. 
And obviously, the hon. member must acknowledge that the 
new facility is important and will help us address the very 
problems that she has raised here. 

Ms. Atkinson:  Supplementary. The new facility won’t 
address the problems because we are short three radio-therapy 
technologists; two more will be gone by the end of the summer; 
we’ll be down to five out of 10 positions. In order to move into 
the new cancer clinic, Mr. Premier, two more positions will 
have to be funded. It will not be solved. 
 
My question is simply: what are you going to do to alleviate the 
manpower shortage that has developed at that facility  not the 
new facility, but the present facility  in order that cancer 
patients can get treatment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, that’s precisely what we’re 
going to do, is provide the specialists so that, in fact, we can 
increase our capacity. So at the existing facilities and new 
facilities we will be providing the specialist and the people that 
are needed to have those facilities working to full capacity. 
That’s the intent of why we’ve spent the extra money; it’s so 
that we can deal with the public problem as she’s described it. 
 
We had seen the demand to build it; we are building new 
facilities, and we will provide the funds. I’m sure they’re out 
advertising and seeking to have specialists come in now, as we 
speak. So when they’re in place, obviously they’re up to full 
capacity; when they’re not in place or you’ve just built a new 
cancer clinic, it takes you a little while to have it fully 
operating. 
 
As I said about the new wing at University Hospital, we’ve just 
finished building it and we will begin using it. You don’t just 
finish building it and have all the beds full the same day. We’re 
in the process of having that happen. You’ll see the burn unit 
open as quickly as possible; you’ll see beds starting to be used, 
I believe, as early as May 7. 
 
And that’s precisely what we’re doing; we’re spending money 
on facilities and staff at the same time. It takes a little bit of 
time to put them in process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  New question. Mr. Premier, these are real 
men and women who are cancer patients, and they need 
radio-therapy now; they can’t wait. The question is simply this: 
we have seven positions in Saskatoon out of 10 positions that 
are presently filled. Two more positions will be gone by the 
middle of summer. There will be five people there to provide 
the treatment out of a component of 10. We have a problem. 
 
And my question is: what are you going to do to ensure that 
cancer patients have access to radio-therapy treatment? Bricks 
and mortar are not enough, Mr. Premier. Staffing is what will 
lead to high-quality health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I can only say again, Mr. Speaker, 
that that’s precisely what we’re doing, and we 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1058 
 

will be staffing the facility so that they can be run to capacity. 
And the hon. member says, well you’re short two now, and by 
July you’ll be short five, and by August you’ll be short more. 
That’s not true. 
 
We will be staffing, and that’s what we’re in the process of 
doing now. So I can only say to the hon. member, my concerns 
about people receiving treatment, whether it’s your family or 
my family or others, are just as sincere as yours. We are 
spending a great deal of money. We want to have the 
professionals in place. 
 
That’s why we’ve not only built facilities, but adding staff and 
adding the professionals, advertising for the right kinds of 
people so that indeed, as we saw here in Regina where we have 
specialists moving back in because we’ve taken the effort to 
deal with people who have concerns with respect to cataracts 
and other eye problems. We had the specialists moving in. 
We’ll see the same in Saskatoon. And obviously that’s one of 
the things that we want to do when you have a brand-new 
facility designed to treat people because of particular cancer 
problems. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Supplementary. My information comes from 
Dr. McGowan, the head of the radio-therapy department, Mr. 
Premier, and he says that by mid-August half of those 10 
positions will be gone, and we do not yet have assurances from 
your government that you will fund the two additional therapy 
positions that are needed to move into the new cancer clinic. In 
the meantime people are waiting for cancer treatment. 
 
My question is this: when are you going to come to grips with 
the problem of 75 people on a waiting list for radiation therapy? 
When is your government going to deal with that tremendous 
social problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve said to the hon. 
member that in fact we have the money there, and in fact that’s 
what we’ve said with respect to the new facility, and why our 
operating budgets are up so significantly, why we’ve added 
extra money in Saskatoon particularly. And if you talk to the 
hospital administration, they will say that’s exactly the case, 
and that the line-ups are going down, the bed closures are going 
down, and people are being served. 
 
So I can only say to you that we will be increasing the capacity, 
and the money is there. If you want to know, if you want to tell 
your friends whether there will be money for people in terms of 
the cancer facilities, yes, there is. It’s to be allocated and it is 
there as the new facility is there. 
 
Some people said we wouldn’t build a new facility; it’s there. 
Some people like you have said we won’t fund people to be 
there; we will. You will see that the effective program is in 
place and it will be efficient, effective, and run at capacity, and 
that’s precisely why we designed it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Premier, this morning I was contacted by 
a woman by the name of Muriel Gustafson from Elrose. She has 
very aggressive estrogen-negative cancer and she, on April 12, 
1988, had a radical mastectomy. Last Thursday, April 28, she 
was informed 

that because of the problems at the cancer clinic in Saskatoon 
that she may have to wait until July to begin her radio-therapy 
treatment. 
 
This is urgent, Mr. Minister. When are you going to deal with 
the problem of 75 people, for the first time in the history of 
Saskatchewan, on a waiting list to get treatment for cancer? 
When are you going to deal with that problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I’ve answered the hon. 
member several times but she obviously wants me to play the 
game that she wants to play. I have told you that it will be 
funded and we have built the facility and the funds are there and 
they will be hiring people and that’s why . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  When? Tomorrow? Next Week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  If you would just care to hang on, I’ll 
respond. 
 
Let me just . . . Mr. Speaker, when I do answer the hon. 
members aren’t interested in the information; they just want to 
raise the rhetoric. I will say to the hon. member: part of the 
reason for the first time that you’ve got this problem, part of the 
reason is that the union there refuses to work overtime despite 
people are lined up and want to have some information and 
some treatment. Now that’s part of the problem. Okay. 
 
Now I want you to go back to whoever you’re talking to and 
say, please, I would like some co-operation with the staff, with 
the funds that are there and the people are there. If you can’t get 
them to work overtime, despite the health care needs, I would 
think that if you have a great deal of support from unionized 
members or union leaders you could say, at least co-operate 
with the public. 
 
They shake their head; they don’t care. You see, the point is 
they don’t care. All they care about is the politics of it. 
 
I would ask you, I would ask you, please, please recognize that 
the new facility is there; recognize that hundreds of millions of 
dollars are being allocated, and the city of Saskatoon is doing 
better and better all the time. 
 
And I will finally say, Mr. Speaker, you have raised, and the 
other member has raised, the Health critic has raised with 
respect to information that has been inaccurate in the past  
very inaccurate. There was raised with respect to people who 
have said we haven’t been in contact with them. I have 
information, Mr. Speaker, to show that we have been in contact 
with them many times, and they weren’t telling it as it is. 
 
So I will only take your information as you give it, okay  as 
you give it. I will do the research and I will find out, because in 
many, many cases when I do respond, you ask the same 
question and the same question. All you want to do is inflame it 
rather than get some results. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Minister, I spoke to the Saskatoon 
Cancer Clinic this morning about this case, and this case 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1059 
 

was raised with the member from Elrose. So your information is 
there if you just care to find it. 
 
Now the question is simply this: is it acceptable, in your view as 
a government leader, is it acceptable that a woman is advised on 
April 28 that she may have to wait until July to get cancer 
treatment? Is that acceptable to you, as the Premier of this 
province, that someone should have to wait that long? And if 
it’s not acceptable, then, Mr. Premier, what are you going to do 
about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I’m going to call the hon. 
member on this one. I would be very surprised if you were 
receiving confidential health information form the cancer clinic 
on individual patients. And if you are . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  I don’t believe that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I don’t’ think anybody believes it. 
But if you aren’t, and if you’re making this up, or you’re telling 
me and you’re telling the public that you can go into the cancer 
clinic and you can get confidential information on patients . . . 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just say to the hon. member, you have tried 
this many times before. You don’t care, right? All you care 
about is the rhetoric. You’ve been wrong before. I don’t believe 
they’re giving you that kind of information. 
 
We are building this new facility, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
built it precisely to deal with line-ups, and we have put 
hundreds of millions more into health care to deal with it. And 
the hon. member stands in her place and she says, well I have 
this information on this confidential basis from the cancer clinic 
and health people, saying that these are the facts etc. I don’t 
believe it. 
 
I’m going to go back and check it out to find out if in fact 
confidential health information goes to the hon. member on an 
individual by individual basis, that is absolutely confidential. I 
don’t believe it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Supplementary. Mr. Premier, we don’t need 
long speeches form you. We don’t need you to question the 
integrity of other members of the legislature. That’s not going 
to help the people who are waiting for cancer treatment. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it acceptable that a woman who has a radical 
mastectomy on April 12, 1988, and requires radiation treatment, 
is it acceptable in this province that that woman has to wait 
perhaps until July? Is that acceptable to your government and to 
you as Premier? Answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. member told me 
in this legislature that she got confidential information on 
patients from the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. member  we’ll 
check Hansard  has said that she received 

confidential information from the cancer clinic on particular 
patients and this was the case. Now I’m telling her two things, 
two things  well three  once more about the new facility 
and the money we’re prepared to spend. 
 
I will also tell her that I don’t think it’s very acceptable, because 
she hasn’t raised it, that people who get paid will not work 
overtime to help the very person that you’re concerned about. 
And third, I don’t believe it. I don’t believe that you are 
receiving confidential information about patients, about their 
condition, from the cancer clinic as you said here in the 
legislature. so I could suggest to you: one, make sure that you 
are receiving confidential information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Supplementary. Mr. Premier, just to clarify 
the situation. I told you that I was in touch with the cancer 
clinic to confirm the information that I was given by this 
woman. The member from Elrose can confirm the information 
given by this woman. 
 
My question, which you haven’t answered, is this: is it 
acceptable that a woman goes . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. Give the hon. 
member an opportunity to finish her question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  The question is this: is it acceptable, a 
woman gets a radical mastectomy on April 12 of 1988, and she 
is advised that she may have to wait until July to get radiation 
therapy treatment. Is that acceptable, and is that your 
government policy? Answer the question, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has just 
said that she has confidential information confirmed by the 
cancer clinic. Now I will be very surprised if the cancer clinic is 
confirming confidential health information to the hon. member 
or anybody else, with respect to private concerns with respect to 
health. 
 
Secondly, I would say to the hon. member, she knows, she 
knows that if there is funds, if there are funds available, if 
there’s sufficient money there, there’s sufficient professional 
staff . . . and the only reason that this individual may not be 
getting treatment as quickly as she’d like is because people 
have refused to work  refused to work. And they know that if 
they’d work overtime . . . Now we’ll find out because the NDP 
are saying they would never advise the union leaders to do that. 
If the union leaders have put a ban on working overtime to help 
people because of health, Mr. Chairman, I’m going to find that 
out, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to find that out. 
 
And we’ll see who settles down, because if you have not 
received confidential information, and if in fact you are 
encouraging union members not to work at the cancer clinic, 
Mr. Chairman . . . and the public will be very happy to know 
that about the NDP. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1060 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Heavy Oil Upgrader at Lloydminster 
 

Mr. Solomon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier this afternoon. Last Friday afternoon after the 
legislature rose for the afternoon, your Energy minister, once 
again in your government’s typical speak and run fashion, 
announced a deal concerning the Husky heavy oil upgrader at 
Lloydminster. As of today, there has not been released the deal 
that you signed committing the Saskatchewan taxpayers to a 
loan guarantee of $191 million. 
 
When will you and your government make that agreement 
public, and what are Saskatchewan taxpayers getting in return 
for this $191 million loan guarantee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, obviously when the 
package is being built and all the parties are in place, then 
anything that we do will be tabled in the legislature and you 
will have full opportunity to go through it, probably in Energy 
estimates or in Crown Corporation, or in both. 
 
I can only say to the hon. member, you clearly questioned 
whether we would build an upgrader in Regina. You 
encouraged students to go out and look at it. You questioned 
whether we’d build a paper mill; you questioned whether we’d 
build packing plants; you questioned whether we would expand 
the turbine manufacturing. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, we are glad to 
do those things despite the fact that the opposition does not 
want to admit that we are creating all these projects. 
 
The deal will be tabled in the legislature when they finally put 
all the packages together, and we’d be very happy to share it 
with the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Solomon:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You’ve signed 
an agreement committing the Saskatchewan taxpayers to $191 
million, but you won’t release the deal. The taxpayers of 
Canada are being asked to sign another loan guarantee and put 
up $250 million or more in the same project. 
 
Loan guarantees are a claim against the taxpayer, Mr. Premier. 
Why won’t you tell the taxpayers who are taking the risk what 
they are getting in return for their $191 million risk capital? 
Why won’t you release the deal; what are you trying to hide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I mean, this is really 
interesting. We are building a project that’s going to provide 
from 3,000 actual jobs to 7,500 jobs across the country, make 
gasoline and diesel fuel out of our own oil, upgrade to have 
100,000 barrels a day processed in this province  an awful lot 
of economic activity, more economic independence and energy 
independence  and the member stands and says, what are you 
trying to hide. 
 
Well the public has waited and waited for so long for 
processing, manufacturing and diversification. For the first time 
in our life, Mr. Minister, we are now going to be making our 
own gasoline, our own diesel fuel out of our own heavy oil. 
Rather than like the NDP did, and buy it all 

from Alberta, we’re going to do it right here in Regina because 
of this upgrader. 
 
And when the Husky upgrader goes ahead, Mr. Speaker, we 
will have the same kind of capacity to have a 
process-manufacture product that can be for sale for us here in 
Saskatchewan for our use and for all over Canada; indeed, all 
over North America. And the member stands and says, are you 
going to hide this? Are you really going to hide this? 
 
I’ll tell you what . . . we have hid the fact from the public long 
enough. I think we’re going to have to tell them that under years 
and years of NDP administration . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Solomon:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
Prior to the last federal election campaign over four years ago, 
your government promised this upgrader at Lloydminster. 
You’ve since promised this project almost as many times as 
you’ve promised to balance the budget, and you’ve been 
equally as successful. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have no credibility on your promises. When 
are you going to stop with the federal pre-election public 
relation effort and start delivering on this project? When are we 
going to see shovels in the ground and real jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I mean, he has to stick to 
this script. He says, what about promises? We said that we 
would build an upgrader in Regina. We said that we would 
build a new rehab centre in Regina. We said, Mr. Speaker, that 
we would build a paper mill, and we said that you would have a 
brand-new packing plant, and we’d have recreational vehicles. 
We’d have turbine manufacturing. We said we’d provide rural 
gas, individual line service. Mr. Speaker, we said we’d help 
farmers and home owners against high interest rates. 
 
We had all kinds of suggestions from the public. That’s why 
they elected us in 1982 and again in 1986. They elected us in 
1984 and, Mr. Speaker, I’m fully confident when they see the 
brand-new upgrader in Lloydminster, they’re going to elect us 
again in 1990 or 1989 or 1991 as a result of building  
building for the people of Saskatchewan, not just complaining 
about the fact that there’s nothing that you could do about it. 
 
Mr. Solomon:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems the Premier is 
getting a bit upset, and I think he should calm down because 
these are very important questions to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Your Energy minister, Mr. Premier, on a new question, and she 
is here today, stated the other day that construction would start 
early next spring. Premier Getty of Alberta indicated that the 
construction of the project would commence this coming fall. 
 
We’d like to know in Saskatchewan what’s going on, Mr. 
Premier. It seems the left hand doesn’t know what the right 
hand is doing. Who’s telling the truth, your Minister 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1061 
 

of Energy or Premier Getty? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith:  Mr. Speaker, my apologies for being late. 
The agreement that has been signed allows for negotiations to 
carry on until the end of December in finding other private 
sector equity. After December we have the option of either 
setting into place another agreement or giving some thought to 
other ways and means of trying to get an upgrader into 
Lloydminster. 
 
This statement for the springtime, Mr. Speaker, was based on 
that December 31 deadline that is on this agreement. 
 
An Hon. Member:  What about the Premier of Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith:  Well the member says, what about the 
Premier of Alberta? He should be more concerned of what’s 
happening in Saskatchewan as opposed to Alberta. 
 
The good member says what are we getting in Saskatchewan 
for this, Mr. Speaker? What we are going to be able to do in 
Saskatchewan, for the second time, because NewGrade was the 
first time, and that is, for a change, have the jobs, the 
investment and the opportunity to upgrade our oil at home, as 
opposed to sending it south of the border or into eastern 
Canada. And I think that’s pretty significant, and I think the 
member would probably agree. 
 
Mr. Solomon:  A question now, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister 
of Energy. It seems to us on this side of the House that you’re 
talking about two different projects. The Premier of Alberta 
says one’s going to start in the fall, and you say one’s going to 
start in the spring. But Husky is seeking a further $344 million 
in private equity. But they’ve indicated publicly that they’ve 
expressed some doubt that that equity would be available. The 
Government of Alberta has, on the other hand, expressed some 
interest in taking an equity position. 
 
My question to you, Minister: are you and your government 
interested in taking an ownership position in this new upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith:  Mr. Speaker, the agreement that is in 
place for the financial arrangements of the upgrader will remain 
until December 31, and to put forth any kind of hypothetical 
suggestion of something else at this point in time is simply silly, 
in my opinion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Moratorium on Irrigation Project 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Water Corporation and for the 
environment of our province. It has to do with irrigation. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will be aware of a report by Professor Les 
Henry of the University of Saskatchewan, studying soil salinity 
and related problems to freshwater irrigation. I might add that 
you commissioned that study. You’ll also 

be aware that that study recommends an immediate and total 
moratorium on further irrigation projects in this province. 
 
So my question is this: are you going to follow the 
recommendation of the report and place a moratorium on 
irrigation projects, or are you going to ignore that report and its 
recommendation and proceed with your multimillion dollar 
irrigation projects? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, in reading the report of 
Professor Henry, you won’t find what the hon. member is 
saying, that it’s a complete moratorium on irrigation. 
 
What he’s indicating is the serious problem that has occurred in 
irrigation district no. 1, which was the irrigation district opened 
up when that government of the NDP were in power back in 
1971. That particular irrigation program was not well planned 
and not well researched right from day one. 
 
What he is saying is not that the new irrigation system that we 
are putting in is a problem, but rather that the old one that has 
been there for a while, that was not well designed, is having 
some difficulty. 
 
So he’s suggesting to us that we not do further irrigation in 
irrigation district no. 1, and until we have an assurance of 
directions that could be taken to improve that district, we likely 
will not proceed with further irrigation in that particular district. 
Others can go ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Time has expired. Order. Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 6  An Act Respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts Resulting from the Enactment 

of The Regional Colleges Act and The Institute Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the consequential amendments to certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Regional Colleges Act and 
The Institute Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would refer 
said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  We would not necessarily object to 
moving it to Non-Controversial Bills Committee, but we really 
have no knowledge of the Bill or what it states. I would suggest 
to the minister, let’s take a look at it, and in second reading  
before the second reading we can then move it. But we really 
think it’s only fair if the opposition has an opportunity to look 
at the Bill. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, please. We’re having a little difficulty 
getting these Bills introduced. I’d like some co-operation from 
the members. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1062 
 

Bill No. 7  An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement 
of Judgements Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgements Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to refer the 
said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  We would not intend to hold up any Bills 
that are non-controversial, but I will say that, as I have said 
under the other minister, we’re not going to give leave on first 
reading until we see the Bill. If the government can’t get its act 
together to show us the Bill, then we will want to see it and then 
decide on second reading whether we refer it or not. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Public Libraries Act, 
1984 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Public Libraries Act, 1984. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Could we have order in the House, 
please. We’re having some difficulty. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Fire Prevention Act, 
1980 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Fire Prevention Act, 1980. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10  An Act respecting the licensing of Persons 
who Perform Work of Electrical Installation or Sell 

Electrical Equipment 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the licensing of Persons who Perform Work of 
Electrical Installation or Sell Electrical Equipment. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 11  An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act 

1981 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13  An Act to amend The Denturists Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Denturists Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No 14  An Act to amend The Dental Profession Act, 
1978 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Dental Profession Act, 1978. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Optometry Act, 1985 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Optometry Act, 1985. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 1 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when 
we began these estimates I asked if you would supply me with a 
number of answers to some specific questions as it related to the 
government’s departments. I was wondering . . . We’ve had 
nearly a week now and I haven’t received them. I was 
wondering if you will be able to table those documents today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, in about an hour we 
should be able to have, I believe, the complete package ready. 
So we’ll get it over to you as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  And you also indicated, when I asked a 
question for a breakdown of the expenses on the equity 
financing document that was prepared, I was asking for a 
breakdown, and you have that and you were going to send it 
over  I was wondering, could you send that over? But also I 
would like to know what moneys were paid to members, of the 
government members who participated on that, and a 
breakdown of the members and the amount paid. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1063 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the members that were on 
the committee didn’t get paid any salary. They get paid their 
travel expenses, and that’s the meals and general expenses that 
go with it. But they’re not paid any additional salary. They’re 
just MLAs, so they would receive that as a normal course of 
events. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Could we get a breakdown of those expenses, 
Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  No, we don’t provide them by MLA. We 
will give you the total cost, and I’ll tell you that the expenses 
. . . the only money that was received is for expenses. They 
didn’t get paid a salary. And you can have the total amount and 
all the meetings they went to, the number of meetings held. But 
I can’t pick each individual MLA and say, well he had a peanut 
butter sandwich for lunch and somebody else had French fries, 
and so forth. I don’t think that’s relevant. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Then I understand, Mr. Minister, that you will 
be able to send over the lump sum of the five members that 
were on the committee. 
 
Then I would ask the minister, on the Saskatchewan agriculture 
cabinet committee on farm inputs, you made available the 
expenses for each member on an individual basis. So I guess if 
that’s the case with the input cost committee, I see no reason 
why that cannot be the same with the members for the equity 
financing committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  We have here the agricultural people that 
were on the road; the non-agricultural people I would not have. 
We will make an effort to go back and provide you comparable 
information received from other committees that has, in 
tradition, been released. 
 
The minister of rural affairs chaired the meeting. His expenses 
would be under rural affairs; I don’t have those. But any of 
those in Agriculture, we’ll be able to provide you. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, this is amazing. I mean, 
it’s not that hard of a question; it’s not that hard to get that 
information. I don’t understand why you’re trying to make it 
difficult for me just to access information that should be readily 
available to this House. 
 
I mean, you can go into each department yourself, and seeing 
that equity financing comes under the Department of 
Agriculture and you commissioned it, I think it’s your 
responsibility to get those figures. So I’d ask you again, could 
we have that breakdown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the first committee, I 
understand, was a cabinet committee, and the information 
provided by individual cabinet ministers may be one thing, 
compared to the information that would be MLAs that would go 
out, some under Agriculture and some that would be a cabinet 
minister like rural affairs. 
 
I’ll get all the information that we’ve got, provide you as much 
as I can on each of the information, and we’ll get it to you as 
quickly as we possibly can. So you can look at it 

and say, that’s good enough, or then you can make a judgement 
whether you want more or less. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, no, I guess I can’t accept 
that. All I’m asking for is a breakdown, by member, of their 
individual expenses when they were involved in the equity 
financing meetings that went around this province. It’s as 
simple as that. Would you provide that? Not just what you 
could come up with; I don’t want that, I want everything. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  We’ll give you standard, as the hon. 
member said, standard stuff, okay  what normally comes out 
when committees and MLAs go around, you’ll get the standard 
kind of information. I will get that together as quickly as I can 
and you will receive it. 
 
If you want unique things that are not received in a standard 
fashion, then we’ll probably be here for some time. But I’ll give 
you the standard information that normally goes out with the 
committee, whether they’re standing committees or cabinet 
committees or Agriculture committees or whatever. You will 
get the standard information. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Will that standard information, Mr. Minister, 
include all the moneys that cabinet minister . . . or that members 
received while on the meeting with the equity financing 
proposal that went around the country? Will that information 
include a breakdown of each member’s expenses, a total 
breakdown on an individual basis? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, it will include all those 
expenditures that the hon. member mentioned. I don’t know yet 
whether it will include each and every member broken out. So I 
will go back and find out what they have, and I will also have to 
go to other cabinet ministers that were there because this 
involved MLAs and some Agriculture people and some that 
were just plain cabinet ministers. Their expenditures are in their 
departments. 
 
So I’ll get you the standard information and hopefully it will be 
just what you want. But I say right now, I don’t have what the 
other ministers’ expenditures were here because this is 
Agriculture estimates. Their expenditures were covered under 
rural affairs, if it was the minister of rural affairs. In fact it was 
that cabinet minister who chaired the meeting. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, you’re making a very simple 
question awfully difficult. All I want to find out is what the 
expenses were for each member of the committee, including 
whether they’re a cabinet minister or whether they’re just an 
MLA. I want a breakdown on an individual basis  their 
expenses as it relates to the equity financing road show that you 
put on around the country  a total breakdown on an individual 
basis of each of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I can say to the hon. 
member, these are Agriculture estimates. I don’t have the 
information; an Agriculture minister doesn’t have it for 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1064 
 

the minister for rural affairs. You can ask him what his 
expenditures were on that committee. I have it for agricultural 
people, and we’ll provide it for the agricultural people. Okay? 
So I will do that. That’s all I can say to the member. 
 
These are Agriculture estimates. If the Minister of Health was 
on that tour, his expenditures would be under Health. If it’s 
rural affairs, it’s under rural affairs. This is Agriculture. I’ll 
provide you the agricultural portion of it, and that’s all that I 
have access today. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, who commissioned the Farm 
Finance For the Future study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  The Department of Agriculture, under the 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well then, Mr. Minister, if you commissioned 
the study, the expenditures were developed from you 
commissioning that study. I think that we have every right to 
know what the complete cost was, so will you supply it to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, if I commissioned a study 
and I had the federal government participate in it and they 
covered their expenditures, I couldn’t give them to you. I say 
. . . and this is the Department of Agriculture. I’ve got 
Agriculture expenditures, and when you run into rural affairs 
you’ll be able to get rural affairs expenditure on that. I don’t 
have them here, because Agriculture doesn’t pay the bills of 
rural affairs. 
 
That’s all I’m saying. You’ll get the information. You’ll get the 
standard information. I have it in Agriculture. That’s all I’ve 
got, okay? I’ll give you that stuff in Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Will you give us that information now, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I said that I’ll give it to you within the 
hour, and you’ll it within the hour. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  It’s pretty sad, Mr. Minister. We’re in 
Agriculture estimates, right. Expenditures that you 
commissioned . . . I mean, it’s pretty simple . . . simple remedy 
for you just to go and get that information, yet you refuse. I 
think that is just another indication of how uncooperative and 
how secretive and how difficult you try to make this whole 
procedure, instead of co-operating on a relatively 
straightforward, simple question. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I have a few more questions with regards to 
equity financing, and my first question is: will the Government 
of Saskatchewan provide any loans or an operating grant to the 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I can’t say, Mr. Chairman. We don’t have 
an equity mechanism working, and it may or may not. It may 
not involve any cash at all. It may be just a mechanism that 
allows people to cut a deal and be controlled locally. 
 
So I wouldn’t rule it out, but it hasn’t been ruled in because we 
haven’t done it. We have several proposals that are before us 
and several that are before the public. 

We are meeting on a daily basis with farmers and financial 
institutions and others to find out how we can best deal with the 
farm debt situation. Some include some cash injection by 
government, some don’t. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, with the problems that we 
have in this province that we’ve gone over for the last four 
days, barring yesterday, and you still don’t know what you’re 
doing  and I ask, okay, are you considering that the provincial 
government will provide loan and operating loans that are 
operating grants to an equity corporation, if requested by that 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, we may or may not 
provide it. That’s all I can tell the hon. member. And so we’re 
in the process of talking to farmers about setting up local 
associations to help in the intergenerational transfer of land. If 
farmers think that they might need some help from government 
to set that up, we wouldn’t rule it out. That’s all I can tell you. 
We wouldn’t rule it out and it may be something we’d consider, 
particularly if it’s local land associations set up by people as I 
described to you, say from Humboldt, that wanted some help. 
We haven’t ruled out helping them. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, will the provincial 
government be putting in lands held through lands branch into 
the equity corporation? Are you considering putting provincial 
lands into equity corporation in return for shares? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, right now I don’t even 
believe that it’s eligible to be tendered in any fashion that would 
fit equity corporation. So certainly at the outset, we would 
consider doing something with local farmers in their association 
that they may be able to be set up because of legislation or 
enabling legislation that we would provide here. 
 
Maybe some time down the road, if it looked like it was really 
working and it was a very doable proposition because farmers 
were receiving benefit and they wanted support on that basis, 
then again we haven’t ruled it in or ruled it out. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Let’s consider that you said it’s a possibility 
that provincial lands branch land would be put into the 
corporation. If that lands branch land was put into a 
corporation, would they be able to maintain the present number 
of years that they have in their present lease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t answer that. 
I mean, it’s pure speculation. If you want to know our . . . Are 
you asking about leases on land bank land? We’re not going to 
change the agreement that’s already in there. 
 
That isn’t to say that the ownership couldn’t be put in some 
other framework because the government owns it, and also the 
option to purchase. People might want the option to purchase. If 
we have government land now . . . I can say to the hon. 
member, we have sold records amounts of government land to 
the public, and they like that. Even during difficult times 
they’ve bought thousands and thousands of government acres. 
 
If they’re on land bank land and they want a new 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1065 
 

mechanism to purchase the land that would be favourable to 
them, an option  not forced to but an option  we certainly 
wouldn’t rule that out. So if they could get into a situation with 
the land association locally to buy some of their land bank land, 
for Heaven’s sakes, we would be very open to that suggestion, 
and obviously would be prepared to co-operate. 
 
But I can’t say what it would look like until it’s established, and 
what might be appealing to people who are on land bank. They 
may want the option to purchase because the value of the land 
is very reasonable, and they may think that’s a good idea. They 
probably have been anxious to buy it for some time if given the 
proper conditions. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, the problem that I am having 
here is that we’re trying to . . . I mean, you have a report that 
took a year to develop. The situation in rural Saskatchewan is 
not getting any better. And still, all I’m trying to establish here 
is some of the programs that are going to be put into the equity 
finance corporation as it appears that you’re pushing forward. 
 
And I mean, you can say, maybe yes, maybe no, if you want, 
but that doesn’t help me or doesn’t help the farmers of 
Saskatchewan to know what they have to look forward to. I 
mean, it’s the same old story. Here we go, over a long period of 
time the government trying to make up its mind, not telling the 
people what it’s doing. And all I’m trying to establish is some 
of the facts that . . . or some of your thoughts on the equity 
financing corporation. 
 
So I ask: will Farm Credit Corporation be putting land into the 
equity corporation in return for shares? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, that is certainly 
something that was discussed along with the agriculture credit 
corporation, the credit union, the banks and financial 
institutions. That’s the whole concept, and they’ve explored 
many models. 
 
So if the Credit Union Central has a model where they would 
participate this way, and it involves write down so that they can 
start over again  FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) has its own 
research that would show that, then clearly that’s what it’s all 
about. 
 
I mean, we’ve been through this for three days, so . . . I’ve gone 
over and over it with several of your members. That’s the 
principle, that you put it in there at a write-down value, and 
then you start over again, which is a lot better for the farmers 
and everybody else. 
 
So you’re asking me: would it be entertained that you’d have 
FCC land in there or credit union land? That’s exactly what 
they’ve gone through in the models. 
 
You were at the meeting and you saw the values that they put it 
in. And you keep asking that same question. How many times 
does a person have to give you that illustration? I mean, you 
were there; you saw it on the blackboard and on the slides. 
 
That’s what they do. They put the land in, write it down at a 
lower level, and the farmer can pay it off with higher 

cash value  cash operating funds. It’s just that 
straightforward. 
 
So the illustrations have been there; we’ve been through it for 
several days. Yes, that’s the thing that the financial institutions 
have talked about in even exploring this, is that they would put 
their land in, because it’s not getting paid for. The farmer has a 
certain equity; they have an equity  start over again at a lower 
interest rate and lower payments, because your cash flow is 
improved, and everybody has a chance. The way it is, at the 
high levels that you got originally, you don’t have a chance. 
 
You’ve heard me answer that question days and days and days 
in a row. And I’ve said the same thing to you: yes, that’s the 
principle. The principle, once more, is that you put your equity 
in and somebody else does, and you start at a lower rate, and it 
makes it easier for you to make the payments, and the people 
that have some equity perhaps can get something back over a 
20, 25-year period. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well I think the problem, Mr. Premier, is the 
fact that we’ve been going over this, and the reason that we’re 
still asking questions on it is, you just give the same rhetorical 
answer, and we don’t know any more now than we knew 
before. 
 
The farmers out there have to know what they’re looking at. 
The problem that I’m having is the length of time which you’re 
having to go through in order to establish this, and unable to 
answer any questions in any manner that would give us any 
clues to what form this corporation would take. 
 
Mr. Minister, under the equity financing scheme, would 
investors receive any tax credits for moneys that they put into 
the corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  There’s just no way to decide that and to 
define it to date. We may find that if there’s a local association 
that would want to facilitate something like this, they may come 
to us and say, would you encourage those that have money in 
the bank to help us out, to invest here in this agricultural 
situation so that in fact we can improve it for farmers and the 
lenders alike. 
 
So it . . . I believe the report of the group that went around said, 
if you . . . if there are any incentives, make sure those same 
benefits that go to the taxpayer go to the farmer at the same 
time. So what they said, is, let’s have corresponding incentives. 
If there’s incentive for people to invest here to help me, then I 
want to see the same kind of benefit for me in the agricultural 
sector. And I think that’s only fair. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  So what you’re saying then is if there’s any 
tax credits given to investors who invest in the corporation, the 
farmers will be given an equal amount in some form or other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, that’s the 
recommendation of the report, and that could show up in a 
multitude of ways. It could show up in a longer, lower-run, 
fixed interest rate; it could show up in the way they structured 
the debt; it could show up in many ways. Because if there is an 
incentive for people to invest their 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1066 
 

funds in agriculture, then you could have a corresponding 
incentive built into the structure that was going to service 
agriculture. So the recommendation made perfect sense to me. I 
mean . . . and you’ve had the chance to read it, and I’m sure 
you’d agree with that. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, the land that’s placed in the 
corporation in some cases will be owned jointly through shares, 
if I’m correct. Who will pay the taxes on that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Under the concept that has been set up, 
the owner would pay the taxes. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  So the owner . . . the definition of the owner 
would be, in a case where the farmer put some land in, would 
be a person who holds the majority of shares in that parcel of 
land. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the equity was held by 
most likely the farmer and somebody else, the land association. 
So if he put half of it in and had half the equity and the land 
association had the other half of the equity, they would most 
likely split the taxes on the basis of who owned whatever was in 
there. I mean, that’s just shared ownership. That’s all a 
partnership would need, so I don’t think it would be any more 
complicated than that. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, the Peat Marwick report 
suggested that there should be a Saskatchewan Stock Savings 
Plan set up. Would farmers be eligible to participate in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I would think that any shareholders 
or anybody would be, certainly in agriculture, and farmers 
would be eligible. I don’t see any reason why they would not be 
eligible, unless you’ve got some reason why they wouldn’t be. 
I’d appreciate you advising me. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well the study indicates that farmers’ shares 
would not be eligible for the Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan. 
Is that . . . are you going to be following through with that 
suggestion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  In my view, Mr. Chairman, that if a 
farmer buys shares, his shares should be eligible for the same 
tax treatment as anybody else that buys them. It seems to me 
would be fair. Now if you would rather not make farmers 
eligible to get the same benefits as others, I would be interested 
in your view on that. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, you say, if a farmer buys shares. 
But if a farmer puts land in and receives shares for that, those 
shares would not be eligible. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I may get the hon. 
member to re-ask the question, but I’ll separate it out and then 
he can see whether he wants to ask it again or not. 
 
We have the farmer that may own a certain amount of equity in 
the land association, and then you’ve got others that would own 
equity; it might be split 50-50. If somebody comes in and buys 
some equity, they buy it from the land association and they’re 
entitled to 

Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan. It doesn’t mean that they 
bought the farmer’s equity, or any part of it. 
 
On the other hand, if he wants to buy some of that equity that’s 
in there, then, as an individual, he will be entitled to the 
Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan if that was something that 
was entitled to the public. So as an investor, you’re entitled to 
it. On the reverse situation, are you wondering if somebody 
buys some, whether they’re getting a hold of the farmer’s 
equity? No, they’re not. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well that’s fine, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
think probably what will happen when farmers start selling their 
land, or putting land into the equity corporation, the immediate 
response would be to put the poorest land in there and retain 
your most productive land. 
 
Are there going to be any criteria or limits or any rules as to the 
quality of land or the amount of poor quality land that the 
corporation will take on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I’m not sure that I understand the 
question. I mean, you’re saying that somebody in Melfort that 
has land under the older system would be 5,000 a quarter, could 
play this game, and somebody that was farming very, very light, 
sandy land, could not play it. What are you asking? A farm is a 
farm, and it’s assessed on the value of the land and what it can 
produce and its productivity, whether it’s on light soil, brown 
soil, dark soil, grey, you know what I’m talking about. 
 
So why would you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  No, he doesn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, maybe he doesn’t. Why would you 
discriminate on the basis of land type or soil type? A farmer 
does different things with different kinds of land as to 
communities and so forth. I don’t know if you’ve really thought 
that through very carefully. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’ve thought it through 
quite carefully. Because if I’m a farmer with six quarters of land 
and I want to participate to get some cash back out of the 
corporation, and out of those six quarters of land I have two 
quarters that are marginal land, whether it be alkali or whether it 
be light sandy land, whatever, I would make the decision to put 
the poorest two quarters in and retain the most productive 
quarters. 
 
I think the problem might be that the investors, if there’s no cap 
put on  and I suggest that in order for this thing to work, you 
might have to put an amount on the number of poor quarters 
that are put into this  because the investors are going to look 
at it and say, look, this unproductive or lesser productive land is 
not going to . . . Why should I invest in it if there’s no good, 
high quality land in it, because that land, the price would be 
lower, you know, all the time? 
 
So is there any chance that there will be a cap or a certain 
amount of acres put on poorer productive land that might go in 
the corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the question doesn’t 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1067 
 

make a great deal of sense in that you do different things with 
different kinds of land, and their productive value and their sale 
value are different based on their productivity. 
 
Now you’re telling me that land that was, say, somewhat alkali 
or in bush, would be valued at the same price of land that was 
nice and flat and heavy soiled, and they’d both go in at the same 
value. So you’ve got it all figured out; you’d just put in your 
cheap land, but charge the same as your valued land? 
 
I mean, what’s the difference in productivity if the price reflects 
what it’s worth? There’s no difference. You haven’t thought 
through that very carefully. It doesn’t matter what kind of land 
goes in if it’s priced properly. I mean that’s the whole key. 
When the NDP bought land bank land, evidently they went and 
they paid one price for sand and another price for stuff at 
Melfort. I mean, was there a limit to how much poor or high or 
other land you deal with? I mean, you obviously haven’t 
thought through that very carefully. 
 
So, no, it depends on what you price it at; clearly, what people 
are prepared to . . . (inaudible) . . . If you took very expensive 
land and you didn’t depreciate it at all, no write-down, nobody 
would invest in it if you put all the good land in. Right? Of 
course not. If you took some land that was worth 200 bucks an 
acres because it had bush on it, and it dropped down to $50 an 
acre, there may be an awful lot of people that would invest in it. 
It’s all based on what it can produce and at what value you 
should put it in, what values that it was to start with. 
 
And financial institutions will tell you that. In some cases 
they’re in trouble on very poor land because it was way 
over-valued; in some cases they’re even in more trouble on very 
good land  very, very good land. And you’ll find that in 
communities. 
 
The member from Regina Centre, who grew up next to me out 
north of Moose Jaw, knows exactly what high-valued land can 
do to you if it’s over-priced. We went through that example for 
two hours the other night. So it depends on its value. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, the Peat Marwick study 
indicates that the corporation . . . I’ll just read what it says: 
 

The farmers will want to sell off their poorest land first and 
the corporation must refuse to take an excess amount of 
poor land. 

 
And I think that’s . . . this is very important. I know that the 
value of the land will . . . of poor land will be less than the value 
of good land; the amount the farmer receives, it won’t be all the 
same. 
 
But as an investor, to lure investment in here, into your 
corporation, I think they’re going to want to be looking at the 
more productive land for a number . . .  the price, you know, 
you just mentioned, the price of the best, of the highest quality 
land. And that’s the point, that that land will . . . the gap 
between the buying price and the selling price could be much 
greater than the gap between the  

buying and selling price of poor land, because you know it’s not 
proportional. 
 
So I ask you: will there be any limits put on  let’s make it 
simple  any land? Will any land in the province be available 
to go into this corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I won’t go through this. 
I’ll just say that individual associations, if they’re set up locally, 
will be able to manage their own. And if they want to buy 
because it’s a relatively reasonable thing to do to take pasture 
land and livestock land and land that can be used for various 
combinations of purposes, and that’s the best value, then I 
encourage them to take for the best values. 
 
If some of it is just fairly highly assessed flat, black soil, then 
they’ll be taking that. Who am I to decide what the value is? I 
mean that’s what you go in there and you price it for. 
 
It is not unlike your colleague there, day before yesterday he 
was saying, well if you could decide in here how you’re going 
to run this mechanism, then I could decide right here in Regina 
whose crop I would take off on what days. 
 
I mean, the value is based on what you can do with the land. 
You may find that it would be in your best interest to deal with 
all marginal land, because it had dropped so much in value that 
that’s the place that you’d want to invest. You know that in any 
kind of investment you will buy property, be most anxious to 
buy it, if it’s dropped the most in a relative sense. It doesn’t 
matter whether it’s good property in the sense of being high 
quality brick house versus a poorly built wooden house, if the 
value is there, that’s what you’re interested in. 
 
So I would just say we’d leave it up to the local individual 
associations to decide what they think is the best situation that 
they could deal with. And certainly, if you talk to the local 
credit union they’ll tell you. They will differentiate themselves. 
Some cases it would be mostly land that’s in livestock. In other 
cases it would be mostly land that would be for straight grain. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, we’re not talking about 
the value. What I asked you simply was: will all agricultural 
lands be eligible to be placed into an equity financing 
corporation, or will it not? Simply and straight  will all 
agricultural land be able to be put into the  at the discretion of 
the farmer  be put into the equity corporation, or will there be 
rules that say certain lands, for whatever reason, may not be 
able to go to this corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, you didn’t  in all 
respect  you didn’t ask that. You said, would there be limits 
on poor land and limits on some other land. Then you said, 
we’re not talking value. If value isn’t of concern then nobody 
would care. 
 
So I would just say, in my view and in theory, we would leave 
it up to the individuals to decide. I wouldn’t want to limit them 
out of pasture land that could be there or the amount of grain 
land that would be in there. Leave it wide 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1068 
 

open. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Chairman, I just want . . .  We’ve gone 
through, in some detail, in respect to the equity financing 
proposal, Mr. Premier, but I want to zero in on a few ideas here. 
 
First of all you indicate that there will be write-down in value of 
the land that goes into the equity financing corporation, which 
is referred to as the Saskatchewan farm trust corporation, I 
believe, in the Peat Marwick study or proposal. You say that the 
land that goes in will go in at a write-down value. 
 
I’m going to ask you then: who is going to absorb the 
write-down value? Is the financial institutions, and do they take 
the write-down? Do they absorb the write-down in the value, 
because many of their mortgages are probably higher  there’s 
a higher amount of mortgage than the current value of the land. 
That’s what you said the other night, that the land has dropped 
50 per cent over the last number of years. 
 
Now let us assume that the credit union has a farmer out there, 
and you say he’s in difficulty. And the credit union has a 
choice. You say this land will go into the equity financing 
corporation at a write-down value. Who will absorb the loss in 
that instance? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I have the information that your 
colleague was asking for, so I’ll send it across. 
 
Obviously, the person who has lent the money out and is not 
getting paid is going to have to take the hit, as it were . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, no. If you’re the farmer and I’m 
the financial institution, I lend you $400,000, and you tell me 
you can’t make the payments, then what I’m going to have to 
do is take this and say, I’ve got to sell it to somebody. And the 
market value, as you know, is about half that, so I’m going to 
take the hit. Rather than do that, they may say, let’s cut a deal, 
all right? 
 
Let’s get in it together, start over again at some lower value, 
and we’ll work it out over time. Which means, for farmers, 
what you’re going to have to have is the co-operation between 
the financial institutions and the farmers so that you can have a 
mechanism by where they will do better than just saying, well I 
guess it’s all over. And the financial institutions are going to get 
hurt that way, as you know. 
 
And the farmer’s saying, look, I want a farm but I can’t pay you 
something that was equivalent to $7 wheat for $1,000 an acre. 
We’ve got to start somewhere fresh, so let’s take a crack at it. 
He’s made some payment, but it’s just no more than interest. 
The bank’s going to have to take some heat, and take a hit and 
take some cuts, and they’re doing it every day. What we’re 
looking at is a mechanism that allows them to do that with as 
little hassle as possible so that they can help each other. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Why are you . . . if there’s going to be a 
write-down, Mr. Premier, and you say the banks are doing it 
every day, then this farmer that is in serious 

trouble should be able to, under your scenario, maintain his title 
at the reduced value. 
 
Why wouldn’t the institution go directly to him, rather than 
going in, giving up all his ownership, his title  and title to 
land is a very, very important ingredient to farmers? Why 
wouldn’t you continue this and maybe even facilitate it, by 
federal and provincial government or Farm Credit Corporation, 
so that the farmers that are in serious trouble, that you do 
facilitate a write-down and the farmer starts at that reasonable 
rate you say, and has title to his land and can work to pay it off 
and maintain his title, rather than becoming in essence a . . . no 
title because the title gets transferred into the equity financing 
corporation? That’s what it is. And he ends up with a little share 
 that’s what he does  just like Pioneer Trust. 
 
People of Saskatchewan here invested in Pioneer Trust. They 
bought shares. Well I’ll tell you, it didn’t help when the 
management was in with the executive officers of Pioneer 
Trust, and holding that share didn’t help them. That’s really 
what you’re doing, is setting up a corporation with 
shareholders. And I’ll tell you, investors aren’t going in there 
just to help farmers because that’s not the game they play. They 
play the game of wanting to make money and control it. That’s 
what they want. Money, they want. Profit. They’re run by it. 
And I’ll tell you, the farmer, I can’t see how they’re going to 
get a deal on it because they’re going to lose thousands o  
farmers are going to be, essentially, just share-croppers, renters. 
 
And I ask you, who decides all the details of the rental rate? 
Who decides whether he can remain as a tenant? Who decides 
how long the lease will be for? Obviously it’s somebody that 
goes and invests in the corporation, I would think, would have a 
board of directors that would want to make policy. I can’t see 
them putting the money in there and saying to the farmer that 
has had to go into it: you run it the way you did before. 
 
So I ask you those specific question: who will be making the 
decisions? Because what you have is, farmer may have a few 
shares, but outside equity will be with the investors. And do 
they not . . .  do you not propose that they have a board of 
directors and that they make the policy? I ask you that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I could say to the 
hon. member, as I did to the member from Regina Centre, we 
can decide the rules here in this House. I mean, it will be 
Saskatchewan law and if you want a mechanism, if you want a 
mechanism that would encourage this process to take place so 
that it would help farmers so that he has the hammer and the 
right to buy it. 
 
Why shake your head? Why not try? Why not say that if you 
can take it, as I described to the member from Regina Centre a 
couple of days ago, if you can get a break from these farmers, 
up to $90-some an acre in cash-flow benefit, and we set the 
rules so that, as you said  I’ll just go along with you here  
you said, look, let’s design it so the farmer can own it and the 
farmer has the right to buy it. 
 
I will say to the hon. member, now with the bank or the credit 
union, the farmer doesn’t have title. The bank holds 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1069 
 

the title until he pays it off. All we’re saying is that you share it. 
What you do is that I have so much equity and you do. As I buy 
more of it, I have more equity and eventually I’ll own the whole 
thing. 
 
Now you, I’m sure, would like the farmer to have the right to 
buy it all, over time. That’s what we’re both looking for, right 
 own it over time. You can’t give somebody the total title and 
all of its value if he doesn’t own it, or else we’d just hand out 
titles. I mean, you’re a lawyer; you should know that. He who 
pays for it has the title. When you lend money to somebody  
like the banks now have got title to a lot of land, and the farmer 
gets that title when he finally makes all his payments. 
 
He’s saying, I can’t make my payments. So what we’re saying 
is, let’s cut a deal at, say, half the price and we’ll start over 
again. The farmer has some equity in it, the bank has some 
equity in it, or somebody does, and we’ll work it out over time, 
and the farmer will have the ability to buy it at his pace that he 
can afford, and his cash flow is improved. 
 
As I pointed out yesterday, and I’m sure you heard the example, 
where if you had land that was $800 an acre at 8 per cent, that’s 
$64 an acre. If it went to 16 per cent interest rates, he’s gone up 
to 128. But we write it down to 400 at 8 per cent, you know 
what he’s got; he’s got $32 an acre. He’s got a huge savings in 
cash flow that he can afford. That’s all we’re trying to do. 
 
You and I can design, let’s say, the index of his payments. His 
payments are based, as they’ve done with the FCC, for example 
 commodity based. Take all the commodities that he can 
grow on that farm. Here’s the price of commodities, here’s the 
land values, and here’s the formula. You’ve done it with the 
rent on land bank. Design the formula, you and I could sit here 
and design the formula that would allow for the rent to be there, 
or his payments. 
 
He pays more than that, he gets more share of ownership. If he 
gets lucky and prices go up and he can put a big bunch against 
it, he might own two-thirds of it within three years. 
 
But we’ve given him the option of more cash flow to make 
those payments, and he can look at the formula that you and I 
would design and say, here’s my payments; I know my cash 
flow is way up; the financial institution is happy because they’d 
just have to go to court and fight me; and both of them are 
paying lawyers. They don’t want to do that. They want to cut a 
deal and get on with it, and this could facilitate it. 
 
We could set up a mechanism. If you can’t maybe stretch your 
imagination, just go back to the formula used for deciding what 
rent you pay on land, and you’ve, I’m sure, been in cabinet 
talking about that, and there is a mechanism there. Base it on 
that. Base it on a basket of commodities and you run that over 
time. As commodities go up, his payments go up. if they go 
down, the payments go down. The investor knows that. 
 
I have one last point. When Al Blakeney was in the legislature, 
the former member from Regina Elphinstone, 

he agreed with me that this could be very good for farmers. 
Then he asked the question, and I’m just paraphrasing: we’d 
have to make it attractive enough to get people to invest in it 
that were non-farmers. What I’m saying to you is that we can 
do that. We already see the benefits for farmers. Financial 
institutions are saying right now they’d rather cut a deal than go 
to court. 
 
So what we’re doing is that can we find this an attractive 
mechanism for investors that have pension money so that 
indeed, as you know and I described to the hon. member the 
other day, they can get a return that they know is fixed, and 
we’ll design the formula that you and I are just talking about, 
and some appreciation in the portfolio that they’ve bought, and 
that happens with land values. 
 
Now you couldn’t find a much better time to look at that than 
right now. Farmers know that; you know that, I’m sure, being 
from rural areas. So the mechanism is there. It’s a big help for 
cash flow. And I’m sure if we had some co-operation between 
your colleagues and our colleagues here, we could put together 
legislation that would facilitate this. 
 
Total control by the farmer  total control, controlled by local 
associations or Saskatchewan associations, Saskatchewan 
legislature. Why do you not want to try? 
 
We set the rules here in this House. We design the legislation. 
Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously they don’t want to . . . they 
obviously don’t want to try very hard because the money is 
there and the mechanism, and farmers want it written down and 
financial institutions are telling us that they want the chance. 
 
And the member just shakes his head so he must . . . I won’t 
pursue it too long, but I mean, if you want to pursue it, you 
want to link to trust companies and so forth, then we can get 
into arguments about land bank and your solutions and you can 
wail on me and trust companies and I’ll do it on socialism. 
 
I’m just trying here on behalf of farmers  farmers. Don’t 
laugh. Farmers are in some trouble and they need some help 
and some suggestions. The suggestions that are forwarded here 
are sincere suggestions to help farmers. 
 
And if I could have any co-operation from members opposite to 
design some legislation on the formula  and the question was 
on this formula  could you do it? How would you set it? We 
can design that, here in this House. There are the rules and if the 
people want to participate, as they did in renting land, then of 
course they’ll take it and it’s under provincial law. And that’s 
the way it should be. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Well do you intend to get outside investment 
into this corporation? What is the nature of the expectations of 
investment that will be poured into this equity financing 
corporation? From where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, obviously it would depend 
on what we can design here in Saskatchewan with the 
co-operation of the opposition members, whether we get 
Saskatchewan people to participate, or they get pension funds to 
participate. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1070 
 

And at the outset I can say, Mr. Chairman, we don’t even need 
money. We just need an association that would allow people to 
do this. You don’t need to exchange any money. They just both 
say, I’m going to be a part of this equity corporation and we’ll 
share in it over time at a given interest rate and a formula. 
 
Credit union could cut those deals right now if we had 
provincial legislation  right now, sir. You know they can’t do 
it because they can’t take an equity position. If we allowed that 
to happen, then they could write her down and start all over 
again. You know that. So we need to provide them at least the 
flexibility to do that without any money. 
 
Now if you do that plus allow people to invest here, you could 
have hundreds of millions of dollars in cash going into 
agriculture. But you stand there and do not even . . .  well it 
seems to me you’re not even allowing us to even entertain the 
possibility of that kind of help for farmers. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, you’ve been trying to sell this, 
and you haven’t done a very good job because you’ve been 
turned down across this province. And farmers after farmer has 
turned it down. The Credit Union Central has turned it down. 
And you sit here saying what a marvellous solution that you 
have  that you’re going to take all the titles away from the 
farmers and you’re going to let large outside investment come 
in. That’s what you have held back. 
 
I’m going to ask you, why would investors want to invest? 
They would want to invest because of speculation in the 
appreciation of the land. That’s what they’d be going in for, and 
you’re also indicating the other night that you’re going to 
guarantee them a return on their investment. Now that’s good 
for the banks and that’s good for the people that have lots of 
money. But I’ll tell you, it doesn’t help the farmer very much. It 
doesn’t help the farmer very much. 
 
Well I’ll ask you, Mr. Premier, if you’re so confident, why 
haven’t you launched it? That’s the question I ask you. Why 
haven’t you put it out two years ago if this is a solution? Where 
were you when the farmers were going broke? Eleven per cent 
are insolvent; 28 per cent, your own report indicates, in serious 
financial problems. If it’s the solution, and you’re right, and it’s 
best for the farmers, why haven’t you launched it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, the NDP 
had the same people go to the meetings all over the province 
and stand up in front of the television camera and say exactly 
what the NDP in here told them to say, that this is exactly what 
it is  they’re going to take our property, they’re going to take 
our equity. I mean, you don’t care. If you cared you’d try with 
me. 
 
I mean, if we had some co-operation from the opposition we 
could do an awful lot more. But the opposition holds it back and 
holds it back. They won’t even allow us, won’t even allow us to 
entertain the concepts about standing up here and saying, 
there’s no work. You’re just going to take if from farmers. I 
mean, you heard them. So I mean, they won’t entertain the 
principle of it, the principle of it. 

Mr. Chairman, I would say to the hon. member: he asked me 
how we could design the index; I told him. Then he stands up 
and said, well why would you invest in it. I said, you invest in it 
for two reasons. One, because you could get a guaranteed 
return. And we’ll set up the index of what that return is, and 
some appreciation on that portfolio over time. That’s exactly 
what you would do. And the farmer owns it all because he can’t 
pay for it now at $1,000; if you made it at 400, then he could. 
 
So he won’t accept any possibility of helping him because it 
might work and then he wouldn’t have credit for it. Well I think 
that he’s being very, very unfair to the farmers of Saskatchewan 
not wanting to help. I’m really disappointed in the member 
from Quill Lakes, and frankly the member from Humboldt, who 
would stand in their place and deny farmers this kind of a 
write-down, this kind of low interest rate loans, this kind of 
ability to pay it back over time with tremendous increase in 
cash flow, and they won’t even acknowledge that it’s a 
possibility. They just stand in their place and deny them even 
the right to do this. 
 
(1530) 
 
Many farmers would like to see it happen. It reminds me, Mr. 
Chairman, when interest rates were 20 per cent they wouldn’t 
consider any help either. All they’d consider and say, well I 
guess we’ll have to buy your land for the government. 
 
Now look, we can go over and over that. We are approaching 
the 21st century. We’re not back in the third century or the 13th 
century where the government owned everything. We want to 
modernize. When this is modern agriculture you have to look at 
new financing mechanisms, new technology in agriculture, 
modernize health care, modernize education. We have to be in 
the global village, not way, way back to where the government 
owned all the land. The farmers have told us even in difficult 
times they want to own more land. This can facilitate the 
farmers owning the land. 
 
You and I could design the legislation to make sure they got it 
all, and all the power to control it. But you won’t even entertain 
that. I mean, you won’t even entertain the principle. And you 
say, well, where’s your legislation. Where is the legislation? 
 
You have never even acknowledged that it’s a possibility; 
you’ve never even acknowledged it. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m extremely disappointed that the 
members opposite would do two things: one, speak against the 
possibility all the time; and secondly, on various kinds of 
symposiums and counselling and meetings with farmers, I 
mean, we heard the same rhetoric from the same farmers that 
obviously got advice from the members opposite to say, we 
don’t want any part of this. 
 
They know very well  I’ll just close on this  they know 
very well that the bank’s headquarters are in Toronto. And the 
banks have shareholders all across Canada and the banks own 
the title. They know that. So who do they 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1071 
 

think they’re kidding? 
 
The banks finance most of the farm land here. And they said, oh 
we’d never want to do anything a little bit different. I think an 
awful lot of farmers would like to be able to finance land from 
one generation to another without just going to the bank or 
without just saying, I’ve got to have the government own my 
land. That’s all you’ve given them. 
 
You said, well this new mechanism with the bank is just fine. 
The banks own the title and the banks have shareholders all 
across the country, and you seem perfectly happy with that. 
 
I’m telling you, there’s a lot of farmers that would like an 
alternative. They would like an alternative. This don’t make any 
sense. Do the banks own the title? You’re a lawyer; do you 
know that? Banks own the title until you pay it off, and banks 
have a lot of title right now. Farmers don’t want that. They want 
an alternative. We’re asking for co-operation for an alternative, 
and I would just seek the co-operation from the member 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Well, Mr. Premier, every time you get cornered 
in, you can’t even articulate what your own report said. I want 
to ask you; is it accurate that the Peat Marwick proposals on 
one of the shortcomings, has cited that farmers with the most 
serious debt problems will in fact not be indeed eligible for 
participation in the equity financing corporation? That’s what 
the Peat Marwick report indicates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  It’s Peat Marwick  Peat Marwick. All 
across Canada it’s called Peat Marwick. It’s a Peat Marwick 
study. 
 
In my view, Mr. Chairman, that whether a farmer has 50 per 
cent equity or 10 per cent equity or any combinations, they 
could be eligible for significant assistance in a plan that you 
could set up control by local people. 
 
So that if it is 75 per cent equity owned by the financial 
institution, 25 per cent equity owned by the farmer, they start on 
that basis. Here’s the new deal, let’s go. 
 
If it was 10 per cent by the farmer and 90 per cent by the 
financial institution, here’s the ability for him with a cash flow 
payment to buy it all  to buy it all. Right now he can’t do that 
because he bought at a very high price, interest rates went 
higher and he got caught. 
 
So I’m saying that I could see the possibility where it could 
help virtually all farmers  most of them. And I would not 
make any arbitrary line where you could not keep various kinds 
of land in it, whether it’s livestock land or whether it’s bush 
land or whether it’s top-notch grain land, or people with various 
kinds of debt/equity situations. I would include them all 
conceptually, at least in theory, and I’m at least happy that 
you’ve moved to that to say that you may show some interest in 
this, that if people are in some difficulty, it will be the people in 
difficulty that need this. 
 
Precisely those that are in difficulty would come in and say, 
look, I don’t want to go to the lawyers, I want to cut a 

deal with you, let’s do it. And you know they’re doing it every 
day. I want to see us with a situation where I can buy it back. I 
have the right to buy it and I’ve got a certain percentage equity 
and I’m going to buy more, and my cash flow is up so I can put 
that against equity, not just interest. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, I asked you why, if you’re so 
confident in this, and the farmers are in support of it and it’s 
going to completely solve their problems, whey haven’t you 
launched it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I am, and I’ve asked for 
the co-operation of the members opposite for day after day after 
day after day, and they won’t even consider it. They just stand 
up there and say, no co-operation. They just say, no, I reject it. 
Inside and outside the legislature  no idea that they would 
support legislation here that would help. 
 
And he asks me why it isn’t proceeding as fast as he would like. 
He doesn’t want it to proceed, let’s make it very clear. You 
haven’t shown me that you’re prepared to co-operate to allow 
the credit union to do this. 
 
You’ve stood in your place in this House and said, I’ll talk to 
the credit unions, I’ll tell them not to do this; I know people in 
the credit unions. I mean, you’ve done that yourself. You said, 
don’t get near this. 
 
All right, I will say to the hon. member, a little bit of 
co-operation. I think and believe we could design legislation 
that would facilitate a great deal of help to farmers and ranchers 
across this province, and particularly, Mr. Chairman, those that 
have financial difficulties from north, south, east, and west. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, I asked you why you haven’t 
launched this program. You say you have the banks, and it will 
be good for them and it will be good for the financial 
institutions, it’ll be good for the farmers. They’ll locally control 
it, they’ll have the same as ownership, they’ll have a cash flow. 
 
I’m asking you: why haven’t you launched it? What are you 
waiting for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, when we bring the 
legislation forward, I would respectfully ask the hon. member to 
treat it at least fairly — at least fairly — so that when we’re 
looking at the legislation that will be necessary to facilitate this, 
that you will say . . . the first thing that you would say is that, I 
want to see real help to farmers; and secondly, I want to see 
some laws that are in there that will make sure the mechanism 
works fairly for everybody; and third, that we want to increase 
the cash flow in agriculture so that in fact we can remove some 
of the debt and replace it with some equity. 
 
If I can have some sort of assurance of co-operation of at least 
an attitude from the opposition that just drags their heels on so 
many things, that gives me an idea that the faster I bring it in, 
the better. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  This is a remarkable turn-about by the Premier. 
When he slashed and cut and devastated the 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1072 
 

drug program, he didn’t ask us for his co-operation in designing 
a health care consistent with the wishes of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I’m asking you here . . . you’re the government, Mr. 
Premier. You can’t even put down a specific proposal, how it 
would work. You’ve said that today. 
 
You talk about local people controlling it. And what does that 
mean? Give me the scenario. Give me a theoretical scenario of 
how you would set it up with outside investment, and how you 
expect to get investors in there, who are speculators  they 
could care less about the farmers. All they want to do is go in 
and take profit, get the land, and when it appreciates, they want 
to fill their pockets. 
 
That’s what they want to do. And that’s what you’re putting the 
farmers into the threat of. Putting them in the hands of the 
speculators. Bad enough with the banks. But now you’re going 
to have shares you propose to sell on the Toronto Stock 
Exchange, if you can feature it. People from outside of 
Saskatchewan having shares in the land of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what he has said. That’s the proposal that he has put 
forward across Saskatchewan. And look at the writings. Hong 
Kong people, ready to come in with a hundred million people. 
Farm Credit Corporation actively working with them. Good buy 
 this land in Saskatchewan  to the multimillionaires over in 
Hong Kong. And that’s what you’re playing to here. 
 
Now if you aren’t, and if you’re honest, then why don’t you 
launch the programs? Simple question. What’s stopping you? Is 
it that you need our co-operation? Why, why did you not ask for 
your co-operation when you launched the production loans? 
You didn’t ask us whether that was a good programs or whether 
it should be universal; you launched it. 
 
Now if you are interested in the farmers, I’ll tell you, you can’t 
lose if you’ve got the solution. Go ahead and launch it. And I 
ask you: when do you intend to bring it in to save the farmers, 
the 40 per cent that are in desperate shape right now? Why 
don’t you launch it? When will you launch it? Will you launch 
it during this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I would think that the 
public watches this Assembly on television often enough to 
know that we should be able to be mature enough, mature 
enough, to sit down and work out an arrangement that would 
help farmers. 
 
An Hon. Member:  I get a lot of calls . . . (inaudible) . . . my 
boy. I get a lot of calls. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, he doesn’t want to listen 
to the response. I mean, all we’re asking for is the co-operation, 
the co-operation from the opposition to deal with a very serious 
problem, and he stands up here and says: I’m not going to have 
any part of it; all you’re doing is trying to rip off the farmer. He 
knows that we’ve put an awful lot of programs in for the farmer 
that we’ve got a lot of credit for; he doesn’t like that. 

And if he wants to talk about land speculation, the land bank 
was the biggest speculative venture in the history of agriculture 
in Canada. You went out and you bought land at a very low 
value, and then when it went up, you said: well we can sell it to 
the children; we’ll speculate. And Mr. MacMurchy, the former 
minister of agriculture, and the cabinet minister, and others  
from Quill Lakes  said, isn’t this a great program? They 
speculated on the backs of the farmers. They did it for 
generation after generation. Well I mean that’s all he wants to 
talk about, so we can go back and through it. 
 
We will be dealing with this situation and the appropriate 
legislation to help farmers, Mr. Chairman. I’m asking for their 
co-operation. I guess I have to admit today they’re not going to 
co-operate. They don’t want to co-operate on all kinds of 
things: they won’t in terms of resource policy; they won’t in 
terms of refining and processing; they didn’t co-operate on 
upgraders; they won’t co-operate on paper mills. They won’t 
co-operate on the largest single job project in the history of 
Regina and Saskatchewan here; they don’t want to give us any 
credit for that. 
 
And they won’t face . . . I mean, he mentions all the problems 
that we have today. He won’t face the facts with respect to the 
crime and drug abuse on streets; he never even mentioned it. He 
wouldn’t face it; he hasn’t got the courage to face it  hasn’t 
got the courage. And they were afraid to. They said, all we . . . 
geez, that’s something else that we better not be able to touch 
that. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, we respectfully ask for your co-operation. If 
we don’t get it, then we’ll have to deal with it ourselves, okay? 
And you’d rather fight about it than co-operate. I know that. 
And I’ll just watch your response. You’ll stand up again and 
you’ll beat all over us in every program that we’ve done. I just 
ask for your co-operation in helping thousands of farmers that 
need our help. 
 
You and I can design the legislation to make sure that the 
control is here and the control is local and the control is for 
farmers. And you won’t even admit that you have that power. 
This House has that power. This Assembly has that power. And 
you stand there and deny us that right. 
 
And I will seek your co-operation when any legislation with 
respect to agriculture is introduced. But I would gather today, 
Mr. Chairman, that the opposition is just bent on being contrary, 
they have for some time, and I guess the public will just have to 
recognize that fact. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, the problem that you have is that 
you don’t have any credibility left out in the farming. That’s 
what’s happening. And you can’t go out and sell it to the 
farmers because they don’t believe you any more. That’s the 
problem that you have. 
 
And I’ll tell you, you don’t have to worry about our actions 
here; we’ll account for those and we’ll make our representation. 
You look after yours because, I’ll tell you, this opposition is 
going to be increased tomorrow by two more members. And 
that’ll represent how popular you are, Mr. Premier, and how 
much credibility you have. 
 
Your pretence, yes, your pretence that you’re looking 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1073 
 

after the farmers. You said that you were going to open the 
treasury. And now your Finance minister says, well it’s too big 
a problem. We can’t open the treasury. The treasury is broke. 
 
But, you know, you have no problems when it comes to the 
multinational corporations. You stick it to the farmers at nine 
and three-quarters per cent and you give it to Weyerhaeuser of 
Tacoma, a multinational corporation, at 8 per cent. And you 
defer any payment until they get the pulp . . . the paper mill 
built, on the debentures. That’s what you’ve done. 
 
Now that . . . the farmers would like that, but you wouldn’t 
defer their interest until there’s a turn-around  no way! But 
you said to old Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington: we’ll 
give you eight and a half per cent. Farmers, we’ll stick it to you, 
nine and three-quarters. Those were the choices that you made. 
 
And how can farmers stand up and believe that you are on their 
side, when you give a deal like that to the multinational 
corporation and you won’t come to the assistance of farmers. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you were serious . . . In the 1987-88 budget, the 
Minister of Finance said that the problem of major crisis is farm 
debt. That was in ’87-88. That was repeated this year, and that 
was repeated again in the throne speech. You have identified 
the problem. We agree with that. All I’m asking you, Mr. 
Premier, you haven’t delivered. 
 
(1545) 
 
You are prepared, I think, to see thousands of farmers divested 
of their family holdings as we knew it. And I’ll tell you, the 
farmers of Saskatchewan as you have said yourself take great, 
great value . . . great care of their land. They have a great love 
for the land. And in my community and in my constituency, I’ll 
tell you, owning that land means an awful lot. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Is the land bank land theirs, Murray? 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Well lookit, Mr. Premier, you go a little 
squirrelly again on land bank. That was a total voluntary 
program  voluntary program, totally voluntary, no one was 
forced to go into the land bank, you know that. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Premier, what you’re setting up here and 
the farmers are afraid of, is that you’re going to turn it over to 
the speculators, the realtors, and the real estate, the Century 
21’s of the world, the Marathon Realty’s. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Now run down business. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  That’s . . . I’ll run down business because I 
want to protect the family farm. 
 
An Hon. Member:  You’ll run down business. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Yes I will. I’ll run down speculators who want 
to take over the ownership of our land. You’re right, I will. 
Marathon Realty, I’ll tell you, I wouldn’t let them 

buy up the farm land. I would make a program where the 
farmers could retain their title. That’s what I’d do. 
 
You haven’t even . . .  you know, you don’t even have the 
interest of the farmers at mind because this problem of debt can 
be solved, because you can work in conjunction with the federal 
government and you can handle that debt. And you can weather 
the storm until the turn around in the prices, and obviously the 
prices will have to turn around or else there will be no farming 
left. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Premier, if you are so absolutely and totally 
convinced, since you identified the problem a year and a half 
ago in the ’87-88 budget  the Minister of Finance indicated 
that debt was a crisis  I ask you, why have you sat on your 
hands? And if this here proposal is so good, I ask you why 
haven’t you introduced the legislation; and when will you 
introduce it during this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I will try my very best to 
co-operate with the hon. member. As a signal of co-operation, 
I’ll do my best to introduce legislation this session that will help 
farmers in several ways. I will just say to the hon. member that 
we had $705 million  almost three-quarters of a billion 
dollars  out to farmers at 8 per cent. And obviously we’ve got 
1.2 billion that we put out at 6 per cent. And that option was 
clearly there for both, so we had almost a billion . . . 
three-quarters of a billion at 8, and almost 1.2 billion at 6 per 
cent. 
 
I would only say to the hon. member that we will do our very 
best to co-operate with you in getting legislation through that 
would help farmers in several different ways, as early as this 
session. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Would you enunciate the several different ways 
that you have in mind in dealing with the crisis that we have 
right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we will be bringing 
forth pieces of legislation that will provide for alternatives that 
the hon. member will be able to look at in very clear detail. 
Some will be on the protection side for farmers; some will be 
on new money for farmers, in a combination of things that we 
can do to allow the farmer to feel better, the financial 
institutions to have more co-operation with the farmers, and 
generally, for the public to know that we are doing the right 
thing for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s not surprising, 
Mr. Minister, that you didn’t even refer in your several options 
that you’re going to put forward to the equity financing 
proposal, and that was a specific question. Again, you evaded 
that answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about co-operation from us, that we’re 
not co-operating, and that’s why you can’t get it through. That’s 
bunk and you know it. I mean, the people of this province and 
this legislature know how your government operates. They talk 
about consulting, and don’t consult. They talk about 
participation from groups, and they don’t listen to them. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, I, on this side of the House, 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1074 
 

will not co-operate with anything that is going to put farmers in 
even worse trouble than they are now. I’ll tell you, this program 
is going to do that in the short term, unless you come up with 
some specific answers. 
 
You have been unable to answer any questions on this topic, 
and then you turn around and say we don’t co-operate. You 
have been unable to put legislation forward in over a year, and 
you say we don’t co-operate. Well, Mr. Minister, the problem is 
you, not this legislature. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve asked questions about financial 
institutions, and you talk about write-downs. You began on 
Monday by saying that the institutions were going to write 
down half of their . . . the debt to the farmers. And after about 
an hour or so later, you said, well I can’t speak for the 
institutions. So you turned around and said one thing on one 
side of your mouth, and then turned around and said another 
later on. 
 
What do you expect us to do when you make statements like 
that? There’s no possible way that the farmers of this province 
would want this side of the House to co-operate with your deal, 
and they’ve rejected it in the country. 
 
You talk about lower interest rates. You and the Farm Credit 
Corporation have the power  holding half the debt in this 
province, farm debt  have the power to develop a program at 
long-term, low interest rates. And you refuse to do it, just like 
you refuse to . . . and dragging your feet on this farm equity 
financing corporation. 
 
I think I know why; it’s because you don’t know what to do, 
you know  that this brain-child, of whoever’s initially, was 
going to, you thought, solve the problem. And then when you 
got out in the county, when you talked to the real people and 
they told you their message, you accused them of being the 
NDP mouthpieces, running around to every meeting. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, there were people that I talked 
to from every one of those meetings, and the majority of the 
people there were not interested in your program. And you 
accused us of not co-operating. Well I guess we wouldn’t 
co-operate when it’s not in their interests. Why would we? 
 
Yet you want us to co-operate with you on a proposal that the 
farmers don’t want. Well I’ll tell you, we won’t  we won’t, 
Mr. Minister. We will stand up behind the farmers and stop 
you, if we can, from implementing a proposal that is not going 
to be helpful; in fact it’s not going to be helpful to those 11 per 
cent who are insolvent; we know that. You won’t admit it, but 
we know that the 11 per cent of the farm population who is 
insolvent is not going to be able to participate in this program 
because it will make no sense for them to do so unless they 
want to become tenant farmers. 
 
You say that the banking institutions are going to cut their debt 
in half. You know darn well that’s not going to happen. The 
banks are going to want to get every cent out of that land that 
they can because they’re taking the loss on it now. 

You talk about outside investment for people coming into this 
province with guaranteed returns, and you don’t talk about 
guaranteed returns for farmers. I mean that’s the angle you’re 
coming at. It’s the people with the money who make money off 
farm land, and have the farmer as tenants on their own land. I 
will not stand in here and co-operate with you in any scheme 
that goes in that direction. 
 
An Hon. Member:  You like land bank, though. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll tell you, the member 
form Kelvington-Wadena asked me if I like land bank. That 
program did more for the people of this province than this 
program will, and you know that. And they had the option to go 
in it. 
 
You talk about principles, the principle of land bank, and I’ll 
stand here and say that the principle of land bank was good. 
There were many things that went wrong, and you know that. 
You accused it of inflating the price of land. Well when you 
take that logic to Alberta and Manitoba, it just doesn’t work, 
Mr. Minister, and you know the real reason. 
 
But you continue to put out your rhetoric and that’s why the 
farmers of this province are not believing you now. 
 
So I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, we will not co-operate, we will 
not co-operate with you on any program that is going to make 
tenant farmers out of the people of Saskatchewan and, in the 
long term, not alleviate the debt situation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think I can say on behalf of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, either you bring your program out right away so 
that we can find out what you’re all about, or else forget it and 
go and try and find something that will work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 
a couple of questions to ask the Premier with respect to his 
equity financing plan, and then I’d like to move into another 
area entirely, having to do especially with the potential drought 
situation that much of Saskatchewan is facing. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Premier, with respect to equity financing, as 
I have listened to your descriptions of what you have in mind 
over the course of the last several days, it seems to me that 
you’ve been using in your various examples two concepts that 
are at least in theory quite different from each other. I’d just like 
to seek some clarification from you about those concepts. 
 
The first one was the notion of amending the Bank Act and 
potentially amending other legislation to allow banks to take an 
equity position in farm land, and then . . . once that amendment 
had been done, and then to let the farmer who is in trouble and 
his banker do some sort of deal to refinance the farm, starting 
from a new and lower total equity value. And presumably that 
new refinancing would include some combination of payments 
by the farmer to the bank, plus an equity position for the bank. 
That was one of the concepts that I heard you describe. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1075 
 

The second concept was the establishment of some kind of 
equity land association, as you’ve tentatively dubbed it in these 
discussions, a land association into which both the farmer and 
the banker would agree, I presume, to put the farmer’s land, for 
the purposes of refinancing, but with some broader form of 
equity participation that goes beyond just the farmer and the 
banker. 
 
I wonder, to start with, Mr. Premier, if that brief description is 
more or less accurate with what you’ve previously described in 
the House? I wonder if you could confirm that. 
 
And could you also confirm that you are talking about those 
two different situations: one that would involve just the farmer 
and the banker doing some sort of deal with some kind of 
equity angle to it, and a quite different arrangement that would 
involve the farmer and the banker, but also other investors? I 
wonder if that distinction that I’m drawing is accurate. Then I 
have a couple of other questions I’d like to put to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I think that’s a fair separation. You 
could do the latter without any change to the Bank Act. In other 
words, financial institutions can’t take an equity position right 
now, but they could sell to a third party at a certain level and 
say, I’m just getting out of it at this level. That third party takes 
an equity position along with the farmer. 
 
So they could say, I’m throwing mine in here at this value and 
I’m rid of it and I’m done with it; I don’t want any more part of 
it. The farmer, he has some equity in it, the third party has some 
equity in it, and they just cut a deal and they go operate as 
partners. You could do that without changing the Bank Act. 
 
Alternatively, you can go back to the first alternative or the first 
scenario that you presented, and said, look, we can modify this 
so that financial institutions can have an equity position, and 
then maybe with some other legislation that we are looking at 
here, to help facilitate it so not everybody’s in court settling on 
a very difficult situation, help mediate a value of what you can 
put it in there at. Then we can get on with our lives without 
everybody ending up in court for months and months, in some 
cases even years. 
 
So frankly, we’re looking at both. We’re looking at mechanisms 
that would allow us to facilitate this co-operation between 
farmers and financial institutions because they’re both in 
trouble; and say, could we do something in law to help you 
work this out without going through a great deal of expense, 
find a number that’s good for both of you, make it fair, and then 
start over again and improve the cash flow, but the financial 
institutions also knows that they’re going to get something out 
of it. 
 
Now if you want outside investors  if you go to the full equity 
concept as you have in Australia that was presented here and 
the model that the credit union used  you’re going to have to 
allow that participation from pension funds or others or the 
market as they invest to say, here’s a guaranteed return or 
something that looks like it’s a pretty fixed return, plus some 
improvement in my portfolio. And they will invest in that, if it’s 
set up right. So 

we’re looking at both. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, it may not be possible for you to 
answer this next question today, but I would be grateful if you 
could give me a written description of the legislative 
amendments that you would see as being necessary in the Bank 
Act or in any other legislation either federally or provincially, 
that would be necessary to allow banks to take an equity 
position in farm land. 
 
I wonder if your research has produced to this point a definitive 
list of the sections in legislation, either provincially or federally, 
that would have to be changed to facilitate this? And secondly, I 
wonder if you could tell me if the federal government has to 
this point agreed to those amendments, at least some of which 
they would have to make? They’re not within the jurisdiction of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I can certainly share with you the 
discussions that we had during the symposium and in the 
research that was done for us and in the reports and in the 
examples of what legislation would have to be changed. 
 
Secondly, we have not got an agreement from the federal 
government that they would pass changes. We had very specific 
proposals by the Farm Credit Corporation that said this is 
what’s possible. But it hasn’t been passed by the cabinet at the 
federal level, to say that yes, they would be prepared to do that. 
 
(1600) 
 
We are talking with them and with other governments across 
Canada, and indeed in the United States and other places, of 
what legislation you have in place, how does it work, and how 
could we facilitate the solving of this dilemma that the financial 
institution and the farmer faces at the same time. 
 
We’ve done research in the United States, for example, where 
they had a mediation process that works quite well. Now they 
have different laws with respect to banking. We have looked at 
the modifications there and have looked at them carefully. I 
know the financial institutions have looked at them. 
 
So if there is some light in terms of solutions, we’re going to 
look at them very carefully and we will be prepared to table 
them here and obviously be prepared to argue for them in 
Ottawa or with the federal government if it looks like it’s 
something that would be helpful. 
 
I’ll give you what we have in terms of the legislation that is 
proposed and what would be necessary to change. We’ve done 
some, as I say, in looking at it in the United States, describe 
what they have versus what we have, and it’ll give you a pretty 
good idea of what you’re up against. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, going back to the original 
distinction that I drew between the two different concepts that 
you’ve described in your discussion about this proposal during 
your estimates, you indicated that the second option that I 
described could be pursued without legislative amendments. I 
will be anxious to have the 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1076 
 

information that you can provide to me now on what potential 
legislation would have to be changed. 
 
But presuming it isn’t changed, in terms of your discussions 
with the banks, and I think you’ve indicated several times in 
these estimates that you had extensive discussions with the 
banks about whether or not they would be willing to participate 
in this kind of exercise, could you give some indication as to the 
preferences which the banking institutions are, at this present 
time, indicating to you? 
 
Do they want the Bank Act and other legislation changed so 
that they can get an equity position in farm land? Is that 
something they are anxious to have, or are they more interested 
in the second option, that is selling whatever interest they might 
have in farm land to some other third party that would then take 
over both the investment and the debt? Which seems to be the 
bankers’ preference at this moment in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I’ll give you my assessment of it, 
but you’d have to talk to the financial institutions to get their 
feeling on it. 
 
I think they’d be most interested in having, first of all, an ability 
to restructure the debt with the farmer that they’d both be happy 
with and get on with some stable payments and a little bit more 
cash flow on both their parts. I think they would really like to 
be able to do that without a lot of legal hassle. In other words, 
when you put up a lot of road-blocks between both the farmer 
and the financial institution, it’s going to cost them a lot of 
money to work out a deal. 
 
I know, I think it’s fair to say, when they look at the U.S. 
system and some others, where mediation is there in a very 
professional way, saying, this is a fair value, and it wasn’t here, 
but it’s down here some place; why don’t you just agree that 
this would be a good place to start and just start over. Now that, 
I think that they would prefer. I wouldn’t say that for everyone, 
but I would say that they would like to have some mechanism 
that didn’t cost much. The farmer certainly wants one that 
wouldn’t cost much. 
 
Secondly, I’m not so sure that they want equity positions, that 
they necessarily want to stand there and line up and say, I want 
an equity in the farm. Unfortunately, they’re getting some of it 
because they’re going to have this title to the land, and they 
don’t want to farm it and they’re going to have to get rid of it. 
 
So I’m not saying that they’re standing up and waiting to say 
that they would like to take equity positions. I think they would 
prefer the latter. If you found a price, they’d say, look I’d just as 
soon get rid of it at this price, and you had somebody else 
prepared to take an equity position, I think that they would be 
more inclined to do that. 
 
So if you want to rank them, I would say that what both farmers 
 I suppose farmers and financial institutions would like to 
have an ability to cut a deal as cheaply as possible to get out 
from under a situation where they’re both losing and start all 
over. That would be the first. 

Then the second would be some situation that would allow 
them to find either some new cash or some new money to get 
out of a situation that is very uncomfortable for both parties. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, if some sort of legislative 
framework is established here to attract outside investment in 
farm land to establish some kind of farm land equity association 
in Saskatchewan, what kind of mechanisms do you have in 
mind for making this arrangement attractive to those outside 
investors? 
 
I note in the news release dated April 15, which accompanied 
the report of your committee on the subject of equity financing, 
item number (f) on the second page of that news release 
recommends that the government should not offer incentives to 
attract outside equity capital unless farmers are assured of fair 
and corresponding benefits. 
 
I wonder how you would propose to attract capital without 
some incentives to do it, and if that recommendation from your 
committee is to be honoured, what sort of fair and 
corresponding benefits do you have in mind assuring to the 
farmers’ side of the equation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well as I explained, perhaps when you 
were not in the House, an illustration that investors are inclined 
to invest in this for at least three reasons. And the financial 
houses that have done the research on this, Pemberton Houston 
and Willoughby and others, have described what pension fund 
mangers and others look for. 
 
One, they would look for a fixed return that was guaranteed, 
and that could be built right into a basket of commodity prices, 
and say, at this level we know that you’re going to be able to 
receive whatever rent  would it be 6 per cent, 8 per cent, 
seven and half, or whatever; lock it in. 
 
The second benefit that they would receive, or look forward to, 
is would their portfolio, their share value, increase over time. 
Now if you’re going to buy farm land at any particular time this 
is probably as good a time as you’re going to find. In other 
words, the probability of it going much lower is not as high as 
the probability of it going up very rapidly, or a long ways to 
move. 
 
The third is that if you had some tax incentives to encourage 
you to do that. Now what the farmer said to us is that we would 
like to have some equity, and we would like to have an 
opportunity to rewrite this, and we’d like it at low interest rates; 
if you’re going to give this guy an incentive make sure you pass 
some of those benefits on to us. 
 
The first benefit is to be able to rewrite it all at lower interest 
rates. Now you could structure that benefit into the way that 
you charge the rent; the fixed payments you’re going to give; 
the length of time that they may have to pay; how fast it would 
go up; the value of the land and what it’s put in at. There’s 
several ways that you could do that. 
 
But I would think that the key for the farmer is to know that 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1077 
 

they have the hammer. In other words, they have the right to 
buy that land and that’s theirs, and no matter what else goes on, 
that that’s the case. And that’s what the opposition has been 
asking about. 
 
So if you build that right in, and that is a corresponding 
locked-in legislative guarantee that we can pass here, if you 
have any sort of mechanism, then he’s going to say, look, I 
don’t mind some incentives over here if I’ve got the hammer; I 
get to control it; I know what the interest rate’s going to be at 
these commodity prices as I do when I rent land from the 
government based on commodities and cost. 
 
So the investor needs to know  I have a rate of return that is 
reasonable; I also have some up-side in terms of my share value 
increasing or the value of my portfolio; and I may have some 
tax breaks. Those are three reasons that they would look at this, 
at least theoretically. An investor will tell you that. 
 
A farmer needs to know that at least at this level that his 
payments will be X, and if he makes some money he can buy 
all the equity that he likes. Now if he buys the equivalent equity 
to have his farm he can buy it in the first year. Once he knows 
that, and nobody else can do that as long as he’s got that 
contract, then it’s very powerful for both sides. 
 
One of the reasons that I keep bringing it up, obviously, is that 
people do it all over the world. Investors that have money will 
buy credit cards. They will buy all kinds of things. And I just 
believe that if farmers could have access to the equity markets 
rather than just borrowed money from banks, financial 
institutions, it would give them at least an alternative. They 
don’t have to, but if they had access to equity markets like you 
and I might or other people, it could be very powerful to the 
structure of agriculture for decades and well into the next 
century. 
 
And frankly, they’re just, as you know, I’m sure, a little tired of 
every generation having to go the bank and borrow it and 
refinance it over and over. If there was a way . . .  I think that 
we have numbers here that say about 40 per cent of the 
transactions now are family to family  say it’s equity. They 
just do it together. 
 
And they are saying to us, help us get access to that equity 
money. Even if it isn’t my dad’s  somebody else’s equity 
money  I just want to use his money. We’ll control it, but use 
his money. And that’s a very attractive feature, if we can design 
the legislation to protect the farmer and use other people’s 
money, at least as an alternative to just going to the bank. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, there are obviously some 
fundamental differences between what you are describing in 
terms of your equity financing proposal and what existed under 
the previous government in terms of land bank. 
 
But I wonder if you wouldn’t also agree that there are some 
troubling similarities between the two proposals as well, which 
cause farmers some difficulty. Some of the very things that 
worried them about land bank are also attached, at least in part, 
to your proposal. 

I think, for example, of the loss of absolute ownership. 
Obviously under that land bank, that ownership was lost and the 
farmer became a tenant, and that was found to be offensive to a 
large part of rural Saskatchewan. Under your proposal, some of 
that quality of ownership is also lost. 
 
And it seems to me that in many of the public hearings that 
were held, that was one of the repeated concerns that came back 
time and time again from farmers. The question was being 
asked, well in one case we were the tenant of the government, 
and under this new plan we’re going to be the tenant of 
somebody else, but we’re still a tenant. It may be temporary or 
it may be permanent, but that problem of a loss of ownership is 
a very disturbing thing in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The second similarity that I see, similarity in terms of problem, 
is that the speculation factor comes in once again. Under the 
land bank, of course, we had the peculiar situation where 
government was speculating on farm land in Saskatchewan, and 
again farmers found that to be offensive. Under this new 
arrangement, somebody else will be at least potentially 
speculating in terms of those private investors that might be 
attracted to the equity scheme. 
 
I wonder how you answer those concerns, because they were 
concerns that caused grave difficulty for the land bank in rural 
Saskatchewan, and many of those same questions, in slightly 
different terms, but many of those same questions about the loss 
of ownership and somebody speculating on farm land to the 
disadvantage of the farmer  those questions that were raised 
in relation to the land bank are being raised in relation to this 
proposal. 
 
And I think it’s important for you to assure the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that the things that they found offensive in the 
government land bank will not be repeated in this new 
arrangement called equity financing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d be more than 
glad to answer that. Anybody that would, say, look at investing 
in a blue-chip stock on the stock market, if they consider that 
anywhere close to land bank, I’d be surprised. 
 
People who invest in, say, General Motors or anything else that 
is a very high quality stock wouldn’t consider that to be a 
government operation. And the connection here is that the fact 
that either neighbours or local people or Saskatchewan people, 
or indeed Canadians, could provide some equity to individuals 
so that in fact they could farm the land and they could have a 
situation where they could pay it back. 
 
Now in land bank, the government owned the land. The 
government had the title. We still have the title. The NDP 
borrowed, I think, $120 million to buy 1.2 million acres of land 
 and which still costs us $20 million a year interest, never 
paid. We still do it. We own the title, the farmer doesn’t. 
 
Under this situation, which is equity, the farmer owns 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1078 
 

some of it and somebody else owns some of it and he can buy 
as much as he likes. We’ve certainly had land bank land for sale 
so if they want to buy it, they can buy it. It’s different in 
philosophy. So I would say they’re completely different, 
completely different. 
 
Now you mention, well what about the speculation and the 
value? You have, when you work through the banks, the 
speculation and interest rates, and it’s going up all the time. If 
you have an equity partner, say, like your dad, you and your dad 
are in a situation and he’s going to sell it to you for $200 an 
acre. That land may go up over time and he owns some of it and 
you own some of it. Well obviously you both benefit if it goes 
up over time. You’re going to have to pay a little bit more for it, 
but you’ve cut a deal on it with respect to some interest rates 
and some sort of settlement. 
 
(1615) 
 
Many equity arrangements are set up right now in 
Saskatchewan on that basis. 
 
Now third point I put up, and if anybody that asks you about 
land bank and who owns the property  I just went through it 
here  is that, when you borrow from the bank, the bank holds 
the title; you’ve got nothing until you pay it all off. The bank 
owns that title for 20, 25 years and that’s held in Toronto 
because the headquarters are in Toronto. So would you rather 
have your neighbour having a share in it, an equity, or rather 
have a bank in Toronto owning it  all of it  the title? See, 
and that’s a significant difference. 
 
So the government doesn’t want to own it. I can say this 
government doesn’t; I don’t want any part of a new land bank 
scheme. If I can get cash that’s out in the community now to 
help the farmer take some equity in it and the farmer can buy as 
much of it as he likes, then he doesn’t have to speculate on the 
interest rates. 
 
And third, most people are starting to recognize now that they 
don’t have the title if they borrowed money from anybody. 
Whoever the lending institution was, FCC, Ag Credit 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), the banks 
or the credit union  those institutions hold the title and the 
farmer has got nothing until he pays it all off. 
 
Under this situation, he’s better than both land bank and the 
bank situation. He’s got some equity, he’s got it in his hand, and 
he’s got a long-run, low, fixed interest rate and he can buy as 
much as he likes as quickly as he likes, and he’s got a better 
cash flow. 
 
So if I was to think of a way to finance land, if I could have it 
on a equity basis, I mean, as we mentioned here today, you 
could even split the taxes. Much land, right now in this 
province, is either rented in families or purchased through 
families. They understand that very well. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, there a number of other 
questions about equity financing that I would like to return to 
with you on another occasion, but in the time remaining this 
afternoon, I would like to turn to one or two other subjects that 
are also critically important in relation to agriculture. 

To start with, I would like to refer to the other items that were 
referred to in your committee report on farm financing. And I 
don’t have them in the order in which they were covered in that 
committee report, but of course equity financing was only one 
suggestion that was made. There were several others, and I have 
some questions about those others. 
 
First of all, the report talks about changing the existing 
legislation in Saskatchewan that deals with farm debt. It 
suggests that the legislation is now found in a number of 
different statutes, some of which are exclusively farm related 
and some of which are of general application. And I gather the 
proposal is to draw all of them together in some kind of 
omnibus legislation dealing with farm debt, and I understand 
from the Minister of Justice that there’s a task force within his 
department presently working on that. 
 
I wonder if you could provide the House with a list of the 
legislation that is potentially to be affected by that 
consolidation. The Justice minister mentioned a figure in the 
House the other day as to the number of Bills that he thought 
were being examined. I wonder if you could provide us with a 
specific list of what provincial laws in Saskatchewan are 
potentially involved in this consolidation of legislation dealing 
with the farmer-creditor situation? 
 
Secondly, beyond just a consolidation, will there be substantive 
changes in the law? Are you contemplating just drawing 
together all these various statutes so farmers and their lawyers 
can find them in one place, rather than in 17 different Bills? Is it 
just a consolidation, or in that consolidation will there be some 
substantive change in the law of Saskatchewan? And are you in 
a position at this point to indicate at least the general direction 
that that substantive change might be taking, if indeed you 
expect there to be some? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, very briefly, we are looking at 
legislation and we have a committee working that would 
consolidate much of the legislation. On page 12 of the 
committee there are such Acts as The Land Contracts (Actions) 
Act, The Limitation of Civil Rights Acts, The Farm Land 
Security Act, The Queen’s Bench Act, The Exemptions Act, 
The Provincial Mediation Board Act, and others. And if there 
are others that we’re looking at, I’d be glad to share them with 
you. 
 
But, as an example, some we’re looking at putting in one place 
for two reasons: one, to simplify it and know where it’s at; and 
secondly, to make modifications in either these Acts, or provide 
additional legislation that would make it easier for both the 
farmers and the financial institutions to get on with the job of 
resolving some of their problems. I touched on some of it today. 
 
Obviously we have a concern with respect to the homes where 
people live, and there was a big concern with respect to the 
home quarter when we travelled around. Financial institutions 
are pretty touchy about the home quarter as well, because you 
have hog operations and dairy operations and others, as well as 
the house on the home quarter, and much of it has been used for 
security. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1079 
 

I believe there are some things  I mean, co-operation with the 
financial institutions  that we could look at with respect to the 
home quarter to make it . . . to be reasonable. I wouldn’t be 
prepared to say what they were today, but we are consulting 
with all of them, and the Minister of Justice is doing that. 
 
We will be doing, consequently, both. We will be providing in 
the legislation, as it’s being drafted now, the consolidation and 
amendments. And I couldn’t add much more than that today, to 
be fair to those who we’re talking to, because they’re giving us 
good advice on what sort of seems to be feasible and what isn’t. 
 
But there would be things like that, maybe some things to 
facilitate mediation, that would make it easier, in a legal sense, 
and less costly if we can arrive at a mechanism, and we’re 
looking. I will frankly admit, we’re looking at what the United 
States and others have done to make it . . . make the system as 
fair and professional as possible. It may take some legislative 
changes, things like that, that we’re talking with credit unions, 
banks, FCC, and our own people about it. So that would be one 
side of the legislation. 
 
The other side that we’re looking at in terms of the two track, or 
second track, is: how do you protect and facilitate this world of 
debt restructuring? And the second side is: how do you finance 
it? What kind of help could we provide, under what kind of 
mechanisms and what kind of circumstances, what interest 
rates, over what period of time? So how do we adjust here? And 
on the second sort of stream of legislation that we’re looking at, 
how do we help farmers that may need some new kind of 
adjustment? 
 
I still don’t believe that most farmers in the province know that 
we’ve got something like counselling assistance that can 
provide a great deal of help, and I’m seriously thinking about 
providing that information to an awful lot of farmers out there. 
Because when people do find out that there’s tremendous 
assistance and government-backed guarantees, they say, well, 
gosh, I wish I’d known that. We’ve advertised it, and you know 
how difficult it is to get a message out in anything in the media 
today. 
 
But there is the combination of things that we could do right 
now if farmers were aware of the legislation that’s available and 
the programs that are available. The government backs young 
farmers in many circumstances, tens of millions of dollars in 
operating money, if they go through counselling assistance. So 
we’re going to make sure that young farmers, if they’ve got a 
worry, if they’ve got a concern, phone the Department of 
Agriculture, get the advice, and they can get hooked into several 
different programs. 
 
But very briefly, we’re looking at both. I wouldn’t want to say 
much more about the legislation in specific detail. But we are 
doing, as you pointed out, both things. We’ll consolidate and 
amend, and probably bring in some new legislation if we think 
it’s necessary. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, just two technical 

questions about your answer. The list of statutes included in this 
report includes The Exemptions Act, as you mentioned a 
moment ago. I wonder if you could indicate whether the 
consolidation and amendment of all of this legislation would 
take the step of rendering statutes, like The Exemptions Act, 
applicable to government lending agencies just as they apply to 
private sector lending agencies. 
 
You and I have corresponded about this subject for some 
considerable length of time, and my concern flows from a court 
decision in Saskatchewan last year that specifically ruled that 
when you’re dealing with a government lender, like the ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), The 
Exemptions Act doesn’t apply. 
 
I think in some of your correspondence to me you’ve said that 
has always been the government’s presumption anyway, so that 
the court decision didn’t come as any great surprise. 
 
But I wonder why there should be a distinction in the law? Why 
should a government lender like the ACS escape the application 
of The Exemptions Act, whereas if the lender happens to be a 
credit union or a bank, they’re covered by The Exemptions Act? 
Why is there that distinction? Will your consolidation deal with 
that distinction and make government sector lenders subject to 
the same rules and regulations as private sector lenders? 
 
And could you give some indication of your time frame with 
respect to the legislation? For example, would you expect to 
have this omnibus Bill on farm debt legislation before this 
session of the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I’m not quite sure why governments 
have been exempted for all these years. I really don’t know. 
 
We’re certainly looking at the possibility that they might not be 
and that they might be treated like everybody else. And that’s 
under consideration, because there is, I mean obviously, that the 
government has the capacity and power to do all kinds of 
things, but you don’t necessarily have to make them exempt. So 
we’re quite prepared to look at it. 
 
In terms of legislation and the timing, some of it, certainly I 
think, will be available this spring in this session. On the 
protection side, I think that on that track, we’re making enough 
progress that I would think there’s a fairly high probability that 
we could get it through this spring. 
 
On the other side, in terms of new financial arrangements that 
could be made, I think it’s going to partly depend on how 
successful we are on the first. And if you’ve got a mechanism, 
say, to have mediation and you’ve got some new values being 
struck, and then you want to help facilitate that on some things 
that you could do with respect to the home quarter, then on the 
other side say, well now we got that process working, we can 
throw in a little bit of assistance here because we’ve got 
co-operation. 
 
So I’m optimistic that we’re making good progress and that 
people see some light at the end of this very large debt 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1080 
 

problem in terms of things that governments can do, financial 
institutions and farmers, and maybe even, yes, investors, and 
the equity that’s out there to make a difference. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, I want to turn to another subject, 
and you will note that I’ve asked a number of questions in the 
legislature about it, and that has to do with the very dry spring 
that we have experienced across most of south-western 
Saskatchewan. We all hope, of course, that at some point it’s 
going to rain and the problem will go away. 
 
But so far, at least for most of my area, and a good portion of 
south-western Saskatchewan, that the Mother Nature solution to 
the problem has not yet arrived. For other areas of 
Saskatchewan there’s been good moisture, indeed, just this past 
weekend. But the south-west is not that fortunate. 
 
You will know that I first brought this issue up with you in 
some correspondence during the winter, and I’ve followed it up 
with several questions here in the House. It is a very serious 
concern. We’ve had a lack of moisture for most of last fall. The 
winter was very dry and open. This spring there was no run-off 
to run off, almost no spring rains except in, I guess, along the 
eastern side of the province and across the North this spring. 
But for the South and the West, there has not been appreciable 
rainfall. Dug-outs are low or dry. Virtually no sloughs in much 
of south-western Saskatchewan. Lakes are dry. 
 
And you’ll recall, Mr. Premier, that I raised in the House last 
session the difficulty at Old Wives Lake south of Moose Jaw, 
where what used to be an alkali lake is now an alkali flat. And 
that salt dust, whenever there’s a wind, blows all over 
everything, causing substantial concern for people in the 
Mossbank district. 
 
Streams and creeks are low or dry. Some community water 
reservoirs, such as the one at Limerick, has virtually run 
absolutely dry. There are water conservation rationing 
programs, or at least advisory programs, under way in a number 
of communities now. Water tables are low. That affects the 
wells for both farms and communities. And some statistics are 
saying that in some areas this is the driest prairie spring in this 
century. So obviously we’ve got a big problem on our hands 
now, and it could be a massive problem if the rains don’t come 
very quickly. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Premier, since January or February, I’m told that your 
government has been monitoring the situation, surveying the 
situation, drawing up various maps that are trying to track the 
existence of moisture and to put that on colour-coded charts and 
all of that, and of course that’s interesting information. But in 
response to my letters and most of my questioning in the House, 
I certainly got the feeling that the government was not yet 
acknowledging the seriousness of the situation, hoping that it 
might somehow go away. At least that seemed to be the 
government’s position until last week. 
 
In some of your answers last week, Mr. Premier, I 

gathered that something had changed in the government’s view 
of the situation, that you were beginning to take it far more 
seriously, and that you were consulting with farm groups and 
municipalities and others about what the government might do 
to draw up a contingency plan to deal with the situation. 
 
That all comes, in my opinion, a little bit late but at least 
something is beginning to move. And I wonder if you are yet in 
a position to say when a detailed drought contingency plan for 
Saskatchewan in 1988 will be ready for announcement. When 
do you expect to be able to say something in detail about that, 
and will that plan involve new initiatives and new money, or 
will it just recycle old programs and old money? 
 
I ask that question specifically, Mr. Premier, because I think the 
magnitude of the problem that we are dealing with requires 
more than just the recycling and reusing of programs and 
services that are already on the government shelf, if you will. 
Certainly some of this problem goes far beyond what existing 
programming would seem to be able to cope with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I will share with the hon. member 
our sincere concern about the drought in parts of southern 
Saskatchewan as he, no doubt, knows that we have been in 
constant conversation and touch with municipalities and 
farmers. 
 
He also knows that every constituency south of No. 1 Highway 
is represented here except yours, and we certainly do visit with 
people in there, so we’ve . . .  from the east side to the south of 
Swift Current, Maple Creek, Shaunavon and Morse and 
Bengough, Milestone and Estevan and Souris-Cannington, etc., 
we have talked to people all the time and so there would be 
every indication that they know that we know that we’re 
concerned about it. We were very happy to see rain come when 
it did. 
 
There are two programs that you will hear about very quickly. 
One, is in part an ongoing program which is through the water 
corporation and thereof, the standard incentives for drilling and 
exploration, pumping water in dug-outs and pipe and so forth 
there. That one was way ahead of what they had in Alberta or in 
Manitoba. The Alberta announcement recently has sort of 
brought them up to where we are. The Minister of the 
Environment and the water corporation will be making 
announcements in the next few days with respect to any 
additional assistance that will be in that program with the water 
corporation. 
 
Then there’s the second program which would be all new 
money and that would be a specific targeted drought assistance 
program that we have been designing with the stock growers 
and the cattlemen and the municipalities. And that one would be 
targeted right to the farmer, and that one has been designed, if 
you will, in principle, with the farmers and municipalities and 
ourselves. 
 
The question will be when we will need it and when it should 
be announced. And the farmers are telling us that, you know, 
the rain in this eastern half of the province made a difference. 
People are now making decisions, 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1081 
 

even in your area and right straight through to the south-west, 
about what they should be doing, either moving water or feed or 
cattle. And sometimes it’s one or the other, depending on their 
situation. 
 
I will say, when I do make the announcement, that it will be 
targeted to the farmer; any cash assistance will go directly to the 
farmer or to the rancher. They can decide who they want to pay 
for what. You’ll hear an announcement very quickly with 
respect to leased land. And normally you’re isolated to using 
. . . or confined to just using your livestock on leased land. We 
may modify that, as we did in ’84-85, to say under 
circumstances like drought, you’ll be able to put your cows in 
somebody else’s pasture and it might make it easier. 
 
Those kinds of specific suggestions from the stock growers, 
from people like Mike Smith, for example, in the Mankota area, 
and others, have said, this is what we should be doing  are all 
there. 
 
Now I’m listening to the farmers tell me, I don’t think you 
should announce this yet, that you’re going to be moving cattle 
up North or you’re going to have X amount of dollars available. 
Tell them that the money will be there  I’m saying that today. 
It will be sufficient money to help them. They will receive the 
money by applying for it. 
 
It will not be because we’re drawing lines around situations. 
You may have a good part of your riding, other areas that are 
applicable  we will do it on the basis of need. It’s not going to 
be comprehensive or right across the province, as you would 
know, for everybody. Because if they’ve had three inches of 
rain in Canora or Preeceville or something else, obviously they 
don’t have a drought problem. Some cases they’ve got too 
many sloughs. 
 
So you can expect announcements  if I could summarize 
briefly  one in the very next few days from the minister of the 
water corporation, Minister of Environment, with respect to 
drought-proofing, if you will, drilling and municipal activity 
and so forth that the water corporation deals with, and in 
co-operation with the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration), and probably some top-up there, as well as the 
existing money. 
 
New money targeted just for farmers and ranchers in drought. 
We’ve got a program in place, in principle. We’re meeting with 
the farmers again this week and they’re giving us their advice as 
to what exactly should be in it and when it should be 
announced. And we will be prepared to announce it whenever 
they say; now, I think, is the time to do it. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Well, Mr. Premier, I’m glad to have that 
information because I think that is the most detailed response 
on this subject that has been available to date, and it will at least 
be of some comfort to farmers to know that the government is 
seized of the issue. 
 
There are a couple of specifics out of what you’ve just said that 
I would like to pursue with you. One has to do with the services 
of Saskatchewan Water Corporation and those instances where 
they make pipes and pumps 

available for the transporting of water from one source to a 
location where it can be more useful. 
 
And if my memory serves me correctly, that service in 
Saskatchewan used to be provided by the PFRA. And a number 
of years ago the Saskatchewan Water Corporation took over 
that function from the PFRA, and in the process of doing so 
they acquired PFRA’s capital equipment  the pipes and the 
pumps. 
 
Now I’m given to understand that when PFRA was running the 
program the cost involved to the farmer or to the community 
was negligible, that it was a . . . there may have been a token fee 
or a token charge but that was really a no-cost proposition, 
PFRA made the pipes and the pumps available. But now, under 
the water corporation, I understand that there are specific fees 
charged of significant cost which didn’t used to be the case 
under the PFRA. 
 
I wonder if you are considering, in the circumstances of this 
year, waiving those extra charges that the water corporation 
would, perhaps in its normal operations, make? Would you 
consider providing the pipes and the pumps without that 
expense to the farmer or to the community? And secondly, 
would you make it possible for a community that needs to pump 
water over land  maybe five or six or seven miles  would 
you make it possible for them to be able to acquire the 
equipment outside of the water corporation, and yet have the 
water corporation pick up the cost for it. 
 
And let me give you one specific illustration. There’s a 
community in my constituency that plans to be pumping water 
six or seven miles. I understand that the kind of pump available 
to them through the water corporation is a tractor-powered 
pump; in other words, strategically along this pipeline they have 
to locate farm tractors to run the pumps for 24 hours a day for 
however many days it takes to move the necessary supply of 
water. And I gather that this is the only kind of pump that the 
water corporation makes available, this tractor-powered pump. 
 
They find it rather impractical for them to try to find X numbers 
of farmers in that area to commit their tractor to park by the 
pipeline for one or two or three or four weeks, running 24 hours 
a day, until they’ve moved enough water. What they would 
prefer to do is to go to a company that rents irrigation 
equipment and acquire a proper pump that they don’t have to 
attach their tractor to for a couple of weeks. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Premier, if that kind of a modification, which 
seems to be a very practical suggestion, whether that kind of a 
modification in the arrangements being made by the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation is a part of your planning. I 
think it could be very helpful, not only to the community that I 
have in mind, but to many others, if you had that kind of 
flexibility in your arrangement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll take the hon. 
member’s suggestions and pass them on to the minister of the 
water corporation and the Environment. I believe his estimates 
are coming up. He’ll be making announcements in the next few 
days. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1082 
 

I’ll pass on your suggestions and he can take them under 
consideration. He may find them worthy of review and may 
make some changes on them. I just . . . I don’t know where he’s 
at with respect to the two things that you’ve suggested here. I’m 
sure he does. He’ll be next up in terms of estimates and will be 
the person making the announcements. But I’ll certainly give 
him your suggestion, and he will respond. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. I’m interested in 
your comment two answers ago about changes in lease policy. I 
had a number of calls to my office today from farmers in the 
south-western part of Saskatchewan asking that very question. 
 
In a couple of instances, a rancher had, over the last number of 
years, reduced his herd. He now has more lease land that he 
personally can use. His neighbours are phoning him on a daily 
basis, saying, can I use your pasture? And up to this point in 
time he’s saying, no, it’s leased land, and the rules prohibit me 
from allowing you to put your cows in my leased pasture. 
 
I gather from what you’ve said that you’re considering 
changing that. And I wonder if you have anything further that 
you can add on that subject, because just judging by my phone 
calls today, that seems to be a rather hot topic in south-western 
Saskatchewan right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I’m just happy that our policy 
changes were even before your anticipated concern came up. 
We’re looking at it. We did it in ’84, and it seemed to be 
practical and a great deal of common sense. And we just hope 
that farmers co-operate with each other, and not abuse it and not 
charge each other too much money. And generally they’re very 
fair with their neighbours and others, so it would seem to be an 
accommodating thing to do under the circumstances. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Could I ask, Mr. Premier, if you are also 
contemplating changes as were done three or four years ago 
with respect to crop insurance in Saskatchewan? ’84-85, I 
believe, was the period of time when there were some fairly 
significant modifications made in the crop insurance program. 
 
It seemed to me at that time that those changes, although well 
intentioned, were implemented in a rather hurried fashion and 
perhaps without the opportunity for adequate forethought. 
There was a good deal of confusion surrounding exactly what 
the government was attempting to do. And you’ll remember 
that there were some pretty big meetings in rural Saskatchewan 
talking about those crop insurance changes. 
 
I wonder, while again I recognize you’re not the minister 
specifically responsible for this, if you could confirm that there 
are some changes being contemplated for 1988 with respect to 
the application of the crop insurance program in Saskatchewan. 
Do you anticipate there could be some changes? 
 
Secondly, how much advance notice will you be able to provide 
to farmers so that they can tailor their circumstances to meet 
those changes? Thirdly, what portion, if any, of the cost of 
those changes would be 

borne by the federal government under the standing 
arrangement for cost sharing of crop insurance? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the modifications 
that were made in ’84-85 in crop insurance helped an awful lot 
of people. The board of directors of crop insurance are very 
familiar with what worked and what did not or needed 
improvement. They will watch it very closely. Certainly our 
MLAs and others will be advising us if there needs to be 
something done later on. 
 
It would be just too early for me to say there are going to be 
changes. I mean, it’s too early to predict a crop failure in 
certainly a large part of the province. And I understand that 
they’re forecasting rain for the west side of the province today, 
as a mater of fact, and tonight, and I imagine that everybody in 
the Assembly hopes it rains all week in south-western 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But they’ll be on top of it and quite prepared, I’m sure, to make 
appropriate changes as they see fit. They’ve already done some 
of that, and I’m sure that they will listen to farmers in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Premier, I have just one area, one further 
area, on this subject that I would like to raise with you, and it 
has to do with the relationship with the federal government. 
 
First of all, on the question of income tax: if we get into a 
circumstance  which we all hope we won’t  but if we do 
get into a circumstance where farmers might have to begin to 
seriously consider depleting their livestock numbers simply 
because of the drought, there is the potential, under the federal 
income tax law, for those farmers to find themselves in a 
disadvantageous position. They don’t want to deplete their 
herds, but the weather may force them to deplete their herds. 
That might create a bubble in income that could present them 
with an unfair tax problem. 
 
I know there have been discussions in past years about 
amending The Income Tax Act to take that kind of a situation 
into account, and I wonder, as my first question, with respect to 
the federal government, whether your government is prepared 
to advise the Government of Canada that some modifications in 
income tax rules might be necessary so that a farmer who has 
that bubble in his income, because of herd depletion in one 
year, is not penalized simply because the weather turned sour 
on him? 
 
Secondly, I wonder if you’ve had an opportunity to consider the 
federal government’s position in relation to whatever they may 
do to deal with this potential drought situation. They have been 
talking, for example, in the media in the last couple of days, and 
even again today in the House of Commons, talking about 
funding whatever the federal government may be called upon to 
do to deal with the drought out of that commitment already 
made of some $75 million for soil conservation and soil 
degradation programs. 
 
It would seem to me that if there is to be drought funding 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1083 
 

made available by the federal government, it should be in 
addition to their soil conservation initiatives and not instead of 
their soil conservation initiatives, because if anything, the 
drought is going to make soil conservation an even bigger issue. 
I wonder if you would be prepared to take up with your federal 
ministerial counterpart, Mr. Wise, the suggestion that if the 
Government of Canada is called upon to make a funding 
commitment, that it should not come out of that 75 million 
that’s already been committed to soil conservation, but in fact 
should be in addition to that source of revenue. 
 
And my third question in relation to the federal government is 
this. Some three or four years ago your government and the 
Government of Canada announced that you were working on a 
new federal-provincial program to meet potential rural disaster 
situations in the future. That announcement was made when we 
were in the last drought situation in ’84 or ’85, and everybody 
recognized at that time that what existed in ’84 or ’85 went far 
beyond what crop insurance could cope with, or grain 
stabilization, or any existing program of either the Government 
of Canada or the Government of Saskatchewan. So new, 
temporary one-shot programs were brought into place to deal 
with that situation. 
 
But the commitment was made that your government and the 
Government of Canada would be working on a new long-term 
permanent emergency disaster relief mechanism to deal with 
this situation should it occur again in the future. 
 
We have such an emergency disaster relief mechanism, 
federal-provincial mechanism, that applies to urban disasters. If 
a wind storm should go through an urban centre, for example, in 
Saskatchewan, there is a program existing between the federal 
government and the province to cost share the measures needed 
to deal with that situation. But we found through rather painful 
experience that that program is of an urban orientation only and 
does not apply when you’re dealing with rural disasters. 
 
The commitment was made three or four years ago that your 
government, the Government of Canada and, I presume, other 
provinces would soon be entering into a new federal-provincial 
agreement to deal with rural agricultural crises such as another 
broad spread drought. I wonder if you could indicate where 
those negotiations stand at the present time, and are we any 
closer to a new federal-provincial agreement than we were three 
or four years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
modifications to the income tax by the feds, two things: one, we 
would certainly expect their co-operation on that if in fact it did 
come to pass. 
 
I would say, however, we don’t want to encourage farmers to 
sell, so I wouldn’t want to be out there saying, well we’re going 
to change the tax system if you just get rid of your cows. We 
want them to hang on to the basic herd, so we would say that 
we’re going to do as much as we can to hang on to them. If 
they’re in a situation where they have to, then I would expect 
co-operation from the federal government, or I certainly would 
lobby for it so 

they wouldn’t be penalized. 
 
Secondly, with respect to drought assistance and the money 
where it should come from, I believe the minister, John Wise, 
said that they would be prepared  and they did spend between 
40 and $100 million on drought, if they had to, in ’84 and ’85 
 and that he’s prepared to look at that or whatever is 
necessary. 
 
I believe now they’ve called a meeting of deputies in Ottawa, or 
Winnipeg, to talk about drought and what we should be doing 
and how much money might be available beyond anything 
associated with soil erosion and some other things, so that the 
money has got to be something that the farmer knows is not 
going to cut into another program. 
 
With respect to rural disaster, the new national agriculture 
strategy has in there now a mechanism whereby if there is 
back-to-back drought situations that are extremely difficult, 
there automatically kicks into gear mechanisms that change 
crop insurance, and there’s a 1 per cent top-off. And there’s 
some other things that take place when it happens one, two, and 
it depends on the significance of it. 
 
So there are some automatic disaster mechanisms and there are 
some that are at the discretion of the cabinet, and some at the 
discretion of the provincial cabinet. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, I have a question with regards to 
the production loan program. Under the loan program last year 
there were some, I believe, 300-and-some-odd cases where the 
government had started actions against farmers who hadn’t 
repaid their loan. Could you tell me: are those actions still 
ongoing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, while they’re looking it 
up  some have resolved and some are ongoing. I don’t have 
the exact breakdown, but they’re looking it up. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister: due to the fact that the 
rules were changed on the production loan program, are those 
farmers who have actions against them now going to have 
another chance? Are you going to be giving them another 
chance to put their loan over a 10-year period? Maybe that 
would solve the problem. Are they going to be given another 
chance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well obviously, Mr. Chairman, when we 
extend it over 10 years, their payments dropped in about half, 
and we saved several hundred million dollars in actual demand 
on cash. So certainly that might have facilitated a better 
arrangement for many of them. 
 
So that’s precisely why you would . . . why we extended it, is to 
help people because the cash flow problem becomes much 
smaller, and they can say, hey, well I can make that one; I 
couldn’t make my $7,000 payment but I can make my $3,000 
payment; or I can make half of my payment because $1,500 
would be half of what it was rather than just a fraction. 
 
So sure, we’re quite willing to work with the farmers on the 
new 10-year program to help them make their 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1084 
 

payments on a different basis. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, have you relayed to those 
farmers who had action started against them that those actions 
would be terminated and they would be given a chance to go 
under the 10-year program? All those farmers under that 
program, were they given any indication through letter that you 
would be stopping those actions and giving them a chance to 
readjust their . . . reassess their situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I can say to the hon. member that in 
many, if not most, cases that the client has been placed on a 
legal recovery status and arrangements are made for repayment 
in many cases so that they . . . we talk to them. 
 
As long as the farmer is talking to us, we’ll advise them of all 
the possibilities that are there. And it’s when they don’t talk to 
you is where you got the problem. So as long as they keep 
talking to us we’ll tell them, look, you’ve got your production 
loan now changed. We’ve got them through the livestock cash 
advance mechanism, and we’ve production loan clients as well. 
 
We just encourage them to talk to us, make some payments, just 
be as co-operative that they can, any way that they can. The 
worst situation is where they just don’t talk and then you have 
to talk through lawyers, and that’s . . . we try to avoid that. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, it seems to me that, in 
these cases, those farmers should have a chance to go back into 
the program and know that they’re . . . the proceedings against 
them should drop. 
 
Now you say they’re in a legal recovery pattern. Well I believe 
that to treat them all fairly, they should be allowed to start fresh 
with their loan and make their payments over the 10-year, 
partial, whatever, because there’s many farmers doing that now. 
They’re involved . . . some were in the three-year program and 
some are in 10-year program, and they’re just making partial 
payments. Many in the three-year program chose that option 
because they weren’t going to tie themselves up with security, 
and they were only going to make partial payments over a 
period of time. 
 
So I believe that these farmers should be let off the hook in the 
short term and be allowed to participate in the program. So will 
you be conveying a message to them that they will be, indeed, 
allowed to sign . . . Let me put it this way: will they be allowed 
to have the two options that were presented to all other farmers, 
Option I or Option II? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I can say to the hon. member that, 
you know, it depends on why the action was started. In many 
cases, the farmer didn’t have the livestock that they said they 
did when they applied for the cash advance. So they don’t fit if 
they didn’t have the cows they said they did. In some cases, 
they didn’t farm the land that they applied for the production 
loan on. And you’ve got some like that that have just not played 
fair. 
 
In other cases, of course, they can start on the 10-year program. 
All we’re asking for is a payment, a payment of 

some kind. But in the cases where they weren’t eligible because 
they didn’t give us the right information, we’ve got a problem 
then. And you would agree that we’ve got to be fair to the 
taxpayer. You can’t do it on an illegal basis. If they didn’t have 
the cows when they applied or they didn’t have the land that 
they applied it on for the production loan, we’ve got to deal 
pretty straight up there. 
 
If they want to make payments now on a 10-year program as 
opposed to the three-year, of course, we’ll receive payments. 
The problem is we’re not getting any payment at all. So if they 
want to come in and start to participate, or they want to tell us 
the facts with respect to their loan  in some cases they 
haven’t been accurate  by all means we would be glad to 
co-operate with them. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
  



 
May 4, 1988 

 

1085 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 

On page 255 of the Hansard No. 9A Thursday, March 31, 1988, 
the last line in the second-last paragraph in the right-hand 
column should read: “residents through a new “Hire 
Saskatchewan” initiative.” 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 


