


















































May 31, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 31, 1988 
 

1693 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure, on behalf of my colleague, the member 
representing the Estevan high school, Mr. Johnson, to welcome 
to the Assembly through you, Mr. Speaker, 14 grade 12 
students from the Esterhazy High School in Esterhazy. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher Norm Overland, and chaperon 
Donna Overland. And I look very much forward to meeting 
with them — I gather outside; it’s a beautiful day — after 
question period this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to welcome the 
grade 12 students from Esterhazy who have travelled here today 
to join with us. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join the Minister of 
Finance in welcoming the group from Esterhazy. I had the 
pleasure of sharing lunch with that group, and Norm and Donna 
Overland as well. I enjoyed their company during lunch, and I 
can assure members that the questions they asked afterwards 
were tough. My sincere hope is that they will ask equally tough 
questions of the Minister of Finance when they get the 
opportunity later on today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and through you 
to other members of the Assembly, a group of 29 grade 8 
students from Silverwood Heights School in Saskatoon, in the 
Mayfair constituency. 
 
They’re accompanied today by their teachers Mr. Don Stiller 
and Miss Bev Zahariuk, chaperon Mr. Art Friesen, and bus 
driver Mr. Greg Johannson. And I look forward to meeting with 
this group at 3 o’clock for pictures and refreshments. 
 
And I would ask all members to give this group from 
Silverwood Heights a warm welcome to the legislature this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you, and through you, a group of grade 12 
students from the community of Wawota, Wawota High 
School, 14 grade 12 students who are here with their teacher 
Harold Laich. 
 
Wawota is a very progressive community and a very 
sports-minded community. I’m glad that the students were able 
to come up and take in the session. I trust they’ll have an 
enjoyable time. Enjoy the proceedings. I look forward to 
meeting with them afterwards. Would the  

members join me in welcoming the students and their teacher to 
the session this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, its my real pleasure today to 
introduce two friends and guests from Great Britain. They are 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the first pew: Roy and 
Audrey Gray from London, England. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will be of interest to members to know that Mr. 
Grey has served in public life in Great Britain and has been 
honoured as a freeman of the City of London. They are here 
touring Regina and Saskatchewan and western Canada. They 
are accompanied today by their hosts in western Canada, in 
Regina, Lionel and Doreen Hender. 
 
And so I would ask all members to welcome these friends and 
guests from London. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and to all members of 
the Assembly, seven grade 7 and 8 students from Dales House 
located in the constituency of Regina Rosemont. They’re here 
today accompanied by their teacher Kathy Hill, and their 
chaperon Rob Reiter. 
 
They’ve been touring the legislature, and I will meet them and 
thank them for the opportunity of getting out of the legislature 
out onto the front lawn after question period today. And I’d ask 
all members here to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuck: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll save the last for the 
best. I’m very proud to introduce to you, and to the members of 
the legislature, 48 students from the Canora Junior Elementary 
School. They are located in the west gallery. They are 
accompanied by two teachers today, Mr. Ron Hoehn and Mrs. 
Marg Pretli. They’re also accompanied by two bus drivers, Mr. 
Nick Zawislak and Mr. Dave Heshka. 
 
They are in Regina for the day. They are touring the city, as 
well as a visit to the legislature. And I would just like to tell the 
children that I hope their visit here today is educational, is 
interesting, but please still have some fun while you’re here. 
But be easy on your teachers. 
 
Please join with me in welcoming these children to our 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Aid for Drought Relief 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is to the 
Deputy Premier, in the absence of he Premier, or perhaps the 
Acting Minister of Agriculture, and it has to do with a recent 
Canadian Press story pertaining to the  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1694 
 

announcement by the federal government of drought relief. 
 
According to this story, Mr. Deputy Premier, Mr. Wise has 
announced a total package of $12 million for the digging of 
some wells and pipelines for all of western Canada, or the four 
western provinces, as compared to say $20 million for the 
province of Alberta alone, announced by the province of 
Alberta for its people. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: is this the sum total of what 
Saskatchewan is going to get from the federal government by 
way of drought assistance and drought relief program? Is this it, 
or is there more to come? If there’s more to come, what is to be 
announced; can the minister tell us what is on the agenda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to respond to the 
Leader of the Opposition on that question. The announcement 
this morning deals only with the area of the drought relief 
program that was announced by Sask Water a few days ago, 
and it basically means that the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) will be bringing their portion of 
the drought assistance to a 50-50 operation with the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And we’re very much 
appreciative of the amount that they’ve put in. It will be an 
additional approximately four and a half million brought into 
PFRA budget for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question — I 
guess it is to the Minister of the Environment in the light of this 
answer. Mr. Minister, I am asking questions of this government 
as it pertains to a meeting which is going on in Calgary right 
now, or apparently has concluded in Calgary, where the amount 
of money that the federal government has dedicated to the 
drought assistance to the Prairies is $12 million, new money. 
We’re not talking about PFRA, but for all of the four western 
provinces, $12 million, is that all there is? How much of this is 
going to come to Saskatchewan, this $12 million? And won’t 
you admit that it’s too little and too late? Is that the best that 
this Premier could negotiate from Mr. Mulroney and his PC 
friends in Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that the hon. member is getting a 
little excited here, and maybe should stop and give time for the 
meeting to finalize in Alberta and for the announcement for the 
cattle side to come out, and that will come later. 
 
This only deals with the drilling of wells and the piping and that 
sort of thing. And I indicated to you that it’s an increase in the 
expenditures PFRA will have in our province of about four and 
a half million — they normally spend about two. So this is 
about twice as much as they normally have had, and I’m very 
appreciative of at least that much assistance. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to 
the minister. The minister says that I should wait because the 
meeting is going on. Here it is,  

Mr. Minister, effectively June 1, and the farmers and the people 
of this province of Saskatchewan have been asked by your 
government and Mr. Mulroney to do one thing, and that is to 
wait and to wait, while the Prairies burn up and your 
government does nothing whatsoever except sing the Hallelujah 
Chorus to the PCS in Ottawa. I want you to assure the people 
that you’re going to get something done now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to listen 
to the Leader of the Opposition. We do have a meeting going on 
in Alberta today to deal with drought assistance for the 
livestock side of the agriculture scene. They may also deal with 
the crop insurance side because that’s another area that needs to 
be addressed. 
 
You can’t deal with drought in that context until you’re certain 
that you’re going to have a drought. And although it’s been 
looking difficult for some time, the government could not 
respond until you move down the road a piece. 
 
When you talk about it in April, yes, we were concerned and 
the federal government was concerned and were making plans, 
and our government has been making plans. But the finalization 
of those plans will now be put in place. I believe the timing is 
right, and as the ministers of Agriculture are meeting today, I 
believe that the farmers are satisfied that the government has 
responded when they’ve had need before, and they will respond 
again as the need occurs again today. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of the Environment. His answers remind me of a variation of 
the old Chinese torture test, a drop at a time. Is the 
government’s position that the drought is not here? Is it the 
minister’s position that in the face of all of the evidence that we 
can see, and the feel and the taste, and all of the complaints that 
the farmers and the people of Saskatchewan are mounting, and 
the rationing of water here in Regina, that your government is 
going to await the time until we’re certain that the drought is 
here? 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that kind of action, that kind of 
response is negligent. Why doesn’t your government get on 
with the job of announcing a comprehensive drought assistance 
program for our farming people now? That’s the answer that we 
want to have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 
member should listen and not just talk. Sometimes he needs to 
have a little lesson. I announced in early May . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Unfortunately there are 
several people wanting to answer the question, and I think that 
we should just allow the Minister of the Environment to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — . . . I announced approximately three 
weeks ago that the Saskatchewan Water Corporation was going 
to provide assistance, and I laid out the whole program to you. 
The federal government has agreed to  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1695 
 

cost-share that program, and that’s basically what’s being 
announced today. And it was at the initiative of the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation that this came forward. 
 
We have put in place 50 per cent assistance for wells. That has 
never been done at any time in the history of this province, 
never. And not only that, cabinet has approved that that date 
start effective January 1 of 1988. So that gives the people across 
this province good assistance for wells throughout the whole of 
this year. I believe that that’s responding to the needs of 
agriculture and the needs of prairie farmers and prairie people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a final question to the 
Minister of the Environment. Mr. Minister, can you tell us how 
many farmers have sold off their herds? I want to have you 
answer that question. And I want to also have you answer the 
question, Mr. Minister, this way. How in the world can you 
justify this snail’s pace announcement of policy a drop at a time 
— this snail’s pace policy of a drop at a time, Mr. Minister — 
how can you justify this relatively paltry sum of money when 
the federal government, your buddies in Ottawa, have got $8 
billion for nuclear submarines and not enough for a drought 
assistant program for the prairies? How can they justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I recall when farmers 
were in difficulty before with high interest rates and a number 
of things when the hon. member was on the government side of 
the House. What did he say? We can’t do anything; that’s a 
federal responsibility. 
 
This government has taken the responsibility and taken it 
seriously, and we have provide assistance and back-dated it to 
January 1. The farm community is very happy with the progress 
of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

Modified Ward System 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. Minister, today, 
avoiding the legislature, you had a scrum in the hallways of this 
building and you announced in this scrum that you were going 
to impose a two-tier electoral system on our cities here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it is well known, and there is evidence 
across all of Canada where this system has been tried, and it has 
failed and it has been rejected. As a matter of fact, you yourself 
said it was not a good system. On March 22 in the Leader-Post, 
you said the following, and I quote to you: 
 

The modified ward system has some disadvantages 
because it leads to a very confusing municipal ballot and 
because it would create two classes of alderman. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, in light of that pronouncement that  

you made, how do you now justify imposing this confusing 
municipal ballot and this two classes of alderman in our cities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I believe I was 
undergoing their wrath because I refused to consult and I didn’t 
listen to what was going on. 
 
An Hon. Member: And you didn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope the 
opposition stays calm enough for a few minutes so that I can 
offer the explanation. 
 
Throughout the consultative process that this government firmly 
believes in, I think that probably the best example of belief in 
the consultation process has occurred, particularly when 
members opposite and, I would dare say, a lot of the people 
understood clearly where I stood on the ward system. 
 
And after all of this consultation we decided, as government, 
particularly after our discussions with SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), who were not obviously 
concerned with the two classes of alderman as I was — they 
said, no, they didn’t believe that that would occur; there would 
not be two classes of alderman. 
 
And as far as it related to the ballot and a confusing ballot, they 
said, on the contrary, the ballot will be shorter, and the true 
democratic process will occur because now the people of our 
cities will be able to vote not only for their ward alderman, but 
also in fact for the alderman at large. And as a result, they will 
be in a position to vote for the majority of their council, and 
that’s democracy in its best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, you may have listened, but you 
obviously didn’t hear, because everyone who spoke to you, 
including municipalities and SUMA, said that you should leave 
this decision up to the voters and the municipalities, and you’ve 
taken that decision away from them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You clearly didn’t have the good sense to 
leave well enough alone, nor the courage to put into practice 
and legislation the things that you wanted to do in the first 
place. 
 
Now, since everyone in the province — municipalities and 
SUMA and groups of people from all walks of life — have said 
that you should leave the system the way it is, can I ask you to 
answer this question: who is it that you’re trying to satisfy with 
this arbitrary legislation? 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1696 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that the people that 
I’m trying to satisfy are the urban voters. They’re the ones that 
I’m concerned with, and the taxpayers of our cities . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. The minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that the 
opposition is never interested in hearing my response. But I’ll 
tell you where the arbitrary imposition came and that was in 
1973 when the NDP government, against two plebiscites in 
Regina, against the plebiscite in Saskatoon, imposed the ward 
system. Now they have nerve to say, what are you doing? 
 
The ward system is still in place, Mr. Speaker. We at least gave 
them an option. It’s a modified ward system; it has the best of 
two models. It has the parts of the ward system where the 
taxpayer still has a ward representative, and it also has the at 
large system where the taxpayer can certainly elect the 
members at large. And we didn’t just arbitrarily impose one 
system versus the other, but rather we have come up with a 
good compromise, a good modified plan that the people of the 
cities should readily accept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It’s like 
everything else this government does; this is a corruption of 
democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the voters’ of 
municipalities told you what they want. In 1978, in Regina over 
70 per cent, they said they want the ward system. In Saskatoon 
they did similarly. In Prince Albert they voted in their ward 
system. You’ve taken that option away. Can I ask you then to 
tell us which voters in municipalities are you responding to in 
light of all the evidence of people who want to keep it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, again they try to discolour 
fact. The member says that the plebiscite indicated the retention 
of the ward system. After it had been in place, after the people 
got used to working with it, but at the time that the ward system 
was put in, it was put in by that group over there when they 
were in government; the NDP government imposed it on the 
largest cities in Saskatchewan. In spite of the fact the plebiscite 
said no, they still imposed it, and now they’ve got the audacity 
to stand up here and accuse us of meddling. 
 
Now all we have done is discussed and consulted for the last 18 
months, and the people that we are concerned with, Mr. 
Speaker, are indeed the taxpayer. And that is where our concern 
lies. And if we can bring some efficiencies and help bring these 
efficiencies to the  

operations of our municipalities, we believe that it is the 
responsibility of the government to do that. Times change. This 
modified system has never been tried in our province, and 
perhaps it’s on the leading edge of new, modern municipal 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

Increase in STC Passenger Rates 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. Minister, could you confirm that our bus company, 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, is going to increase its 
passenger rates up to 20 per cent, effective tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can confirm 
that over the past number of months there have been 
applications before the Highway Traffic Board, by not only the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company but by other various 
bus companies that serve people in Saskatchewan. Those 
increases, I understand, have been approved by the Highway 
Traffic Board, and I understand that they will come into effect 
in the very near future. 
 
Respecting the amount of 20 per cent increase, I do not believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that that is accurate. The increases will be coming, 
I believe tomorrow. The rate increases have not been increased 
in STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) for a period of 
three or four years, I believe. But in no way will the rates 
increase 20 per cent. That’s not correct. 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question to the same minister. Mr. Minister, 
the rates from Saskatoon to Kamsack are currently $20.30; 
they’re going to $24.85 tomorrow. If that’s not 20 per cent, I 
don’t know what is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Since you people took government, the only 
thing you have done with Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, you sell off buses, trade newer buses for older buses. 
Is that what the people of Saskatchewan can expect from you? 
 
Why is it everything you have touched turns bad for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan? Why is it every cost to the people 
of Saskatchewan your government influences in any way has 
gone up in the past two years? And when can Saskatchewan 
people expect a break? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are up to 
their same old scare tactic tricks. The member will use a one 
single example where rates were adjusted and say all the rates 
are going up by 20 per cent. The member has selectively chosen 
one rate that we adjusted, but by no means, Mr. Speaker, are all 
rates going up 20 per cent. 
 
Now the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, will complain about 
the rates are going up. He complains last week and the week 
before that about STC losing money. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company is  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1697 
 

under severe financial pressures today. Every bus company 
across this country is under severe economic pressures. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I say that it is a good thing that this government 
has chosen to maintain service to rural Saskatchewan, which is 
of fundamental importance. And we will not, Mr. Speaker, 
embark on a campaign like the members opposite did and have 
fancy, luxury buses running up and down the highways. Our 
services go into rural Saskatchewan. We are serving the people 
the best we can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. 
Minister, I have other examples of a 20 per cent increase, and 
you should certainly be aware of it; if not, you certainly don’t 
have a handle on your department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — The average age of the bus fleet has gone from 
4.8 years, when you took office, to over 10.1 years now. You’re 
running STC into the ground. It’s well known, Mr. Minister, 
that your government intends to hang the “For Sale” sign on 
STC just like you intend to hand the “For Sale” sign up on all of 
Saskatchewan assets. 
 
Is that not what’s really behind this money grab? Are you just 
now adjusting the passenger rates so that when you friends in 
big business buy our bus company that they’ll have higher 
profit margin? And once again, Mr. Minister, are you not 
putting the interests of your big business friends ahead of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a very 
difficult time in following the member’s logic. I’ll review 
quickly with you, Mr. Speaker, some of the problems we face 
with the STC company. Indeed our buses are ageing. Indeed the 
losses are high in STC. Indeed the rates have had to be 
increased. Indeed we are losing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, indeed the 
buses are ageing, indeed the company is losing tremendous 
amounts of money, indeed there are specific routes that are 
subsidized heavily by the taxpayers of the province. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition has yet to come up with one concrete 
solution, one concrete solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working very hard; we are exploring all 
possibilities. And I would invite, I would invite the members 
opposite to come forth with some reasonable solutions — not to 
stand and complain about every single thing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to once again reinforce that no matter 
what the NDP say, no matter what the NDP say, service to rural 
Saskatchewan will be maintained, and if it takes some money to 
do that, Mr. Speaker, we will continue, we will continue to 
expend moneys on serving the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

Environmental Approval for Rafferty-Alameda Dams 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy 
Premier, the minister responsible for SaskPower. I have here, 
Mr. Minister, a Hansard from April 11 of this year, at which 
time you assured this House that federal approval for the 
Rafferty-Alameda dams was coming, and I quote, “ . . . sooner 
rather than later.” 
 
On Thursday of last week, the federal Environment minister 
stood in the House of Commons and said that he doesn’t have 
sufficient information to make a decision, so how is it that you 
can stand in this House and assure us that approval will be 
coming shortly, when even as late as last week, even now, the 
federal minister’s saying he doesn’t have enough information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I still have a very high 
level of confidence that the approval will be coming sooner 
rather than later. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think that members opposite 
will go into a terminal depression the day that that approval 
comes. Those members, Mr. Speaker, those members take great 
delight, great delight in the plight of agricultural Saskatchewan 
today, Mr. Speaker, great delight in the suffering that’s going 
on because, Mr. Speaker, of the drought that we’re experiencing 
at this particular time, and at the same time they do everything 
in their power to stop the best water management project that 
this province has ever seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And, Mr. Speaker, it will be a very 
happy day for Saskatchewan when that approval is finally in 
place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are talking here about the 
biggest political boondoggle this province has seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, the federal Minister of the 
Environment said in an interview with the press following his 
comments in the House of Commons, the federal minister said, 
I cannot issue the permit as long as there are big gaps in the 
information base. 
 
Obviously the only conclusion we can come to is that there’s 
some serious inadequacies in the environmental impact study. 
Mr. Minister, what are the gaps; what information is missing; 
and why aren’t you providing that information to the federal 
minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I want to talk a little bit about political 
boondoggles, Mr. Speaker. Political boondoggles . . . was it 
1979, I believe it was that very  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1698 
 

member, the member sitting in the Leader of the Opposition’s 
chair today, approved Lanigan phase 2, Lanigan phase 2, which 
is the root of our over-capacity problem today, Mr. Speaker, in 
the potash industry — the root of the problem, preceded by the 
nationalization of the industry, that built two mines with 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money in New Brunswick to compete 
with our industry here in the province now. If you want to know 
what a boondoggle is, I’ve just described one. 
 
Compare that, Mr. Speaker, to a dam, a Rafferty dam, that 
provides for cooling, cooling to a Shand project, Mr. Speaker, a 
thermal plant at Shand that is desperately needed in these years 
of low water flow where our hydro capacity is working at 20, 
30 per cent because of river flows, Mr. Speaker. And those 
people call it a political boondoggle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will be a sad day for Saskatchewan, for the 
country, if those people ever get into office in any province, in 
any place in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation 
Board Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Land Titles Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to take 
this opportunity to lay on the Table the Report of the Provincial 
Auditor to the Legislative Assembly for the year ending 1987. 
 
Order. Order. I think hon. members will have plenty of time to 
debate the auditor’s report. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Measures Needed to Counter Problems of Drought and 
Farm Debt 

 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to speak 
in the Assembly today on this issue of great importance to 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan farmers, Saskatchewan urbanites, 
and the Saskatchewan  

economy in general. At the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll be moving a motion along these lines: 
 

That the Assembly urge the Governments of 
Saskatchewan and Canada to implement immediately 
measures to assist Saskatchewan farmers facing crisis 
situations caused by drought and unbearable levels of farm 
debt. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe I have but one point to make 
today, and that point is the incompetence of this Tory 
government and the federal Tory government in handling farm 
situations, especially situations of crisis. 
 
Statistics show us, Mr. Speaker, that drought . . . we are in a 
worse drought in many areas than in the history of this 
province. To recognize this fact, we have statistics showing that 
the level of rainfall precipitation in Saskatchewan is at levels of 
40 to 50 per cent of normal in some areas and even less in other 
areas. 
 
But what is even more disturbing, Mr. Speaker, is that in 1985 
the federal government, Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Wise, the 
present minister, made an announcement on November 27. And 
I would just like to read that announcement. He said that $150 
million program he is announcing: 
 

. . . will provide immediate relief and we will continue our 
efforts to develop a long-term approach to emergency 
funding. 

 
He went on to say: 
 

It is disruptive to producers to live with the uncertainty of 
not knowing what back-up assistance they will receive 
when natural disasters occur, nor is it easy for the federal 
government to take on substantial new financial 
commitments which have not been previously budgeted. 
This is why we are viewing the crop disaster assistance 
program as a field test for permanent emergency 
assistance programs which could be offered to farmers as a 
complement or extension of the current crop insurance 
programs. 

 
Mr. Minister, that commitment was made in 1985 and out of 
that commitment what have we seen? We have seen no new 
programs. In 1985 the program was to increase crop insurance 
by 10 per cent. We have seen no long-term commitment to the 
livestock industry with regards to crisis situations as we are 
seeing right now. We have seen the federal government sit on 
it’s hands after making an announcement and now wait till 
farmers are again in a crisis situation before they and this 
government will get together to implement some type programs 
for the farmers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Now, Mr. Minister, I ask this government, 
today is May 31. We have had a crisis situation from drought in 
the livestock sector two or three months previous to this, and in 
fact it’s been building over the years. All the indicators have 
been there that there’s a problem, and what is the response of 
this government?  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1699 
 

This government responds by hoping for rain. And I’ll tell you, 
we all hope for rain, Mr. Speaker, but it doesn’t help those 
people who are directly affected by a drought situation. 
 
We have not seen any long-term programs in place. We have 
yet to see what assistance there will be as far as freight or 
transportation of either livestock to feed, or feed to livestock. 
We have seen nothing with regards to opening up Crown lands 
to grazing. We have seen nothing with regards to a program to 
assist farmers for this winter’s feed because there’s going to be 
a great shortage of feed around the province. Nothing concrete, 
and it’s May 31. 
 
And the Premier of this province stands in his place and he 
says: well go ahead boys and do whatever you like; we’ll cover 
you. And today we see an announcement of $12 million for 
western Canada. Well I’m just not sure how he’s going to 
manage covering everybody with that amount of money. 
 
The major problem that we’re having, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
have an industry, the industry of agriculture, in crisis. We have 
one sector of that industry that is currently faced with a drought, 
the livestock sector. 
 
The livestock sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has come 
through some very tough times. It’s come through low prices 
and farmers have been forced into . . . or many farmers are 
forced into divesting themselves of their herds. 
 
And now at a time when livestock and livestock prices are 
climbing up — they’re better than they’ve been in a long while 
— and farmers should be in a position to expand their herds, to 
make major improvements in their facilities, to make their 
operations better and more efficient, what do they have to do? 
 
Because of the lack of response from this government and the 
federal government, they are being forced to cull their herds. 
And in some cases, Mr. Speaker, they are being forced to in fact 
get rid of their herds. Many farmers with livestock are 
scrambling around trying to find places to graze their cattle. 
There are people from the south-west who have already taken 
their cattle over to the east side of this province, co-operating 
between farmer to farmer. 
 
Where’s the government? That’s the question I ask. Where’s the 
government two months ago, three months ago, a year ago, 
when this impending drought was coming upon us? And they 
sit here today and they tell us that announcements are coming. 
It’s just like the debt program that they have. And I call it the 
Tory debt program. And the effect of this is that farmers are in a 
crippling situation with regards to their income. 
 
And what is the response? I believe, Mr. Minister, that it is 
intended by this government and the federal government, due to 
the political nature of this, that they let farmers in this province 
go down on their knees and beg before they come up with any 
programs. And I say that because it is then they feel that the 
farmers will really appreciate any program put in by the Tory 
government. And that is a decrepit, low-life, crass way of 
handling the farm  

situation in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The drought in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 
basically centred in the Palliser Triangle of Saskatchewan. We 
have seen this drought, as in Regina, the worst in 88 years — in 
Swift Current the worst drought in 101 years. 
 
With this drought, the statistics show that the chance of 
recovery by the end of June, Mr. Speaker, runs about in the 
range of 30 per cent. And that means that we have to have a 
phenomenal amount of rainfall just to bring us back to normal 
by the end of June. 
 
And although that could happen, Mr. Speaker, we can’t rely on 
it. And if we can’t rely on it, we have to have programs in place 
that defend the farmers against this crisis situation — $6 billion 
worth of debt Saskatchewan farmers hold; a pending drought 
that could even further erode their income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you that the farmers of this province, the 
people working in small towns, people in Regina and 
Saskatoon, nobody in this province can afford to see those 
farmers lose even a further amount of their income. And while 
the government sits on its hands and waits for rain and drags its 
feet and makes more and more announcements on debt, on 
drought, we are losing our farmers. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, why this government and the federal 
government cannot or will not come up with a program. There 
have been suggestions by this side of the House; there have 
been suggestions by farm organizations. We all know what’s to 
be done. But yet they sit on their hands and drag their feet. 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, I think the major point here is that this 
government is incompetent, it’s incapable of handling the 
drought situation, it’s capable of handling the debt situation, 
and the result is that it throws up its hands in despair and does 
nothing. 
 
(1445) 
 
Today we are seeing the Minister of Agriculture, federal 
Minister of Agriculture, meeting with the provinces. Out of that 
meeting, Mr. Minister, I ask: will there be something concrete 
for the long term? Will there be something concrete for the 
short term? We have to put our industry . . . We have to 
maintain our industry — the beef industry, the livestock 
industry in general, and the grains industry. 
 
The crop insurance program has not had any major adjustments 
to it since 1985, and the adjustments made then were very, very 
minimal. We have seen crop insurance . . . the level of 
assistance not follow the income related to farm income. Even 
in the south, south of our borders, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 
the Governor of North Dakota make an announcement that it 
was a disaster area in his state. 
 
Now Governor George Sinner has a program in place,  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1700 
 

Mr. Speaker, with 12 points. Those point cover everything from 
grazing to transportation to the commodity credit corporation of 
the loan guarantee program. That is the type of long-term 
program that we need in Saskatchewan. And it’s beyond me, it 
is beyond me to know why this government fails to co-operate 
with the farmers of this province in order to maintain the basic 
industry we have, and that’s grains and livestock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also great urgency for this because we 
see other aspects that are affected. There’s the wildlife aspect; 
there’s the environmental aspect. And we’re asking farmers 
today to try to make a living on the income that they’re getting 
without eroding the soil, without mining the soils. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that just doesn’t work. A farmer who has 
had very short pasture right now and who maybe has some 
small growth is going to be overgrazing those pastures, even 
though he knows he’s not doing the right thing, because the 
government has failed to let him know what he can do if he 
can’t afford to do it on his own. And this is the major problem. 
 
If I have the money, if I’m a livestock producer and I have the 
money to move my cattle, to get a loan to feed them or to 
transport them, then I can wait. But as we know, because of the 
debt situation, many farmers don’t have that wherewithal to do 
that. And the government sits down, sits on their hands, and 
does nothing — waiting for rain, making further 
announcements. And I’ll say, Mr. Minister, announcements 
won’t feed the cattle; announcements won’t keep the people on 
the land. 
 
There are many, many situations in Saskatchewan where the 
farmers are throwing up their hands and saying: I have to go; 
there’s no point in fighting any longer. And I ask this 
government, why? In light of things like that that are 
happening, why are they waiting so long? 
 
We heard an announcement a few weeks ago on water. And that 
was fine if you looked at the statistics from the water 
corporation, the most recent statistics. Because the 
announcement was so late coming, the number of wells drilled 
and tested are actually, in some cases, lower, in some cases, the 
same as they were last year. Because the announcement wasn’t 
soon enough, people didn’t know what was coming or what 
they could do. Basically, they didn’t have the funds to do it and 
they had to wait, bringing them down to their knees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial Government of Saskatchewan has 
an obligation. The federal Government of Canada has an 
obligation. That obligation is to maintain the industry in 
western Canada, and in our case Saskatchewan, to have a 
long-term program that will kick in in any disaster situation, 
whether it be drought or insects or anything else or flooding. 
We don’t have that. 
 
We have programs that are based on political expediency. They 
are waiting for the right time to do the right thing so that the 
farmers of this province will actually, when they’re on their 
knees, say, well thank you, thank you very much. And I say, 
that is not the way, that is not the commitment, and that is not 
what the  

people of this province need. We need a government with 
foresight, we need a government with some compassion and we 
need a government that is competent and capable of running 
these programs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we have that. And that is why we 
on this side of the House have constantly asked this government 
to implement programs, asking them to speed up the process to 
let farmers know what’s happening. 
 
So with that . . . One minute? Okay, Mr. Speaker, with that I 
will move, seconded by the member from Quill Lakes: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Governments of 
Saskatchewan and Canada to implement immediately 
measures to assist Saskatchewan farmers facing crisis 
situations caused by drought and unbearable levels of farm 
debt. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to comment on 
two of the central problems that are facing agriculture today, 
and our resolution addresses those two problems, basically the 
drought situation and also the debt situation. 
 
I was surprised today to be in this House and, with the problems 
that are confronting agriculture in respect of the drought, 
particularly in the south-west of this province, that the minister 
stood here today, the Minister of Environment, and indicated 
that they’re waiting to see if it progresses and becomes worse. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that the situation with the drought 
is very, very severe. The statistics on this particular drought 
show that it is probably more encompassing and more 
well-entrenched than virtually any time previous in the history 
of recorded weather. 
 
It indicates here that the drought in areas affected in 
Saskatchewan — in Saskatoon it’s the worst drought that has 
had for 81 years; in Regina the worst in 88 years; in Swift 
Current it’s the worst drought in 101 years. 
 
If we take a look at the weather on the Prairies, and the maps 
indicate, Mr. Speaker, that in Lloydminster the percentage of 
normal precipitation from April 1 to May 17 — and we have 
more up-to-date maps — that Lloydminster had only 24 per 
cent of normal precipitation; North Battleford, some 12 per cent 
of normal precipitation; Saskatoon, 11 per cent; Biggar, 11 per 
cent; Kindersley, 26 per cent; Swift Current, 23 per cent; Maple 
Creek, 10 per cent of normal precipitation. 
 
And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker, that this is indeed a very 
major crisis confronting the cattlemen and the agricultural 
community in the area that I’ve mentioned, primarily in the 
south-west, stretching from Lloydminster to Rosetown, across 
to Saskatoon, over through Moose Jaw and into the Swift 
Current, the Gravelbourg, Ponteix, and Assiniboia area. This is 
the area that it is most damaging to the ranchers, to the 
cattlemen. And this  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1701 
 

government has stood by and has watched it, and the minister 
says we have to monitor further before any further assistance. 
 
I want to say that it’s no secret that agriculture is the backbone 
of our economy; that one of the pluses that has been going on is 
that in the cattle industry there has been a considerable upturn 
in the prices. And surely it would be a great set-back to the 
cattle industry here in Saskatchewan if the government were not 
to respond to assist cattlemen to maintain their herds. 
 
The loss of herds would seriously affect the cattle industry. If 
assistance isn’t given, many of the farmers are unable to finance 
alternative measures. And I may say that what we need, Mr. 
Speaker, as the member from Humboldt indicated, is 
government action now and not later. 
 
We read the various press reports and I can only indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, in respect to the area down by Ponteix, the soil in this 
farmer’s, Mr. Wellbrock’s, 2,000 acre farm is so dry that he 
hasn’t even started seeding. And another individual here by the 
name of Mr. McFarlane has already moved part of his 86-head 
cow herd north to pasture. His 250-acre, tame grass pasture 
resembles a parking lot rather than a field to support life. 
 
And the minister stands in this House and he says the federal 
government and the provincial governments have to stand by 
and wait to determine whether a drought is upon us. I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that what we need here is a government that 
will initiate long-term solutions as well as ad hoc, on-the-spot 
solutions. 
 
The people of the province will indeed co-operate. I say that 
working people and small-business people and professional 
people will support and financial assistance to our farmers who 
are in difficult situation because of a natural disaster, the 
drought. 
 
So I ask the government here to take effective steps, to put in an 
effective program to help to alleviate the problems. 
 
We have tried here, in this House, Mr. Speaker, to raise this 
issue to the government. We’ve raised it by initiating an 
emergency debate, and this government, the members opposite, 
refuse to let us debate the emergency of the drought situation. 
They turned it down. 
 
Later we tried another provision under rule 17, also trying to 
raise the concern of the drought situation. And although it was 
ruled to be an emergency situation, it was considered by Mr. 
Speaker at that time to be a long-term, continuing, and therefore 
would not be debated. 
 
So I want to say that members on this side of the House have 
been aware of the plight of the farmers in south-western and 
western Saskatchewan, and we have tried to move and to speak 
on behalf of them, and the government has prevented us in 
every turn. And accordingly, what we are doing today is rule 16 
debate is raising that concern. 
 
I can only say that in respect to the announcement today,  

it leaves much to be desired. In the telex, it indicated that Mr. 
Wise, the federal Minister of Agriculture, told reporters that 
he’s announcing $12 million aid for the prairie farmers stricken 
by drought. And he said that the money will be used to help 
producers, particularly those in livestock industry, to help them 
build wells, water pipelines, dug-outs, so that they can feed and 
water their livestock. 
 
Well I don’t think you can feed your livestock by having a 
supply of water. And there is a desperate need of either getting 
cattle to the pastures or getting feed to the ranchers in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is this government and the federal 
government has clearly indicated that the only time that they 
will act is for political reasons. The only time they will act is if 
there’s an election coming, in the offing. The federal 
government is now at the stage of about to call — if they dare 
— a federal election. And mercifully, the farmers of southern 
Saskatchewan, once they are down on their knees, they may get 
some further assistance from this government providing it’s 
politically expedient for the federal government and the 
provincial government to offer assistance. 
 
I want to say that in 1985, when the drought hit the south-west 
Saskatchewan, that we had eight members in our caucus and we 
took a tour through south-western Saskatchewan and we visited 
municipal councils, we visited financial institutions, like credit 
unions; we met with business men; we went throughout 
south-western Saskatchewan to draw attention to the plight of 
the farmers at that time. And only after we went and talked to 
the farmers and the farmers themselves organized meetings in 
various centres of Saskatchewan, 1,500 farmers in Bengough 
and another 2,000 in Swift Current, or thereabouts, only then 
would this government take any action. 
 
(1540) 
 
And they were sitting here on their hands with a caucus of 57 
and were ignoring the problem until the small caucus of eight 
decided to go and deal with the problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to do 
the same. We’re prepared to go and meet with the farmers of 
south-western Saskatchewan and western Saskatchewan, to 
address their needs, to allow them to have some input into what 
assistance should be given. 
 
Here they are sitting with legislative secretaries coming out of 
their ears. They have 10 legislative secretaries with special 
privileges, and they are not even out, reaching out, addressing 
the problems, not even talking to the farmers on their own 
bases. 
 
That is in my . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thanks for the 
opportunity to comment on this proposed motion of the 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1702 
 

 member from Humboldt. The words of this motion are not 
objectionable in themselves when you know what the record of 
this government is. 
 
You also know, Mr. Speaker, what the record of the member 
opposite is. Theirs is a record that is easily read and easily 
understood because theirs is a record filled with blank pages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the face of an agricultural challenge or issue, 
the NDP has admirably been consistent. The have no policy, no 
consistency, and they have done nothing for farm families in 
this province, again very consistently. That compares with this 
government’s record of hundreds of millions, and indeed 
billions of dollars, of direct and indirect support for farm 
families. 
 
And although the words of this motion carry some meaning, the 
motion is so replete with hypocrisy and double-dealing that it 
does not warrant the support of any of the members of this 
Assembly. 
 
At this very moment, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, 
the Premier of this province, engaged in emergency talks with 
Agriculture ministers across Canada — the meeting that is 
taking place due directly to the actions of our Minister of 
Agriculture. They have concerns and that’s why they are 
meeting. 
 
The opposition, I remember them saying in question period, the 
opposition said, this is not a provincial problem, when they 
were in power. It’s a federal problem. But I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a problem of Canada, and that includes all the 
provinces and the country of Canada. That meeting is to devise 
methods of support for the drought-stricken agricultural sector. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, is of course in addition to the significant 
program of water assistance already announced. The program 
will provide the transfer of water drilling wells and other water 
development through the office of Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, over and above the existing programs of Sask 
Water, along with an announcement that was made this 
morning by the PFRA, an additional $10 million. I believe it’s 
four and a half million dollars coming directly into 
Saskatchewan over and above what we have already. This, Mr. 
Speaker, is immediate assistance. 
 
But let me say that no person, and particularly those families 
involved in agriculture in the south-west of the province, 
believe for a minute that there are instant solutions to the 
challenges posed by our fickle climate. And, Mr. Speaker, while 
it is essential to ensure that farm families are able to make it 
through particular drought, it is extremely important indeed to 
keep a long-range picture clearly focused in our minds and 
develop programs and plans that will not only respond to crises 
that arise, but that will effect the minimum these crises in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition jeers at the Rafferty-Alameda 
project, a project that is trying to do something for agriculture 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re trying to build a dam to 
hold water. 
 

An Hon. Member: There’s no water . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Gleim: — I know. You got to build the dam first to hold 
water. You can’t hold water without a dam. And this is pretty 
hard to see how you’re ever going to hold water. And I know 
the member from Elphinstone laughs about it, but I’m sure he 
knows . . . I’m sure he’s built lots of dams in his day, and he 
knows you can’t hold water without building it. 
 
And I’ll tell you another thing, the Agriculture critic from 
Humboldt, they call well and water development programs of 
Saskatchewan Water “junk.” Now I’ll tell you, you come down 
in our part of the country and you call those kind of programs 
junk, I’m sure you’ll need a faster transportation out than what 
you come down with. 
 
They denigrate every effort that is made to prevent drought, and 
then they try to whip up a fever debate when the drought 
occurs. 
 
An Hon. Member: We’ll whip up a fever all right — kick you 
out of office. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — This is hypocrisy of the meanest kind, and you 
just . . . we just heard a little more of it from his seat over there. 
 
An Hon. Member: That’s the worst speech you’ve ever read. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — We won’t worry about what kind of a speech it 
is. We’re just talking some common sense over here, and that’s 
something maybe you have to learn about yet. 
 
They want droughts to be brought under control in this province 
because they would lose another tool of fear that they have 
cultivated so carefully. Thrive on drought — is that your 
agricultural policy? Is that your solution over there, is to say, 
we’ll thrive on drought? I have yet to hear one of them stand up 
and say what is the solution. 
 
I remember last fall when we were on our farm tour, the 
Agriculture critic from Humboldt, we did see him once, but we 
never did see him come forward to the microphone and give us 
a solution. But we did hear him after it was all over with come 
up and say, they didn’t do a thing for us. They didn’t do a thing 
for us. 
 
An Hon. Member: Can you solve the problem? 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Solve the problem? Come and help us solve the 
problem. None of you guys . . . I won’t repeat it; I won’t use the 
word that I’d like to use — but you don’t have it to come up 
here and give us a hand. 
 
An Hon. Member: We have more solutions than you can shake 
a stick at. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Well, I’ll tell you what, you better start shaking 
your stick because we haven’t heard of any solutions yet. 
 
I heard somebody say the other day, they asked us who the 
Agriculture critic was in Saskatchewan. I said, well  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1703 
 

don’t you know who the Agriculture critic is? It’s the member 
from Humboldt. The member from Humboldt; oh, well that’s 
fine. Have you never heard him talk about the solution to 
problems in agriculture? Yes, we’ve heard him talk, but we’ve 
never heard him come up with a solution. They always thought 
the member from Rosemont was the Agriculture critic because 
he did get up and talk about the Alameda-Rafferty dam, about 
doing away with it before it’s even built. 
 
So there’s some of the solutions, some of the agricultural 
policies that the members have from across the way. 
 
Let me ask you, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are serious about 
assistance to their farm families, why did they not take the 
opportunity with this motion to set out what they would do? 
What are their solutions? Why did they not provide farm 
families with their plan, both to deal with this drought, with 
future droughts, and the farm debt problem? 
 
They did not do this, Mr. Speaker, because they have no 
solution except land bank. That was their long-term solution. 
That’s why people wonder again, like I say, who their critic was 
because he has never yet come up with a long-term solution — 
maybe even a short one wouldn’t even hurt a little bit. Maybe it 
would even help. That is the answer to the farm debt problem of 
the members across. But I do not know why they think that 
deal, drought . . . unless they do as they say, suggest in the past 
and take the land out of production. 
 
Just let me read a quote for you, Mr. Speaker: — 
 

If we were far-seeing, we’d be taking land out of 
production. 

 
That comes from the leader of the NDP, October 7, 1986. I 
guess this is what they call a farm debt solution, is take the land 
out of production. 
 
An Hon. Member: Let’s hear what we’ve done today. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — You want to hear what we’ve done today. You 
went back to 1985. You talked there was nothing done in 1985. 
That was the year they helped out, they gave $60 a tonne for . . . 
or $60 per cow. 
 
An Hon. Member: And then asked for it back. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — They never asked for it back. They kept it. Did 
they get it back? 
 
An Hon. Member: They’re getting it back. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — When are they getting it back? Then they gave 
$125 grant to each animal out there — horses, cows — interest 
free. That’s something you guys . . . that’s something you 
people across the way never ever did do is give anything 
interest free. You never even . . . when the interest rates were 22 
and 24 and 25 per cent, what did you do? You left them there; 
you waited for them to go under so you could buy it back. Man, 
we got control over it. That’s what you like to call control. 
 
Another thing, the $25 an acre. It wasn’t such a bad deal  

when it come to take it, right. It wasn’t enough as far as you 
people were concerned, but it was put out there for a reason. It 
was put out there to help, and the farmers out there appreciate it, 
even though you people over there didn’t. But I’m pretty sure 
every one of you took it. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a solution to the farm 
families of the south-west. The people that I represent, they 
accept these kinds of programs. They welcome when we come 
out there and talk to them. We come out there, we talk to them 
before we put the programs into implementation. And that is 
something they appreciate. And Bob knows that over there. 
 
People out there, they want to produce on their own land. They 
want to keep the land. They want to keep it productive, not a 
government that will leave them to the whims of the high 
interest rates, then buy back so the land could be left idle. 
 
The NDP have told the people of Shaunavon constituency that 
they should be growing food on their land. Their land, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired for the member. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to enter this debate today, and partly because it 
affects an area of this province that I was born and raised in and 
educated in, and it’s an area that I have some strong feelings 
about, an area right adjacent to the member who just spoke. 
 
But I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that the reason I would 
support this motion is because this government has been remiss 
in developing any long-term planning for that area of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I think it’s well known that the climatic 
conditions are cyclical and we do run into conditions of drought 
on a fairly consistent basis in the southern and western part of 
the province. 
 
And I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that 
this government, although it’s had the opportunity to develop 
those programs, has done nothing since they’ve been in power 
in 1982 to give any long-term planning or long-term stability 
for that particular area. 
 
The minister, or the member across, talked about us whipping 
up a fevered debate and using the drought as a tool of fear. Well 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that those members on that side of 
the House have no reason to be talking about anybody being 
able to use the drought as a tool of fear if they had developed 
plans that would take the fear off of the backs of those farm 
families in this drought-stricken area of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — They spend a lot of time chirping on that 
side about this particular program and that particular program, 
but I want to say, Mr. Minister, what we need is an 
all-encompassing program that will void us of the  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1704 
 

problems of pest and drought and flood. 
 
But this government has been unable to develop long-term 
planning in anything. There’s no long-term planning in terms of 
fiscal management of this province. There’s no long-term 
management in terms of economic development by the people 
and for the people of this province. There’s no long-term 
planning in terms of keeping farm families together, in keeping 
small farmers on their land. This government has been void in 
all of these areas, and I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a 
shame that this government hasn’t developed the kinds of plans 
that would allow those types of things to happen in this 
province. 
 
And I want to say, I think we’re coming rapidly to a situation 
where this government isn’t going to have the funds in order to 
throw, just prior to election time, at a particular problem, 
because they’ve wasted, they’ve squandered, they’ve 
mismanaged funds that should have been available and could 
have been available to develop long-term plans and long-term 
programs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1515) 
 
Two years ago, the federal minister, Mr. Wise, indicated that he 
was going to develop some long-term legislation for drought 
and floods and pest infestation, and we don’t see that legislation 
now. We don’t see those programs now. But what we do see is 
a little conference in Alberta just prior to the time when his 
Prime Minister is sending him out here to try and buy the farm 
vote just prior to an election once again. 
 
And where has the minister of Agriculture, the Premier of this 
province, been? Why hasn’t he been lobbying the federal 
minister for this long-term plan that the minister has indicated is 
required? If he’s got the ear of the Prime Minister if this 
country, and if indeed that is the case, and if the Prime Minister 
of this country and the Premier of this province are sincere 
about the future of farming in Saskatchewan, surely to goodness 
since 1985 there could have been some new vision, some new 
ideas shared by this government with their federal counterparts. 
But we don’t see that. 
 
What we see is the federal minister jump on his jet, fly out to 
Alberta prior to an election, and throw a few paltry million 
dollars at what is a problem that is as severe as we have seen in 
Saskatchewan since the 1930s and beyond. And I say again, 
where is the long-term plan? Where is this caring, this feeling 
government, both from this Premier and the Prime Minister? 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, political expediency is the only thing 
that will create any help for Saskatchewan farmers from PC 
governments, both in Saskatchewan and in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I grew up in 
the Palliser Triangle. I was born and had a lot of my education 
in that area, and I know something of what those families are 
going through right now. I know the  

feelings of a farmer when he wakes up in the morning to see the 
sun beating down on parched earth. My family farms, and my 
father and my mother farmed, and I know the feelings of the 
people in the area. 
 
And I know that they’re disappointed that this government 
hadn’t acted, and acted in a meaningful way, in order to 
alleviate the problems of the drought that this government knew 
was there early this year. They knew there was no snow on the 
ground and they knew there was a potential problem, but 
nothing was done. 
 
The member across wants to know what our agricultural policy 
is. Well I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, he’ll know soon 
enough what the New Democrat’s provincial and federal 
agriculture policy is. And I would want to say to you, when he 
has a look at it, if he can still sit as a member on that side of the 
floor looking at the past performance of that government with 
no long-term planning, then his constituents deserve full well to 
turf him out and turf him out as soon as they can in the next 
election. They knew the problems, this government knew. 
 
In the town of Limerick where last year the citizens of that 
small community, very close to where I grew up, spent some 
$14,000 in order to pump water from a slough to alleviate their 
water problem. And they know full well that they’re going to 
have to end up going to Thomson Lake, in all probability, some 
27 kilometres away in order to bring water to their community. 
 
And this government has known that in terms of that particular 
community. They’ve had to go farther and farther away from 
their particular homes and their town in order to bring water to 
serve their needs. 
 
And it’s not new and it’s not a surprise, and I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, if the good Lord should send some rain down to rid us 
of this terrible drought problem that we’re facing, that that may 
for a short time alleviate the problems. But I think anybody who 
grew up in that area and knows the area, will understand that 
it’s bound to happen again. 
 
And the same was true in 1985 — the same was true in that 
time that this government knew that there would be future 
problems in terms of drought. But no long-term planning, no 
vision, and I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, no compassion. 
 
My colleague from Prince Albert says it appears that there is no 
long-term commitment. And I would agree with him because I 
say, if it doesn’t suit the political needs of the Progressive 
Conservative Party, it doesn’t happen. 
 
And I say to you there’s going to be droughts again just as sure 
the sun comes up in the morning and goes down in the evening. 
We’re going to be facing more drought conditions and more 
drought problems and there has to be long-term planning in 
order to rid ourselves of unnecessary hardship that I don’t 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that this government has the foresight or 
the commitment in order to make that happen. 
 
I want to say that the people of that area deserve better  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1705 
 

government that you’ve given, that this government has given, 
and that ad hoc measures aren’t what is required in order to 
give some security to that particular area. It’ll happen again, as 
I’ve said before, as surely as the sun comes up in the morning. 
And I would suggest that they deserve better than what the 
government has delivered. 
 
I’d like to as well indicate, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
has not got the ear of the Prime Minister of this country — has 
not, and I’ll repeat it again — unless it’s just prior to an 
election, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, your time has expired. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It would 
be very easy to be facetious and try to make this a comedy 
routine and trade insults back and forth across the floor, but, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a fairly serious situation. 
 
As the member who just spoke, we have farm families, we have 
families out there, we have towns, communities, that are 
suffering in a drought. But for the opposition to say that this 
province and this government is doing nothing, is totally 
erroneous — totally erroneous. No one can make it rain. God 
will decide when it rains — fair enough. The NDP cannot 
decide when it rains; we will not decided when it rains. But this 
government has acted and will continue to do so. 
 
In case you haven’t been reading the papers, or you haven’t 
checked out what’s happening in the province, especially in 
rural Saskatchewan, you may not have noticed that oh, I think, 
on May 10, I believe it was, the Minister of the Environment 
made an announcement that the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation would be putting another eight and a half million 
dollars into drought aid to help the very communities that the 
member just spoke about. And that’s going to do a lot to 
alleviate the situation. It’s not going to solve it, it’s going to 
help to alleviate it. They’re going to be able to dig wells; 
they’re going to be able to go into other areas for water. 
 
This morning the federal Minister of Agriculture announced, I 
believe it was just over $12 million to increase PFRA’s 
commitment to bring them up to what we had, as a province, 
put in place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find that fairly significant — $20 million 
for water, water development, for the very communities and the 
people that the members have been speaking about. 
 
An Hon. Member: Is that long-term help? 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Yes, long-term help. It won’t be something 
that’s just there for the moment. Those wells will last for years 
and years. And in the past years, Mr. Speaker, Sask Water 
Corporation has been providing assistance to those communities 
to further increase their water supplies. Unfortunately, the water 
tables are going down, they’re getting lower, we’re going to 
have to dig deeper. But we’re providing assistance, again, 
long-term assistance. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are asked to provide programs that are 
meaningful. Well, Mr. Speaker, $1.2 billion out to the people of 
Saskatchewan seems to me fairly meaningful, that in a time 
when they needed it, on the recommendation of such 
organizations as the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), Sask Wheat Pool, the National Farmers 
Union, farmers across Saskatchewan, and so on and so forth. 
 
When it comes time to pay back the loan, which was originally 
a three-year loan, we again listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan and extended it to 10 years. And there were some 
who said, oh, you should forgive it, you should give it back, 
you should just forget about it. But the problem that we have, 
Mr. Speaker, is it’s $1.2 billion. It was put out as a loan. We 
extended it to 10 years, made every opportunity for people to be 
able to pay it back. That’s long-term commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Crop insurance: we have introduced forage insurance in crop 
insurance, individual coverage for farmers in crop insurance. 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that over the years the former 
member for Shaunavon, now the member for Elphinstone, may 
even have collected on crop insurance. And if any of the other 
members have ever been farmers, they, too, might have 
benefitted from crop insurance. They may even have benefitted 
since we’ve made improvements to the program, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, long-term commitment. And I’d invite members 
opposite, if they have collected on it, to come clean and tell us 
how much. 
 
Let’s take a look at PFRA federal-provincial commitments, Mr. 
Speaker. We have conservation programs that are being funded 
federally in conjunction with our own programs here, and that 
comes from a Conservative government federally, a Tory 
government. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker? The members 
opposite stand up and sanctimoniously go on about how Tories 
are terrible and all the rest of it. But, Mr. Speaker, money is 
being provided. Conservation is being developed. 
 
The national scene: we’ve developed a national ag strategy that 
is helping to bring better understanding of what causes our 
cyclical downturns on the economic side. It isn’t just weather 
that hits us. It’s also world economic condition that hit us, and 
hit us very hard. 
 
Subsidies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what one of the main 
problems is. What we have, Mr. Speaker, is too many countries 
trying to subsidize their farmers for the purposes of controlling 
markets, and providing for their own particular situations, Mr. 
Speaker. And when you get to markets like the European 
Economic Community and the United States subsidizing their 
farmers, we in Canada, who are typically exporters of 80 per 
cent of our product, suffer. 
 
Our Premier has been trying to do his best to bring that to the 
attention of the world. Our Prime Minister just recently was in 
Europe again trying to bring into focus that very, very difficult 
question of farm subsidies. When you take a look at that 
situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you find that between the 
droughts, the frosts, the floods the farmers are subject to, couple 
that with the high subsidy wars that are going on in the world, 
our farmers are in  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1706 
 

difficulty. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why, when we were asked to provide 
6 per cent money, we did. That, Mr. Speaker, is why, when we 
were asked to provide 8 per cent money for young farmers to 
start farming, we did, at a time when interest rates were 16, 18, 
20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta for years and years, feeder associations 
were the order of the day, cattle feeding associations. A group 
of people would get together, form an association, put their 
cattle in, feed them out. They could get particular benefits from 
the government in low-interest loans, long-term loans, so on 
and so forth. But it wasn’t allowed in Saskatchewan. Heaven 
forbid! The former administration wouldn’t allow it. 
 
But we put those in. And today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are 
feeding out more cattle in this province than ever before. That 
provides not only jobs for our people in the processing industry, 
but also provides another market for the grain that we produce. 
 
We talk about vision. Let’s talk about vision. Vision, Mr. 
Speaker. The opposition talks about vision. At a time when we 
have a drought on our hands, they talk about vision and then 
they put their blinkers on and say, don’t build Shand, don’t 
build Rafferty. I mean, Mr. Speaker, does it make any sense? 
 
We’re trying to put together a situation where you will have 
reservoirs of water, Mr. Deputy Speaker — water, which is 
what you need when you have a drought. It is called drought 
proofing. 
 
But the opposition says, don’t do it; don’t do it. And they talk 
about vision. I mean, they are deliberately going blind, which is 
no surprise to anyone. They are deliberately ignoring those 
things which can help in future droughts in future years. And 
they talk about long-term strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it boggles the mind how a party, how a group of 
people can be so insensitive to future needs that they will not 
agree to building these types of projects which will help to 
drought proof the province. I imagine they would have been 
against building the Diefenbaker Lake system. I imagine they’d 
have been against that because . . . well I’m not too sure why, 
but they probably would have been. 
 
(1530) 
 
I can’t imagine anyone not seeing the benefits that that 
particular project has provided for the province to date — 
water, drought proofing, recreation. 
 
And then when we talk about Shand and Rafferty they say, 
don’t do it. They actively, actively work against it. It’s 
unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, just unbelievable. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the farm debt situation which has been 
accentuated by the droughts that we’ve had, and the problems 
with foreign subsidies, grain markets going down. We bring in 
protection for the farm families in Saskatchewan and the 
member for Humboldt calls the  

protection that we introduce, “junk.” Junk. Home quarter 
protection — his very words were, it’s a bunch of junk. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you have an ag critic like that, 
I mean what can you expect from a group of people. When 
you’ve put in protective legislation designed to help farm 
families, designed to provide a certain amount of security for 
those people who are sitting there not knowing, not knowing 
what their future might be, when you have the compassion and 
the foresight to do that and you have a member of the NDP call 
it junk — I am really upset, Mr. Speaker. I’m really upset. 
 
And I hope all of Saskatchewan heard him say it. And if they 
didn’t, I’m sure we’ll go out and tell them because they have 
the right to know that the ag critic from Humboldt, the member 
from Humboldt, calls farm protection legislation junk. 
 
Now that just shows you the calibre of people they have over 
there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it boggles the mind. Again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we talk about vision . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with 
appreciation that I stand and speak on this motion that is put by 
the member from Humboldt and seconded by the member from 
Quill Lakes, because for the past month this legislature from the 
opposition benches has been pushing this government almost 
daily to try to get some action on the drought which is taking 
place in southern and western Saskatchewan. As early as March 
31 the issue was raised in this Assembly, and it’s ironic that we 
are still pushing this government to try to bring in a program 
that would deal with the drought and the problem facing 
farmers as a result of the drought. 
 
Now the member from Kelvington-Wadena, as he speaks about 
the issue of drought, raises only one program that has meant 
anything to the farmers of Saskatchewan, and that is the crop 
insurance program, a program brought in by a New Democratic 
government back in the 1970s. The only program that he brags 
about having any impact during a drought situation, is the crop 
insurance program. And I agree with him. That is the only 
program that will have meaning this year. 
 
And he talks about the water. And I have here the press release 
that come out of Calgary after a month of negotiating, and it 
talks about digging dug-outs. Well the farmers down in the 
south-west will wonder about a government that after studying 
for a month the problem of the drought, would come forward 
with millions of dollars to dig dug-outs. Because digging 
dug-outs in May and June of this year, in 1988, doesn’t seen to 
be dealing with the drought program. 
 
And spending millions of dollars on pipes and pumps when 
there is no water to pump doesn’t seem to make a lot of sense 
either. And when it comes to wells for farmers, the vast 
majority of farmers already have wells. The problem is they 
have no feed for the cattle. They have no feed for the cattle, and 
no money to buy feed. 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1707 
 

Now what this party is pushing for from the opposition benches, 
is a program that would put in place a subsidy program directly 
to the farmers, and pay them between 50 and $90 per head for 
each cow or each livestock head on the farm that would allow 
them to go out and purchase the feed that it would take in order 
to keep the cattle herd in place. 
 
Well the member from Kelvington-Wadena, when he talks 
about all of the programs and the tours that his members have 
taken to try to deal with this program since 1985, should be 
putting that money into helping farmers. Because after years of 
travelling around the province on the debt issue, they come up 
with Bill 37 which has not 1 cent of money for farmers, not 1 
cent to deal with the debt problem. 
 
An Hon. Member: Do you call it junk? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I call it junk, total junk. I agree with . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: You’re calling it junk? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I agree with it. It’s total junk. There’s 
nothing in it for farmers. 
 
An Hon. Member: Do you have him on record? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You have it on record. 
 
An Hon. Member: Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And here’s Bill 37, which cost thousands 
of dollars to tour the Tory caucus around, should have been 
paid for by the Tory Party that comes up with a Bill that is junk. 
It has nothing more in it than what was there before. 
 
All it does is open up more land to foreign ownership; it 
increases to 320 acres the amount of land that foreign investors 
can pick up in this province. That’s all that it changes. There’s 
nothing new in this Bill, except to allow corporations ownership 
where they weren’t allowed to buy up that kind of parcel of 
land. That’s the big change that there is in this Bill. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what about the problem facing 
farmers, of drought and debt? What is there in the Bill? There’s 
nothing. What is there in the announcement that would deal 
with the urgency of the problem that farmers have, the $8 
million that has been announced. There’s not one thing here — 
pumping water from where? Where are they going to pump the 
water from? Where are they going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Rafferty. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Why would they dig a dug-out in June of 
1988 when there’s no water around? The members say Rafferty, 
the billion dollars they’re spending on Rafferty is going to help 
farmers this year. 
 
If it had been in place this year, there wouldn’t be enough water 
to cool the generator, let alone have anything for  

farmers, and everyone knows that. Their own investigation and 
their own research shows that this year there would have not 
been enough water to cool the generator, let alone have any 
water to irrigate or pump onto any farm land. 
 
So the member from Kelvington-Wadena, when he talks about 
Rafferty, simply is either trying to mislead the farmers of this 
province or he’s totally ill-informed — one or the other. I think 
he’s trying to mislead the farmers because there is no water. 
 
There was no run-off in the area, and if Rafferty had been in 
place this year, it would have proven to be the boondoggle that 
we know it will be because there isn’t the quantity of water to 
both cool the generator and provide irrigation water. There just 
isn’t, and their own studies prove that. And that’s why they’re 
very leery about talking about it in any detail and bringing 
forward the reports. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at this government’s 
record in rural Saskatchewan, it is one of ripping and tearing at 
the rural fabric. It’s not only the fact that they haven’t dealt with 
the debt problem and the drought problem, but if you look at the 
farm families who have been devastated by program cuts like 
the dental program and the drug program, we see that farmers 
who are facing disaster economically are also being told that no 
longer do they need social programs like family income, where 
the money has been cut. The dental program which has been 
slashed and cut away where there’s no rural dental program in 
existence any more. The drug plan, which has meant hundreds 
of dollars for some farm families, increased in what they have 
to pay for medical bills. 
 
I say to you that this government is a heartless government 
when it comes to farm families, and it’s not as if they haven’t 
had time to develop programs. They put out a billion dollars to 
farmers in loans at 6 per cent. That’s when things were bad. 
Then at 18 months later or two years later when things were 
even worse, they said, we want the money back, and not only 
want the money back, but we want to increase the interest rate 
by 50 per cent, from 6 per cent to nine and three-quarters. 
 
Now this is an interesting concept where there was such a 
disaster in 1985 or 1986, where they lent out a billion dollars at 
6 per cent. It was such a disaster when wheat was 3.50 that they 
had to lend out 1.2 billion. Such a disaster. Then in 1988 after 
the election, they say when the price of wheat has dropped to 
2.50, we now want the money back, and we don’t only want the 
money back at 6 per cent, we’re going to increase the interest 
rate by 50 or 55 per cent. That’s after they studied the problem. 
 
They drove around the province at taxpayers’ expense and they 
said here is the solution, here is the solution to the problem 
facing farmers. We’ve loaned the money out at 6 per cent; we 
loaned it out at 6 per cent when wheat was 3.50; now when 
wheat is 2.50, we want it back at nine and three-quarters. 
 
Well I can see why the people of the province in rural 
Saskatchewan are rejecting the program of this  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1708 
 

Conservative government. And I know that when the 
announcements come out of the Calgary meeting, we will be 
disappointed once again because we know full well that the 
commitment and promises that were made to rural 
Saskatchewan, both in 1982 and 1986, will have been broken 
again. 
 
But I want to go back to the problem of debt and the disaster 
that that is creating for farmers in rural Saskatchewan. We have 
seen since 1982 an exodus from the farms such as hasn’t been 
seen since the 1930s. The number of young and starting farmers 
going broke with this Conservative government is that record of 
proportions. 
 
All you have to do is drive into any small rural town and you 
will see businesses closed up — record numbers, implement 
dealers. In fact, in the town of Shaunavon, I believe there are 
now three implement dealers less than there were in 1982 when 
this Conservative government was first elected with a promise 
that they would make things better is the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, if you drive to the rural areas and check out other 
businesses, manufacturing, like Friggstad Manufacturing, which 
was flourishing in the Shaunavon consistency down in Frontier 
— bankrupt because the government pulled the rug out from 
underneath of them when things got tough. 
 
So I say to you that when it comes to small business people and 
farmers in rural Saskatchewan, they’re catching on to these 
birds and catching on very quickly. And that’s why we would 
challenge these people that if they’ve got rural members who 
intend to resign, and we know that there are some of them that 
aren’t intending to run in the next election, we challenge them 
to do it early, call early by-elections so we can test the water in 
rural Saskatchewan and check whether or not your programs are 
making economic or political sense, because I believe they’re 
not. 
 
So we see the Deputy Premier talking from his seat about the 
great, great job that this government has done. And he brags 
about Rafferty. This great boondoggle . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to stand here and speak on behalf of a 
motion that I’m not sure that has its worthiness to be spoken of 
in this Chamber this afternoon. But nevertheless, we have now 
heard from a number of the urban farmers that the NDP seem to 
have in this legislature. 
 
I want to say that we just have heard, Mr. Speaker, from the 
member from Elphinstone, the former member from 
Shaunavon, and I just want to inform the people of 
Saskatchewan and this Assembly that the people of Shaunavon 
remember just exactly how much the NDP did for the farming 
and the rural parts of this province when the member tried 
running in Shaunavon again against my colleague on this side 
of the House, the now member from Shaunavon, and he found 
out how quickly  

a member can be defeated by not looking after the particular 
problems throughout this province, and especially agriculture 
— and agriculture as the priority of this province. I want to say 
that he’s now sheltered himself in Elphinstone, in the 
constituency of Elphinstone, because it was quite a drought for 
him in Shaunavon as far as the votes went. 
 
I want to get on to the particular issue at hand here, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say to you that as the member from 
Elphinstone was speaking, he had mentioned that it was that 
side of the house that was forcing this government to do many 
things for the farmers in this province. Well, Mr. Speaker, as I 
stand here and speak, and as . . . right to this particular moment, 
I have as of yet heard from the members opposite, the NDP, 
that said they’re so concerned and with the new ideas and 
everything, I have not ever heard them bring an idea into this 
Assembly and publicly put it forth and lay out any type of a 
platform to this government in which they would help the 
farming community, let alone small business or anyone else in 
this province. 
 
(1545) 
 
I challenge those members opposite, the NDP, Mr. Speaker, to 
come out with those programs to help the farming community 
and the droughts in the bad economic time. But they haven’t. 
They haven’t. They stand there and they get up as a bunch of 
righteous people and say that . . . and condemn everything that 
we have been possibly doing to ease the burden for farmers. 
And yet, no. They stand there and criticize, and that basically 
all we get is just a whole bunch of nothing. 
 
When we talk about . . . when they talk about us, the 
government, not having any money available to farmers. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I think, and as the member from Elphinstone says, 
he challenges anybody on this side of the House in their ridings. 
Well I do take that seriously, and I want the member from 
Elphinstone, our urban farmer, our urban cowboy, to come into 
the riding of Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and I will challenge him 
today and I will challenge him in a public debate out in my 
riding, that what he has indicated here of this government’s 
record for agriculture, I will challenge our record to his record 
publicly any day. And I invite that member to come out to my 
riding and take me up on this challenge. 
 
And he says, Mr. Speaker, that he challenges any one of us to 
resign from our seats and test the water, and everything else like 
this. Well I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, then I challenge 
the member from Humboldt, I challenge the member from Quill 
Lakes and I challenge . . . I guess that is the only kind of rural 
ridings they do have. But I would like to challenge those two 
members to resign. 
 
And yes, we will test the waters, Mr. Speaker. We will test the 
waters just to see who will be back in. And I guarantee you, Mr. 
Speaker, that rural Saskatchewan will put those two members 
on this side of the House, and they will not return it to the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1709 
 

Mr. Hopfner: — They will not return those ridings to the NDP. 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of the farming community I 
represent, I want to say that my farmers out in my particular 
riding are totally gratified to the amount of help that this 
government has shown to agriculture. I want to say that this 
should not be a game of politics when we’re actually talking 
about agriculture and drought. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we see this kind of 
dilemma in our society, that no one should be trying to get any 
real benefit out of politics from such a bad turn of events. And I 
think that all parties, all parties in this legislature should work 
together and acknowledge a good thing when a good thing’s 
done. And we all know that we should be doing so much more. 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is a limitation to the amount of dollars 
that are available to a government. 
 
And a government does not just have one particular department; 
it has many departments where those dollars have to be divided. 
If we took from Education or Social Services or from all 
different realms of the coffers, took those dollars and put it just 
into Agriculture, well everybody else would be suffering. So we 
have to try to operate within means so that to divide it equally 
and try to appease everyone and not have various people having 
to struggle needlessly. 
 
I think we are seeing, Mr. Speaker, some change within the 
farming communities. I know, like my farmers out there have 
indicated to me that we have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: My farmers! They aren’t your farmers; the 
farmers in the constituency I represent. My farmers! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And the member from Quill Lakes is spilling 
out again, you know. He’s the member from . . . that I challenge 
for him to resign and we’ll test the waters in his riding. 
 
But getting back on the point, Mr. Speaker, my farmers, my 
farmers would and do appreciate what we’ve done, and what I 
am saying to you is that they are saying to me that as long as we 
can maintain the type of level that we are showing, that they 
will and should be able to survive this dilemma. 
 
When the members talk about building and drought and 
everything else, and they talk about water, well that’s what our 
government is trying to do, Mr. Speaker — we’re trying to 
build up a water supply in this province, which they’re against. 
The member from Eliphanstone (Elphinstone), our urban 
climber, he was talking about where are they going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Eliphanstone! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Pardon me. 
 
But they were going to . . . He was wondering where they were 
going to . . . Sorry about that. They were wondering where they 
were going to be pumping the water from and stuff like this. 
But, you know, we have to build up these various different 
water areas so that there is this water  

supply and pumping availability. 
 
But I think basically, Mr. Speaker, the people in Saskatchewan 
. . . I must have hit a funny-bone with you, Mr. Speaker. But 
anyway I’m sure that . . . anyway with this kind of investment 
in this province and with us as a government at least showing 
that type of respect for such a major industry such as farming, 
that we can almost rest assured that our farming community is 
much more, much more at ease than it had been back into 1980 
. . . 1979, 1980, 1981, where I can remember the farmers were 
really hollering for a tremendous amount of help when interest 
rates hit 24, 25 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That certainly was 
an entertaining intervention by the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. I would like to point out to him however, 
though, that only elephants in the constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone are those that rolled over the Tory candidate on 
May 4 by-election in that constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — In terms of testing the water, the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloyd invited some of the members on this side 
to go out and test the waters in his constituency, and I want to 
assure him that we have tested the waters in his constituency. 
Many members on this side of the House have been in Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster riding, talking to people, listening to their 
concerns. And one of the things we found when we were out 
there, Mr. Speaker, is a report card done by Jeff Harder from 
one of the local newspapers. There’s a big title. It says: . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has expired. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — By leave of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, we will go to second readings, Bill No. 5. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to declare A Day of Mourning for 
Workers Killed or Injured in the Course of their 

Employment 
 

Mr. Hagel: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill was originally introduced to this Assembly on 
April 26 and at that time was referred to the Non-Controversial 
Bills Committee by unanimous consent. 
 
However, the proposed Bill, as currently printed, states the 
coming into force as April 28, 1988. Because the committee did 
not have opportunity to consider the Bill by that date, and 
because the committee does not have the authority to amend the 
Bill, it referred the Bill back to this Assembly. 
 
It is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that the committee did not 
consider the Bill controversial in the normal sense of the 
meaning of that word, but found itself unable to recommend 
Bill 5 to the Assembly within the rules which  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1710 
 

apply to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Subsequently, the Bill is before us now, Mr. Speaker, and given 
the opportunity, I will be moving an amendment in committee 
of the whole to permit the coming into force of the Bill to be 
retroactive to April 28, 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the government’s co-operation to deal 
with this non-partisan private member’s Bill, to put in 
Saskatchewan law the official declaration of April 28th of each 
year as a day of mourning for workers killed or injured in the 
course of their employment. 
 
It is the Saskatchewan tradition to recognize the contributions 
of our citizens who have been a part of building our great 
province. We frequently and appropriately recognize the efforts 
and accomplishments of public leaders. This Bill gives official 
recognition to the sacrifices made by thousands who quietly go 
about doing their jobs, unsung heroes if you like. 
 
In no small measure, working men and women are an intricate 
part of the process of building Saskatchewan, of making this 
province an excellent place to live, to raise a family, to learn, to 
find opportunities of many kinds, and to retire. Working men 
and women are truly the backbone of our economy and our 
society. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, many of our citizens are injured in 
the process of making their living and building our province. 
Even more unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, every year some 
working men and women suffer the ultimate sacrifice in the 
course of their labours. It is the harsh reality that some of our 
citizens die as the result of work place accidents. 
 
In Saskatchewan the Workers’ Compensation Board settled 
claims for 29 workers killed on the job in 1986. Their average 
age was 37, and in addition to leaving their families with a very 
personal loss, there was a potential earnings loss to age 65 of 
some $20 million. Twenty-seven more were killed on the job in 
1987. 
 
In 1986 the Workers’ Compensation Board settled 598 claims 
for permanent disability, and over 470,000 days were lost 
because of injuries. In 1987 the board settled another 132 
claims for permanent disability with a loss of some 408,000 
days due to injury. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 12 years from 1976 to 1987, Saskatchewan 
lost 492 workers; 492 killed on the job, with another 6,913 
experiencing a permanent disability. 
 
Implicit in the passing of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a call for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to rededicate itself, to recommit 
itself to the improvement of occupational health and safety 
standards both by statute and by enforcement. 
 
We in this House know that we will likely never see a year 
without workers experiencing disabling injuries or suffering a 
single fatality on the job. But surely it is the objective of an 
injury-free work place that must be our goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a spirit of co-operation, I recognize that  

April 28 was proclaimed a day of mourning in recognition of 
workers killed, injured or disabled on the job, last year by the 
Minister of Labour, and this year by the Premier. 
 
I call on all members to support this Bill, making April 27 an 
officially recognized day of mourning, as a matter of statute and 
as a symbol of ongoing commitment to a safer work place for 
the backbone of our province, the working men and women of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, an Act to declare a Day of 
Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured in the Course of their 
Employment, be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of brief 
words, recognizing that the Bill is non-controversial and ought 
not to generate a great deal of debate, and just to support the 
member in his desire to have this date set aside in statute, 
there’ll be no resistance at all from this side of the House. 
 
Unfortunately our minister responsible, I know, would have 
wanted to, in the ordinary course, offer some comments at this 
stage. He’s also chairman of leg(islative) review committee, 
which is sitting at this very moment. So I just want to point out 
to all hon. member that he, in all likelihood, during the 
committee stage would put his remarks on the record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I would urge all members to support this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — With leave of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, I move we go on to Government Orders, Committee of 
Finance. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 
 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a 
few brief questions to the minister respecting one of the 
employees of the corporation, a particular Shirley Hammond. 
And I wonder if you can confirm that Shirley Hammond is an 
employee of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that you’re talking 
about Sheila Hammond. We don’t have a Shirley Hammond. So 
rather than get involved in a bunch of  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1711 
 

nonsense, I’ll tell you that we do have a Sheila Hammond and 
she’s the assistant director of public affairs. That’s about all I 
can tell you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can you tell the House when this Sheila 
Hammond — and I must apologize, I misread my notes here — 
when this Sheila Hammond started work with the corporation 
and what paper qualifications she might have had to bring to her 
job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — She was the manager of the 
communications secretariat at June 1, 1984. And her 
qualifications are a two-year paralegal course, including real 
estate law; four years experience in the private sector as 
paralegal; three years experience with trust company 
mortgages; economics 100, business law and administration at 
the University of Regina; and appraisal 100 through the 
Appraisal Institute of Canada — all real estate courses that 
connect her very well with Sask Housing. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — But she’s employed in the area of public 
affairs. Is there anything in her background that to your mind 
would particularly suit her for a job in public affairs, as say 
distinct from other aspects of the corporation where her work, 
her background in legal work or background in financial 
institutions might stand her in good stead? 
 
Just what particular qualifications does she have in the area of 
public affairs that you would see fit to have her appointed as 
assistant director of public affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well certainly in her communications 
secretariat she established a detailed program for various 
sod-turning ceremonies; she arranged housing authority 
appointments and related activities; she arranged official 
openings, and there was no question that that’s all public affairs 
related. And I would suspect that as a result of that she became 
pretty familiar with public affairs section of the corporation, 
and coupled with the extensive qualifications of time that she 
spent at school, she’s obviously an intelligent young woman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can you just tell the House what her 
salary is, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Her present salary is $3,016 per month. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if Ms. 
Hammond has taken any leave this year for vacation purpose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I understand that she did take a little bit of 
time off recently, for which she was not paid. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — This was unpaid leave then. I have your 
assurance on that point — that she was not paid while she was 
away, reputedly in Hawaii? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don’t know where she was, but I have 
been informed that she took some time off recently, a week or 
two, and that she has not been paid for that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just want to back up for a minute in  

terms of qualifications. Is this the same Sheila Hammond who’s 
a former president of the Progressive Conservative Party 
women’s federation or women’s group? Perhaps you can tell 
me what the exact organization is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Most certainly. I responded to that last 
year. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, would you mind 
responding again this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I gave you the same response. I said, 
certainly it’s the same lady. I responded to that last year. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The PC woman’s federation, is that the 
name of the group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don’t know what the name of the 
organization was, Mr. Chairman. It was the PC Saskatchewan 
women’s association. I don’t believe that that particular 
association is in existence any more. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Obviously, that last comment Mr. 
Minister . . . I won’t speculate on the reasons why its not in 
existence any more, but has Miss Hammond applied for 
educational leave, and if so, can you tell me the terms and the 
conditions of the educational leave? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, she is on education 
leave. That was approved September 1, 1987. It’s in accordance 
with the education policy approved by treasury board in 1974 
and administered by the Public Service Commission since 1981 
— all the same program. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And can you tell us for how long this 
educational leave will go on, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that that 
particular program provides for a maximum length of time, 
subject to the employee receiving passing grades and the course 
in which they’re enrolled. She’s enrolled in the second year of 
pre-journalism and communications, and her present salary, in 
accordance with the policy, is 80 per cent of her normal salary, 
which amounts to $2,412.80 per month. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let me just get this straight now. She’s 
in the second year of her program. Have you already paid for 
the first year of the program? Is there going to be third year of 
the program? Could you just be a little bit more forthcoming 
here about the length of time that you’ve committed for her 
educational leave? Can you please tell us that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ve been informed that she had taken 
some classes prior to her approval for education leave under the 
existing Public Service Commission program, and that we 
began her education leave September 1, 1987, and it was for six 
semesters, to expire May 1, 1990, subject always to her 
receiving passing grades. And that’s within the normal policy 
dictated by the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Minister, I tell you that might be 
the policy of the Public Service Commission, but I don’t think 
that anybody in this House, I don’t think that  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1712 
 

anyone in this House can rightfully recollect someone who’s 
moved into a corporation such as this for no other particular 
reason than their political allegiance, then being sent to school 
for three years. 
 
I just want to back up for a minute here and make it clear for the 
people of Saskatchewan that this particular person is the 
president of some PC federation, who’s been employed by the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in the area of 
communications first, and then public affairs. 
 
And it would appear from the qualifications that you’ve listed 
that she was not particularly well qualified for any of those 
jobs. That’s not to say that she wasn’t qualified for other jobs 
that she’s trained for in the past, such as for a paralegal or work 
in financial institutions, but was not particularly well qualified 
in the area of communications or public affairs. And to top it all 
off, to top it off you’ve now sent her to school to study 
journalism which might make her qualified for the kind of job 
that she’s holding now. 
 
(1615) 
 
What we see here, Mr. Minister, is a double standard, the likes 
of which we don’t see very often in Saskatchewan except under 
your government, where you’re taking a person with very little 
job experience in a corporation and saying, well we’ll send you 
to school for three years. I’d like to know who else in the Public 
Service Commission is getting that kind of help from your 
government. 
 
How in your right mind — how in your right mind can you 
justify taking a political hack, sending her to school for three 
years at 80 per cent of her salary, while there’s all kinds of 
young people in this province who want to go to school, who 
are having a tough time to get loans and bursaries to pursue a 
university education? 
 
What we see here is a government that is willing to favour its 
political hacks and send them to school at 80 per cent of a very 
generous salary, and on the other hand doesn’t have the kind of 
money for university students in post-secondary education. 
There’s a horrible double standard, Mr. Minister, and especially 
so because this is not the kind of treatment that would be 
afforded to anyone else in the public service. 
 
Can you tell me one other instance, Mr. Minister, one other 
instance of a member of the public service who after three or 
four years of employment has been so well favoured by the 
government that they would support a request to send that 
person to university for three years at 80 per cent of their 
salary? Name me one other person who has been so favoured by 
your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ve been informed that this policy has 
been in place, Mr. Chairman, for a long time. And when I say a 
long time, I don’t know, maybe 20 or 30 years — certainly 
under the regime of the NDP. It’s a Public Service Commission 
policy available to the employees, and that it’s used from time 
to time. So if it was used in this occasion, I have nothing to hide 
or fear or be ashamed of. We just used an existing policy that’s 
been in place for a long time. 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, one 
person could take a policy, and with common sense and some 
prudence, make the policy seem fair and work effectively. But 
then there’s others, like yourself, who seem to throw caution, 
common sense, and prudence right out the window if it comes 
to favouring your friends. And that’s the case here. 
 
I ask you again: give me an instance of one person in the Public 
Service Commission who has been so well favoured by the 
government, so well favoured, that after three or four years of 
employment that the government would deign to pay for that 
person to go to school for three years at 80 per cent of their 
salary. Give me on instance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, he’s talking estimates that 
are not mine, but I will take this undertaking. When the Public 
Service Commission is discussed in these estimates, I will 
ensure that the minister has a long list of the way that this 
education has been used prior to 1981. And if you prefer to drag 
the employees’ names through this Assembly, we will. And we 
will have a list of, I don’t know how long, if you prefer that. 
 
It’s not my department; I can’t respond. But I will undertake to 
talk to my colleague and research that information prior to 1981 
to establish the fact that his is a normal leave that has been in 
place for a long, long time. And we will come up with the 
instances that you’re looking for, and they’ll be under the NDP 
administration. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’ve done the 
Public Service Commission estimates, but no doubt about it, 
that we will have further opportunity in the future to ask 
questions about this particular case. 
 
Whatever the policy might be, it’s clear to the people of 
Saskatchewan that this is a gross abuse of your responsibilities 
as a minister, that you would take someone who has been hired 
for no other reason than because of their political connections, 
and then send that person to school for three years at 80 per cent 
of their salary at a time that there is hundreds, if not thousands, 
of young people in Saskatchewan that are interested in 
furthering their education but can’t get the kind of help that they 
need from government to be able to do that. Mr. Minister, it 
speaks of a double standard that is simply gross in this province 
and I have no further questions of you, Mr. Minister, and will 
turn it over to my colleague. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ve got a 
couple of questions to the minister on a similar vein in terms of 
employment practices by the corporation. 
 
I want to refer the minister to an employee who took maternity 
leave and who resigned her job with the Sask Housing 
Corporation, an employee whose name was Jenny (Genevieve) 
Wakelam, and who lives in my constituency who had many 
years of service at the Sask Housing Corporation. 
 
A temporary job came open for which Ms. Wakelam was well 
qualified through her years of employment. I know Mr. Boys is 
sitting here today and I requested from Mr.  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1713 
 

Boys, earlier on, the reason why Ms. Wakelam was not hired on 
the temporary job when in fact an employee who was hired had 
no experience with the corporation, did not possess, according 
to the employees there, did not possess even the clerical skills 
necessary to carry out the job — I requested from Mr. Boys a 
resume of the employee who had been hired — when Ms. 
Wakelam obviously had her qualifications. 
 
And I wonder if you would give to us today the qualifications 
of the employee who was hired in the place of Ms. Wakelam? 
And why is it that people who work at Sask Housing can’t 
understand why people with Ms. Wakelam’s qualifications, 
who are obviously fit for the job, aren’t being hired when 
people from the street are. Is that an example of your hiring 
efficiency and the kind of employee-relations practice that 
you’re undertaking as . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I have been informed that seven of the last 
10 management positions in the corporation have been filled 
internally, Mr. Chairman, and that everybody enjoys the hiring 
practice at the corporation, the union included. We have no 
problems with it. 
 
With regard to the lady to which you refer, I’ve been informed 
that the applicant was interviewed in the same manner as other 
candidates, and that the former employee was not successful as 
the corporation had offered the position to another candidate 
that they considered to be more qualified. And not being 
satisfied with that response, this lady chose to go through an 
area of various people to appeal the hiring, the position, the way 
it was completed. And that’s about all I can tell you. I don’t 
know her. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, that’s not what I asked the 
minister. I want the minister, and as I asked it and requested it 
from officials of the housing corporation before, I want the 
resume of the person who was hired, and I want the kind of 
experience sheet, because I was not told the truth by your 
officials in the Sask Housing Corporation when I inquired. And 
I intend to . . . when a member of the Legislative Assembly 
inquires from officials, they expect to be told the truth about 
what’s going on in terms of what’s happening within a public 
function. And I’m raising this issue here because I am saying to 
you, sir, that what you are being told by your officials and what 
you have just said, is not true. 
 
Now is it not true that in fact that the employee who was 
refused the job, who was turned down the job, took this case to 
the Human Rights Commission because of discrimination, or 
alleged discrimination on the parts of officials at the Sask 
Housing Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been informed that the 
Ombudsman looked into that and declared that the corporation 
hiring practices were fine. I don’t believe that this Assembly 
should be in the position to give out resumes of people that 
apply or are hired at any corporation. 
 
And as far as her appeal to the human rights is concerned, we 
haven’t heard back from human rights anything in particular 
wrong with the hiring practice that was  

involved. And for the member to tantamount to calling my 
officials a liar when he said that he didn’t get truthful 
information, I’m sorry to hear him accuse the officials of being 
that. They are long-time faithful employees of the corporation. 
 
I have been informed that they supplied the member with 
exactly the truth to the point that they feel that they should 
supply certain information from the personal resumes of people 
that are applying, and I suppose that’s all I can tell you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to make it clear that, 
in my opinion, I was not supplied with the truth the various 
times I contacted your officials at the housing corporation. I 
was supplied with different stories and different reasons, and to 
me that is not being supplied with the truth. 
 
However, I’m in no position at this time to do anything about 
that, other than to raise the case of Ms. Wakelam and her, what 
I judge to be unfair, treatment in the hand of the legislature. 
And I’m glad that in fact you did acknowledge the fact that she 
felt her hiring practices were such that she had to take this on to 
the Ombudsman. 
 
I ask you again to ask your officials to supply you with the 
resume of the employee who was hired during that particular 
job search, so that I may indeed judge for myself, and that all 
members of the legislature may judge for themselves, the 
qualifications and the hiring practices. I would ask you to table 
that, if you wouldn’t mind. 
 
And having said that, I would then turn this questioning over to 
my colleague from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my officials inform me that 
the truth was told. I still say that it is not the job of this 
Assembly to scrutinize the resume of applicants for various 
positions in this government. The member from Regina 
Rosemont named Mr. Boys in this Assembly. I suppose the 
only advice I can share with the member from Rosemont is, if 
he would care to slander Mr. Boys and name him publicly 
outside of this Assembly, he would be welcome to do that. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to question you about the housing corporation in my role as 
critic for senior’s issues. 
 
I want first of all, to recognize that I consider housing to be an 
essential need for all Canadians. Good housing is particularly 
important, and it’s particularly important to older people, many 
of whom in this province are older women who have been 
widowed and who need to look at different housing 
arrangements in the course of their lives. 
 
And as I’ve been going around the province, one of the areas 
that people have asked me about, with some questions of deep 
concern, is the development of what your government is calling 
“enriched housing.” We see signs around the province saying 
“Enriched Senior Citizens’ Projects,” and much made of this 
enriched housing. 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1714 
 

And I’ve got the annual report for 1987, in which you have a 
page on enriched housing, and I understand that enriched 
housing is a concept — you used capital letters for it so it seems 
to be something on its own. You say in this report, the annual 
report for ’87, that: 
 

Enriched Housing was developed, through consultations 
with senior citizens, to provide housing in an environment 
that helps keep seniors independent. 

 
Now one of the questions I have, that you might want to 
elaborate on, is the consultations you had with seniors regarding 
enriched housing because of the kind of comments I’m getting 
from the seniors about this enriched housing. 
 
You say in the annual report: 
 

The unique design concept (of enriched housing) 
maximizes independent living through self contained 
units, arranged along a common corridor. 

 
Now somehow that is supposed to be a unique design, but really 
what that describes is an ordinary apartment building where 
people have units that are doors opening onto a central corridor. 
 

An important feature of these (enriched housing) is the 
lounge where residents can gather for entertainment and 
companionship. 

 
Now I’ve been in some of these enriched housing projects, and 
the lounge is basically an enlarged lobby — a very common 
development, not only in housing authority apartments, but also 
in apartment buildings per se. 
 
(1630) 
 
And you say that: 
 

This common area is utilized for a number of volunteer 
community services and programs. 

 
Well it can be used for meetings of all sorts of things. But in the 
enriched housing that I’ve been in, the enriched housing built 
under your government, there’s been no kitchen facilities 
connected with this common room, such as are available in the 
housing authority buildings in the Saskatoon Centre 
constituency, which I represent, that were built under the New 
Democratic Party, where seniors have access to kitchen 
facilities, to lounge areas, to recreations facilities, to 
common-rooms on each floor of an apartment. In the new 
buildings which you call enriched housing these facilities are 
not available. 
 
You say in your report that services found in enriched housing 
projects vary from community to community based on local 
need commitment and choice by the residents. And I wonder 
about the kind of choice by the residents of what they’re going 
to get when they get into a facility; how you see that as choice 
by the residents as to what goes on there. I’m curious about 
that. 
 

I believe . . . and I have some other questions to ask you about 
enriched housing, but I will give you the opportunity to reply to 
my initial concerns. I think what you’re calling enriched 
housing is basically the kind of housing that was built under the 
New Democratic government under the housing authority units 
that we have in Saskatoon. And actually what you are calling 
enriched housing has less facilities than what we built in the 
past. So would you like to address this issue for the seniors of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we . . . nobody knows that 
we had the seniors’ task force in 1984, and since that time not 
only has the enriched housing had total self-contained suites so 
that our seniors can enjoy an independent style, and as a result 
they’ve got, of course their kitchens, total kitchens in their 
apartment. But in all of our newer larger structures that are built 
to accommodate that — and I think of the Trianon Centre that 
was just opened — in the common room there, upstairs, there is 
a stove and fridge to accommodate exactly what the member is 
talking about. 
 
I don’t believe that there’s any single way at all that you can 
even begin to compare our enriched and innovative housing 
program compared to what the NDP put prior to 1984. As I 
look, you know, at one — and this is a project in Saskatoon that 
the member should be familiar with — some of the special 
features that we have now are adjustable European-style kitchen 
cabinets so that the seniors are in fact able to adjust the shelving 
units on it. They have high-quality carpeting along with the new 
modern coloured appliances in their kitchen, cultured marble 
bathroom fixtures with non-slip flooring which is very 
important for our seniors. 
 
This one has got full accessibility for wheelchairs; laundry 
facilities on each and every floor, which is something that was 
not available before; oak finished doors and baseboards so that 
it looks modern and they feel good and comfortable in it. A 
24-hour emergency monitoring system is available in this unit. 
Outdoor and heated indoor parking is available for these 
seniors. Extended balcony railings for extra security, along with 
the public lounge that I . . . well there’s two lounges — there’s a 
public lounge in the Trianon that I can think of, and then there’s 
a lounge upstairs for their use. So I believe that our enriched 
housing is far and a way superior from anything that was ever 
done before. 
 
Ms. Smart: — well, Mr. Minister, you’ve done exactly what I 
thought you would probably do. You have rolled enriched 
housing and innovative housing projects all together. 
 
I’m well aware of that project in Richmond Heights because it’s 
in Saskatoon Centre, and I’m going to talk to you about that in 
due course. But what you have done is combine the enriched 
housing with the innovative housing and you’ve given me a list 
of services that are available in a very particular kind of housing 
unit in Saskatoon. And I’m talking about the units that are built 
under what you call your enriched housing program. 
 
And I want to just mention a couple of the other features that 
you say are involved in this enriched housing. And if  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1715 
 

you can’t distinguish between the enriched housing program 
and the innovative housing, then you really haven’t got a good 
handle on what the corporation has been doing. And it’s part of 
the smoke and mirrors of your government that you will use 
language like this, that you will call housing enriched when it’s 
not enriched, and that you will incorporate it altogether in one 
when it’s actually two separate programs. 
 
Now under the enriched housing, you boast that your 
government is providing people with things like volunteer 
services, transportation services. Now volunteer services can be 
provided in all sorts of housing. It depends on the groups in the 
community that offer that volunteer service. In many 
communities, volunteer service in transportation is offered to 
seniors wherever they live. That is not providing enriched 
housing by the government just because volunteers come in and 
offer some assistance to the seniors. In fact, your government 
has cut back on the funding to the volunteer groups that wanted 
to help the seniors. 
 
So when you say in your report that you’re offering volunteer 
services as part of your enriched housing, that’s all, again, part 
of the smoke and mirrors. 
 
You say in your report that, “The provision of health care, 
based on assessed need, continues to be an important service to 
residents,” as if this was some special service under your 
enriched housing. This care is provided through the volunteer 
efforts of the local home care district and funded by 
Saskatchewan Health, and that is home care. 
 
And that is available to seniors wherever they live. Wherever 
they live, they have access to home care — limited, mind you, 
because of the lack of funding and because they have limited 
resources. But home care is being advertised as a feature of 
enriched housing when it’s available to everyone. 
 
So my comment to you is that the enriched housing, the 
enriched senior citizens’ projects . . . And there’s a picture in 
this report of a sign outside a building advertising it, and I’ve 
been and visited the so-called enriched housing in places like 
Swift Current, and the seniors have said to me, what’s enriched 
about this? Yes, there are laundry facilities on certain floors. 
That’s available often in apartment buildings. That’s not 
unique. Volunteer services are provided to people everywhere. 
 
Now I want to know from you the rents, how the rents are 
determined in these units that you call enriched housing; and 
don’t include the units that are innovative housing. Will you 
please restrict yourself to the enriched housing. How are the 
rents determined? 
 
It is my understanding that the enriched housing would be 
totally subsidized rents, but I’m not sure. And I want to be clear 
with the seniors, and I would like you to be clear with me. 
When people go into one of your so-called enriched housing 
projects, which are not enriched, are they subsidized? Is it a low 
income housing unit like our housing authority buildings that 
I’m familiar with in Saskatoon Centre that were built under the 
New Democrats, or what is it? Can you answer me the question  

about the rent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there was about a dozen 
questions in there, but I don’t know what she’s all excited 
about. If she would be honest with the people . . . the annual 
report, and I’ll read from the annual report. She says that I’m 
trying to fool people or hide things. Let’s read it: 
 

The provision of health care, based on the assessed need, 
continues to be an important service to residents. 

 
Now pay attention. 
 

This care is provided through the volunteer efforts of the 
local Home Care District, and funded by Saskatchewan 
Health. 

 
We’re not hiding anything. It’s right in our annual report. We 
freely admit that. And we simply supply the space — space that 
wasn’t provided in your housing under the NDP administration. 
 
By and large, your housing was semi-detached units. Our 
discussions with seniors, they wanted more than that, so we 
now have common corridors; we have common space areas that 
they can use; we have room for the volunteers with which to 
work — things that you didn’t provide in your era. 
 
And then let’s talk some more about the enriched housing, 
because again you try to fool the people. Look at the annual 
report and read all of it, not part of it. Let’s look at innovative 
housing. You say I don’t know the difference, you don’t know 
the difference. Let’s just look at a few. 
 
Saskatoon Luther Heights — we’ll talk about the Saskatoon 
ones. Senior enriched, where we assisted in 30 units while they 
put up 90, for a total of 120. That didn’t happen — those extra 
90 units under your administration would never be there. 
 
Saskatoon Bethany Manor. We assisted in 21, they put up an 
additional 56. Those 56 never would have been there. Let’s 
continue. 
 
Saskatoon McClure. We subsidized 29, they put up another 80, 
another 80 that would never have been there. And on and on, 
for a total under the innovative side, of 245 assisted units, 
complemented by an additional 302. 
 
Now in the areas where we did direct delivery, and this is all 
from the annual report, Mr. Chairman, it shows the other senior 
enriched where we delivered them directly, where unfortunately 
the community or some church organization or group wasn’t 
able to assist in the delivery of those program. So you can see 
the difference, a total of some 60 units, and they sat there. 
 
If this could have come in under the innovative, maybe there 
would have been an additional 30 or 40 and we would have 
been able to have another 30 or 40 units for our seniors. So 
when you tell me that innovative housing isn’t working, when 
you tell me that innovative and  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1716 
 

enriched are all mixed up, you’re obviously not even reading 
the annual report. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I’ve read the annual report, Mr. Minister, and I 
know that what you’re talking about are services that are 
provided to everyone. I can take you to many of the senior units 
in Saskatoon that were built by the New Democrats, that are 
built with apartments on central corridors. That’s nothing new. 
 
In the report you say, “ . . . 68 Enriched Housing units were 
constructed by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation.” You 
didn’t answer my question about the rents being subsidized, but 
I’m going to assume that they are because we’re running out of 
time. 
 
Your report also says that, “. . . 431 enriched units will be 
constructed through (the) Innovative Housing.” Now you’re 
using the word enriched for two kinds of housing. And I just 
want people in Saskatchewan to be clear on that when I talk 
about the seniors, because the innovative housing is enriched. 
It’s very rich; it’s a very fine program of what should be 
available for all seniors. But under your government it’s 
available to many, many seniors of high income who can buy 
into those units — the example in Richmond Heights, 
Saskatoon Centre constituency. 
 
You also call these units, or they’re also called service housing, 
which is different than enriched housing, and the design is 
based on a Swedish concept. And I want to congratulate the 
people who built it on looking to Sweden for some ideas, 
because Sweden, under social democracy, has got some good 
ideas about how housing should be for people and how housing 
should be for seniors. 
 
And those kinds of houses, that innovative housing includes 
many features which should be available to many seniors, not 
just to the people who can pay the amount of money — 63,000 
to $87,000 payments — to get into the place, and then you’ve 
got your monthly maintenance fees. And it includes a lot of 
good things, like restaurant meals, and 24-hour emergency 
service, and access to a community health nurse and social 
worker, and dietary counselling, and a non-denominational 
chaplain, and many other things. 
 
Now of those 120 units in that particular one in Richmond 
Heights, only 30 are low income units, and they’re scattered 
throughout. And the government has financed them by $2.5 
million of federal and provincial money. 
 
There is a distinction then between enriched and innovative, 
and I want to know where the money for funding the innovative 
housing is listed. Is that under the public housing in the 
Estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I hope the sponsors of those enriched 
units are listening to this argument. You know, where the NDP, 
Mr. Chairman, were concerned with the low income seniors 
only, and it stopped there, our concern is for the low income 
seniors, certainly. And that’s reflected in the numbers that we’re 
delivering and in the other numbers that we’re able to deliver. 
But we coupled that with what the church groups want to do.  

They want to look after their moderate income and high income 
senior families and let them share the same space and life-style. 
That was never available to them before. 
 
It was kind of silly for lifelong friends to have to live differently 
or to have to live apart from where their ordinary friends were, 
whereas now, through the facilities offered through these 
church groups we have a mixture of the low income, the 
moderate and high income seniors living together. And it shows 
in the annual report that the rents are subsidized. It says, 
assisted units, so obviously the rent is subsidized for the low 
income seniors. And now we’ve got a mix there of the low and 
moderate income seniors being able to enjoy a complete senior 
life together. 
 
We put common corridors into areas of rural Saskatchewan 
where before under the NDP those common areas and common 
hallways and the like were almost non-existent. You mentioned 
Saskatoon. I’m talking now, the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, I’m talking all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A few questions to 
the minister. Mr. Minister, I’m asking for some technical detail 
that I hope you have available from your officials here today. 
 
The first question I want to ask you is . . . you made a statement 
in the House last night that the budget for low income housing 
is the greatest in the history of the province. I wonder if you 
would provide us, sir, with your record from 1982 to 1987, the 
number of low income housing units built by Sask Housing 
Corporation. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my officials don’t have 
those numbers available right now, and I would, rather than 
have an impasse with the member, I would recommend this: 
first of all, we will check Hansard. I believe that I said that we 
are delivering the highest percentage of our annual budget now 
towards low family income than ever before. I was talking 
budget dollars. And we don’t have that information here. 
 
But as the member well knows, we will be going into Crown 
corporation hearings. When Sask Housing goes into Crown 
corporations, I will undertake for my officials to have those 
dollar amounts available for your perusal at that time if that’s 
satisfactory to you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s fine provided that it’s 
understood that I’m requesting not only the year under review, 
which is last year in terms of Crown corporation, but I’m also 
requesting that you provide the number of units built from 
1982, each of the years 1982 to 1987 inclusive. If that’s 
understood, then your answer is acceptable. 
 
Second technical question I’d like to ask you and for 
information to produce is the total amount of dollars and the 
breakdown of the dollars spent on advertising by Sask Housing 
Corporation for each of the years 1982 through 1987 inclusive. 
Can you produce those numbers here today please? 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1717 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, all that I have available to 
me is 1986 an 1987, if that’s satisfactory, and I refer back to 
estimates, or Crown Corporation hearings where out of 
Hansard I say that the media advertising in 1985 was $46,000; 
media advertising in 1986 was $276,000. That’s out of Hansard 
and these figures are $275,532. And in 1987, the media 
advertising was $44,262. So I hope that that’s sufficient for you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I notice the qualifying word “media advertising” 
in there, Mr. Minister. When you talk about media advertising, 
are you including the brochures and leaflets which are handed 
out advertising the home program. Are you including the costs 
of the mail-out to every person in Saskatchewan which would 
be classified as advertising? 
 
Once again I repeat, I want the total amount of dollars spent on 
all advertising from the years 1982 through to 1987. If you 
don’t have the figures now, I’d like an undertaking from 
yourself to supply it within one week to the Legislative 
Assembly, here, if you would be so kind to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, that we’re going 
to need a little time for my officials to put that number together, 
and rather than give them a deadline of a week, we will 
undertake to get that information available for Crown 
corporation hearing, which I understand I scheduled for a 
couple or three weeks from now, and we can go through it at 
that time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, that’s not acceptable 
because as you know very well that the Crown corporations is 
only the year under review. I’m requesting that you supply the 
Assembly a list of the spending, a list of the spending for the 
years outlined to the Legislative Assembly for all advertising, 
not just media but for all advertising done in those years that I 
enumerated. 
 
Now are you saying that you’re not going to supply that to the 
Assembly and that you will not give me that undertaking? 
Crown corporations is not good enough. You know very well 
your government’s habit of saying, it’s strictly the year under 
review. What we are asking you for is for spending of ’86 . . . 
from ’82, pardon me, to 1987. I want a list of all advertising, 
and I also would like that broken down by agency. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what kind of 
an undertaking I can satisfy the member with because I 
understand that there is also a motion for return somewhere that 
my officials are looking at and trying to accomplish these 
numbers for. 
 
And you know, I’d hate to guarantee that it would be there in 
seven days and not be able to supply that within seven days. I’m 
prepared to undertake to provide them with as much 
information on the advertising as I can — hopefully, prior to 
Crown Corporations in the next few weeks — or be prepared to 
respond at that time. I can’t see what the problem is with that 
offer. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, first of all I think we’re being  

rather lenient in terms of the questioning. You’re the minister 
responsible for Sask Housing. You should know how much 
money your housing corporation spent on advertising in ’86 and 
’87. You were around then. You were part of the government. 
You know those. 
 
It’s not a question as if these figures, you know, haven’t been 
tabulated. Obviously you’ve done some kind of . . . of should 
have some kind of financial control over the operation of Sask 
Housing Corporation. 
 
I think it’s a question of, dodge them. You’re saying: we’re not 
going to give you the figures; we’re not going to give you the 
figures. And then you’re saying, well it may not be seven days, 
and knowing you, you’ll say it may not be 14 days or two 
months or two weeks. And when we get to Crown corporations, 
we expect the same kind of operation. 
 
All I’m asking is a simple question from you, a simple 
response: give us the total amount of advertising spent by Sask 
Housing Corporation in the years that I ask. There’s nothing 
wrong with that. Surely your officials could put that together 
within one week. 
 
An Hon. Member: Over the supper hour. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And you could probably do it over the supper 
hour as well, Mr. Minister. In fact we may have to do it over the 
supper hour if we’re not going to get any co-operation from you 
on this matter. 
 
Now I’d like an indication, are we going to get that here in the 
legislature? Are you going to give it to us here in the 
legislature? Stop playing, stop playing the silly games; just tell 
us yes or no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I’m sorry that he’s calling it silly 
games. You know, they asked this last year and it’s in the 
records, and I quoted from Hansard and, you know, now you’re 
establishing some other terminology to advertising that my 
officials are going to have to assemble this information. I don’t 
know, you know, all of the . . . I told you the media advertising 
and what it related to, and in 1985 it was $46,000; 1986 it 
$276,000; and 1987 it was $44,000. 
 
Now the other information that you’ve got, you want to go back 
to 1982, I simply don’t have that, and I said that I’m prepared to 
provide you with as much information as I can, and we’re going 
into Crown corporation hearings, and hopefully if that 
information was compiled by my officials before then, it’ll be 
available then. I can’t see what’s wrong with that. I’m not 
holding anything up at all. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just 
like to get some clarification here from the minister. 
 
The member from Rosemont has asked the minister for the total 
advertising spent by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for 
the year 1986-87. Now that was a fiscal year that is done and 
complete. That is the year for which there has been an annual 
report. That is the year for which there has been a Public 
Accounts finally tabled. So that information has got to be 
available. Now I am not clear on what the minister’s response 
was. 
 



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1718 
 

Mr. Minister, are you going to provide that information for the 
year ’86-1987? the total advertising expenditures for the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and I expect you will 
provide it tonight because, Mr. Minister, you should have been 
able to provide it this afternoon when you would have had these 
estimates finished. 
 
As long as you continue not to co-operate with this committee, 
we’re not going to finish your estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, will 
you give us the undertaking that over the evening, over the 
supper hour, as often has happened in this legislature, you will 
send your officials away who will get that information and at 7 
o’clock you will bring it to this House. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, you know, it’s unfortunate 
that we’re going to arrive at an impasse, but I suppose if we are, 
they’re not prepared to accept my explanation. I can’t expect 
my officials to go back within two hours and start compiling 
information from 1982 on. We don’t have that information, and 
I’ve said that we don’t have it. 
 
I’ve provided you with the media advertising numbers that you 
had asked for, and you know, I don’t have any other 
information here. You know, I can tell you that the 1986 
expenditures included $221,000 in respect of 
television/radio/newspaper advertising campaign for the home 
program. A balance of $20,000, applicable to that campaign, 
was paid in 1987 and the like, but I just simply don’t have what 
you’re demanding. And you say I’m stonewalling at this point 
in time. And my officials don’t have that, and I don’t fully 
understand what the heck you’re expecting us to provide. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Being near 5 o’clock, the committee will 
resume at 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


