


















































June 10, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 10, 1988 
 

2009 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure and privilege to introduce through you and to you, 
and to members of this Assembly, a group of 30 single parent 
women who are involved in a special training program in 
Regina sponsored by ATIRA, a training program here in the 
city that many of you will know about. 
 
These people are here to watch question period, and I’ll be 
meeting with them in room 255 after question period. I’d like 
all members to join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome to the Assembly a group of 23 students from the great 
and wonderful town of Kindersley, the centre of west central 
Saskatchewan, a very progressive and dynamic community. The 
23 students are . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The baseball capital of the world. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, the baseball capital of the world as 
well. These students are in town for a couple of days. They’re 
spending this morning in the legislature. With them is their 
teacher Dave Burkell, along with their chaperons Mary 
Edgerton and Jim Baker. 
 
We would welcome you to the city, and I hope you have a 
pleasant time here and a very good trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and to all member of the House, 
17 grade 8 and 9 students from Sion High School in Saskatoon, 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. These are junior and senior 
vocational students, and they’re accompanied by four of their 
teachers, Lana Bauer, Kurt Breker, Ramona Taylor, and Jill 
Staffen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all members of the House will want 
to join with me in welcoming these students. We hope that they 
enjoy their visit here in Regina, their visit to this legislature. I’ll 
be meeting with them in Room 10 at 11 o’clock to discuss the 
events here in question period this morning, Mr. Speaker, and I 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here to this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you, and to the other members of the 
gallery, a group of dental therapists who are sitting in the 
gallery behind me, facing the government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly will remember that one  

year ago today these dental therapists were summarily 
dismissed from their jobs. The people of Saskatchewan, 
however, continue to appreciate the fine job they did in looking 
after the dental care of our children. 
 
I would like to ask the Assembly to greet them in the usual 
manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to, on behalf 
of my neighbour to the west of me, the member for Maple 
Creek, introduce some students from Tompkins who are in the 
Speaker’s gallery today. They are grades 8 and 9 students and 
they are here together with their teacher Phyllis Stolz, and 
Donna Wickstrom is the chaperon. And I want them to feel 
comfortable here and I’ll be meeting with them later on to take 
them to the member from Maple Creek’s office, and we’ll be 
discussing various kinds of things at that time. 
 
These are unique students because they’re academically 
talented, and I think that that’s going to be a really important 
meeting with them, and I’m looking forward to doing that. And 
so I would like the Assembly to join with me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you a special person from the Elphinstone 
constituency, Ms. Julie Shepherd, who is here today to discuss 
health care issues with the members of the opposition. Many of 
you will remember Julie’s problem and her family’s problem 
back in April. She’s here once again to discuss the issue with 
members of the opposition. And I would ask all members of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to join with me in welcoming Julie 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it is with great 
pleasure to introduce to you, and to all members of the 
Assembly, two students from Spain and Norway. They are 
sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. I would like to introduce them 
individually. Firstly, we have from Spain, Ana Lozano Serrano. 
She is staying with Glenn and Evelyn McVeigh from Kenaston. 
And she notes on her comments that she left at the door, I’d like 
to just read that, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I’m an exchange student from Spain. I’ve been here for the 
whole school term of 1987-88. I’m staying with the 
McVeigh’s from Kenaston, and I’m very glad I came to 
Canada. I’m having wonderful experiences I’ll never 
forget. 

 
Ana, would you please stand and just remain standing. I see 
they already are. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, from Norway, Solvi 
Aasheim, and she notes: 
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2010 
 

I’m here for the school term and I’m here as an exchange 
student. I’m staying with Elaine and David Pedersen (from 
Hawarden). I’m going back to Norway pretty quick, and 
I’ve liked it here a lot! 

 
Mr. Speaker, David Pedersen is the son of Martin Pedersen who 
used to be the member from Arm River and also leader of the 
Progressive Conservative Party. I would at this time like to 
thank the McVeigh’s and the Pedersen’s for participating in the 
exchange student program, and I’d ask all members to join with 
me in welcoming the students here and the exchange persons 
looking after them. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the member for Rosemont, I would like to also introduce some 
students. They are 22 grade 8 students from Rosemont School, 
who are seated in the east gallery, and their teachers and 
chaperons. And I want to, on behalf of the member from 
Rosemont and the members here, to extend to them our wishes 
for a very interesting and educational visit. 
 
May they enjoy their visit here and go away being a little more 
appreciative of what the legislature is all about and what their 
government is all about, and maybe even some incentive to get 
involved some day when they reach the age in which they too 
can play a role, hopefully, in this Assembly. 
 
I invite the members to join us in extending a warm welcome to 
these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Utilization of Dental Plan 
 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, I’ll direct my question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, Saturday marks the one-year anniversary 
of the date your privatized and decimated the children’s 
school-based dental program. That is indeed a day that parents 
and children across Saskatchewan will not forget. Mr. Premier, 
can you tell us today: what was the utilization rate of your 
dental plan, such as it was, during the past year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I would like to remind our guests in 
the galleries that they’re asked not to participate in any way in 
the debate in the House. 
 
Order. Order. All hon. members realize that those are 
long-standing rules and traditions of this House, and we simply 
ask all our guests to respect them, and I’m sure they will. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can report to 
the hon. member that there are 322 communities now  

within a 50-kilometre radius of the new dental program, and 97 
per cent of the dentists licensed in Saskatchewan are 
participating in the children’s dental program. I can also say to 
the hon. member that satellite locations offer service now 52 
times a year, whereas under the previous situation, Mr. Speaker, 
it averaged about two visits per year. 
 
We now know, Mr. Speaker, that 79 rural towns have dental 
services, and there are negotiations going on with other 
communities at the present time for more services, Mr. Speaker. 
And I can also add that as a result of the 322 communities 
having access to the program, we find not only children who 
have access but indeed seniors, the entire population, the 
parents, and everybody can have access to dental services 
throughout Saskatchewan, in the towns and villages, as well as 
people that are in the schools here across the province. 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, my 
question was with respect to the utilization and what the 
utilization rate is. I believe you didn’t answer the question 
because you know that enrolment is down. Not only have you 
cut down on the children that are covered by the plan, 
enrolment is down and utilization is down on that enrolment 
figure. 
 
Now Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Premier, there were 338 rural 
communities that had school-based children’s dental program 
implemented in them — 338 rural communities. My 
understanding is, is there’s 71 satellite communities with 
part-time dental clinics; you say it’s 79 today. I’ve just been 
advised this morning as well that six communities have lost 
their participating dentists since last October. 
 
Now you’ve had a year to prove, Mr. Premier, to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that your idea of delivering dental services is 
better, and you failed miserably. Now what are you going to do 
to clean up this mess and straighten it out and get dental 
services to our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the information that I 
have before me says that we are almost at 90 per cent enrolment 
of children in the new program, and we have now 332 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m sure hon. 
member will want to allow the Premier to answer the question, 
and I’m sure our guests as well would be interested in hearing 
the answer, but they can’t if there’s undue interference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If I could just reiterate in case the hon. 
member didn’t hear me, that we are very near 90 per cent 
enrolment of all the children in Saskatchewan. Under the 
previous program, I believe the enrolment was 91 per cent. 
Ninety-seven per cent of the dentists licensed in Saskatchewan 
are participating in the children’s dental program, and 100 per 
cent of the people in the communities will have access to the 
dental program, where it was only the children that had access 
in the schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2011 
 

And as I travel rural Saskatchewan, people are telling me that 
they have need for dentists and access to dentists, and now they 
do, Mr. Speaker. So that when you have a dentist in the 
community, not only the children are served — and 97 per cent 
of the dentists are participating, and up to 90 per cent of the 
children are now involved — indeed all of the public has access 
to dentists as opposed to just the children. 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Enrolment, Mr. 
Premier, is not utilization, and I know that you and your cohorts 
have difficulty in distinguishing and comparing the difference 
between enrolment and utilization, but there’s a huge 
difference, Mr. Premier. Now are you telling us today that your 
dental plan is providing better services for our school children? 
Are you telling us that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will . . . I do want you to 
notice, Mr. Speaker, I do want you to notice that when I answer 
the question with respect to enrolment, then the hon. member’s 
question went to, well what about utilization. I will say . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will point out 
that we’re very near 90 per cent enrolment; and with respect to 
utilization, now you can have access to a dentist 52 weeks a 
year. Fifty-two weeks a year, all year-round, okay, right through 
the summer-time. And as you go into a new program, Mr. 
Speaker, everybody knows in the community they can have 
access to that dentist year-round — summer, winter, right 
through the summer holidays, all the time, and they appreciate 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when she wants to know about utilization, we are going to 
be very proud of the fact that people will have access 52 weeks 
a year for utilization and enrolment. And if 97 per cent of the 
dentists are participating, and up to 90 per cent of the children 
52 weeks a year, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that there is some, 
some benefit to having full-time access to professional, dental 
health care here in the province of Saskatchewan throughout the 
province, and now in 322 communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, your 
facts are grossly misleading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — There were 338 rural communities served by 
the dental therapists, and in your own admission this morning 
you said there were only 79 rural communities being served, 
and we even contest those figures, Mr. Premier. 
 
You’re going on and saying these children now have access to 
more dentists. What about the children from 14 to 17 that 
you’ve slashed out of the program, Mr. Premier? What services 
are they getting under this plan? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, you notice how the hon. 
member keeps changing her tune. I will point out that enrolment 
is almost at 90 per cent; utilization is there 52 weeks of the 
year, and now she says, well for the very young. I guess they 
can’t have a completely publicly funded program where they 
get to pick their own dentists. Now that’s popular and people 
like that. So now she’s moved and said, what about the 
teenagers; you haven’t dealt with those. 
 
I’ve said in this legislature many, many times, the problems 
teenagers face today are comparative problems. And if you 
want to look at the major problem today, it’s not having access 
to a dentist, but it’s the challenges they face with respect to 
life-styles, drug abuse, and many other facets that they face, Mr. 
Speaker. And they laugh at that; the NDP will laugh at it. 
They’re afraid to address it, Mr. Speaker. The NDP are afraid to 
address health care; they’re afraid to address the drug problems 
in society; they’re so afraid to touch it that they can only laugh 
when it’s brought up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll say the people of Saskatchewan want 
somebody to be able to deal with it, and we are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, you and your ministers have 
looked with obvious discomfort at the 60-odd therapists in the 
gallery. You shouldn’t have any difficulty recognizing them, 
Mr. Premier. That’s part of the 411 people that you fired last 
year. 
 
Mr. Premier, under intense fire, not just from the opposition but 
from the public as well, your Minister of Health stated he had 
an agreement with the College of Dental Surgeons that would 
see employment for 150 of those dental therapists and dental 
technicians. Well, Mr. Premier, only 50 are employed, and 30 
of those part time. Mr. Premier, my question is: what happened 
to your Minister of Health’s deathbed repentance? What 
happened to the 50 jobs . . . the 150 jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that the hon. 
member has his figures correct. I will present the figures so that 
he can have them in an accurate fashion. And if he wants to 
assess them with me, we’re certainly prepared to do that. 
 
It’s my information that there were 111 dental therapists under 
the old program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no. No, no. 
There’s a combination of assistants and therapists and dentists 
and administrators and clerks and everybody else you’re 
throwing in. Let’s be careful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he asked about dental therapists. Dental therapists, 
if you’ll just allow me, 111 were under the old program. It’s my 
information that 20 are working full time, 30 are working part 
time, 37 are upgrading by taking dental hygienist courses, 19 
are working for the  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2012 
 

government, Mr. Speaker. So 106 out of the 111 are either 
working or going to school, working for government part time 
— 106 out of the 111 dental therapists that were under the old 
program. 
 
Now I just point that out, Mr. Speaker — so if he has 
information that is different than that, I’d be more than glad to 
review it — 111 dental therapists, 106 out of 111 are either in 
school, working full time, part time, or working for the 
government. So that’s five out of 111, Mr. Speaker, that I 
cannot account for today. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Premier, it seems that 
you’d deny that the sun rose this morning if that served any 
purpose here. 
 
Let me begin this question then with a quotation from Hansard. 
Your Minister of Education, May 18, your Minister of 
Education stated: “We will triple the number of positions 
available to train hygienists.” Mr. Premier, I want to remind you 
of what’s happened today. So far, Mr. Premier, just 18 dental 
therapists have been admitted into the hygienist course. At that 
rate, it’ll take you five years to reach your commitment and 
you’ll be long since removed from office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you’d like to deal 
with that commitment to retraining. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with respect — if I might 
add to the hon. member — with respect to retraining and 
educational programs and job creation programs, I’m sure the 
hon. member knows that as of today, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
second lowest unemployment in Canada — up 18,000 new jobs 
since last month alone, Mr. Speaker, which is one of the fastest 
growing employment records that you will find any place in 
Canada, ranking right behind Ontario. 
 
I point out to the hon. member, because of our educational and 
because of our training programs, and because of the ongoing 
negotiations that is going on between dentists and therapists and 
communities all across the province, we now have 322 
communities involved; we have negotiations going on. 
 
And the information that I have, and I would be glad to confirm 
it with the hon. member, 106 out of the 111 people that were 
involved as dental therapists are now full time, part time, either 
taking courses at university or upgrading at technical schools or 
working for the government. 
 
Now 106 out of 111 since last year, Mr. Speaker, is not that 
bad. And it’s not perfect. But I will say as a result of the 
employment figures, up 18,000 new jobs since May, or over 
April of this year, the second lowest unemployment in Canada, 
and 106 out of 111 people working in a program, and rural 
communities having access to dentists and dental therapists and 
complete dental services 52 weeks a year, Mr. Speaker, in the 
first eight months of the program, I’d say at least is comparable 
to the kinds of things we’ve seen from the other side. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I have a question, a new question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, there were over 170 dental therapists that 
worked in the dental plan in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — There are 50 that have part-time or full-time 
jobs. There are 18 that have been trained in the dental hygienist 
course. Mr. Minister, there are over 60 dental therapists in this 
legislature today that don’t have work. How can you say that 
106 out of 112 people have work in this province or being 
trained? That’s simply not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll extend the same 
opportunity to the member opposite to go through the figures 
with her or the member that raised it previously. Because the 
information that I received, Mr. Speaker, is that there are 20 
people working full time; there are 30 people working part 
time; there are 37 people who have either been . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. We’re having a 
little difficulty hearing the Premier, and I would ask for the 
co-operation of the members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just say 
to the hon. member, the information that I’m sharing with her is 
information that we have received from employers, or academic 
institutions, or the government that has . . . 19 working for the 
government, 37 that either have been upgraded or going to be 
enrolled in school, and 50 people that are working — 30 part 
time and 20 full time. That adds up to 106, Mr. Speaker, out of 
the 111. 
 
Now I grant you that the program is just under way, and we’re 
only into 322 communities. And we still have negotiations 
going on, particularly between dentists and dental therapists, 
and we have communities involved that want to have their own 
dentist. And I could, if the hon. members would like — and I’m 
certainly prepared to do that, give the communities and the 
towns and the villages where we have new dentists and where 
we have satellite offices now across the province — I’m quite 
prepared to share them with the House if they would like to 
hear about them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, for Heaven’s sakes, in the name of 
decency, for the sake of the children of Saskatchewan, for the 
sake of these dental therapists who are sitting in the gallery and 
unemployed, would you please reverse your heartless policy 
with respect to Saskatchewan’s dental plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say to the hon. 
member that I represent a rural riding; that many people across 
Saskatchewan appreciate having a dentist in their community so 
that the entire community can go to  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2013 
 

the dentist, because the community could not go to the school. 
Senior citizens could not go to the school to get dental work 
done. Parents couldn’t go to the school. 
 
But if you have a dentist, Mr. Speaker, that is in the community, 
then everybody can go to the school and we pay for it, for the 
children, Mr. Speaker. The children can pick, and the families 
can pick the dentist they like. We pay for the whole thing; it’s 
100 per cent financed. 
 
The dentists are there — 322 communities, satellite offices set 
up. And the entire community, the seniors citizens. Why would 
they discount, Mr. Speaker, access to a dentist by senior 
citizens. They never mention senior citizens; they never 
mention parents; they never mention anybody else. 
 
The can only say, Mr. Speaker, the access . . . And they don’t 
like to hear it. You may have to ask them to be quiet again, Mr. 
Speaker, because all they can do is talk from their seat when I 
tell them 322 communities — seniors, parents, as well as 
children — have access to the new dental program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dental Services for Gravelbourg 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question on 
this subject specifically to the Premier with respect to 
Gravelbourg. And the Premier will know that before the 
children’s based dental program was eliminated, Gravelbourg 
had access to two forms of dental services. There was a dentist 
operating on a part-time basis on Main Street, and there was, of 
course, the school-based plan in the school. When the program 
was cancelled, both of those services were eliminated from the 
community of Gravelbourg. 
 
The Premier told us on March 25 of this year that he would 
soon be reporting to the House on the situation in Gravelbourg 
and the successful negotiation of a dentist arriving in that 
community. Mr. Premier, can you tell us why you have not 
provided that kind of a report to this date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the information that I have 
is that there was a satellite office ready to go into Gravelbourg, 
and they refused the satellite office because they want a dentist 
of their own in Gravelbourg. And they’re not much different 
than many other communities; they want their own dentist, and 
they want that service for the entire population — senior 
citizens, farmers, families, everybody, including the children. 
 
So they are holding out for a dentist as opposed to having a 
satellite office. And I mean, that’s their prerogative, and I am 
doing everything that we can to make sure that they get access 
to a dentist and that one can go there as quickly as possible so 
that, in fact, they can get the kind of service that they want, 
which is a full-time dentist for Gravelbourg and area. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier told us, both just 
now and on other occasions, that he and his Minister of Health 
and the deputy minister of Health would be  

offering all forms of assistance to Gravelbourg to solve this 
problem and to solve it quickly. 
 
The problem has not been solved. The problem continues. Is 
that not evidence, Mr. Premier, that the policy that you’ve 
enunciated, at least in respect of Gravelbourg, is obviously not 
working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can just reiterate: the 
community has access to a satellite office if they want it. They 
turned it down. So they’ve made the choice that they want to 
pick their dentist, and they want the dentist. And I’ve said I’ll 
do everything I can to find you the kind of dentist you want to 
have. 
 
So they want a dentist for their entire population so that they 
can serve them all. And I will do everything that I can, let them 
compete for dentist or go to graduate schools or anything else. 
If they want a dentist, then I certainly will support them in 
finding that dentist. I will point out, they have turned down the 
satellite office for dentists, and that’s their prerogative, so I can 
only respect that. 
 

Assistance to Family to Purchase Drugs 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, in the absence of the Minister of Health, and we’re 
having a great deal of trouble getting any answers out of this 
individual. 
 
But I want to ask another question on health care. Saturday is 
also the anniversary of the destruction of the drug plan in 
Saskatchewan, as we once knew it, an excellent program, 
first-class anywhere in North America. I want to say that my 
colleagues brought forward literally tens and hundreds of issues 
and concerns from individuals over the last couple of months. 
 
I have a constituent who came to this legislature back in April, 
Mrs. Julie Shepherd, who asked your government to deal 
specifically with her individual case. At that time, Mr. Premier, 
you insulted the people of Elphinstone by virtually calling them 
drug abusers. I want to ask you today whether you have 
reviewed the case and can give us an answer whether or not this 
individual now is getting help from your government in terms 
of buying needed prescription drugs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the information that I 
have is that Mrs. Shepherd has been receiving benefits through 
the family income plan since February of this year. And I’m 
informed that because of the review through Social Services 
that was requested by the Shepherds, they will be receiving a 
substantial increase effective, I believe, May, that they received 
increases from Social Services. And I’m also informed that 
Mrs. Shepherd will be receiving supplementary health benefits 
on a temporary basis, working with Social Services and health 
care. So I expect that as a result of her consultations with Social 
Services and because they were dealing with Social Services on 
an ongoing regular basis, that they are being looked at and 
cared for. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2014 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the Premier. This is not 
what the individual concerned is telling us. She says very 
clearly that they are able to afford the drugs because of the good 
charity of a neighbour. And I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, is 
this the kind of drug program we now have in this province 
where individuals who lack the economic power to buy 
prescription drugs now have to depend on charity in order to get 
needed prescription drugs? Is that the policy of your 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only add to this that 
the normal programs, as you know, for people on social 
assistance are the fact that we didn’t change the program there, 
and they can receive full benefits. And in this case, they’ve had 
their benefits even increased as a result of circumstances that 
apply to families under these kind of conditions. 
 
I will also add, Mr. Speaker, as they know, that people . . . 
social service payments in Saskatchewan, for people who have 
families, are the highest any place in Canada. And at the same 
time, the prescription drug program is the most lucrative for 
people and for families any place in Canada. 
 
So it’s a combination of the social services money that goes to 
families, ranks number one in Canada, they receive more 
money than anybody else across the nation, and the prescription 
drug program is more lucrative for families than any other 
across the nation. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
prepared to deal with all kinds of new challenges in health care. 
 
And so the hon. member I’m sure is aware of the fact that they 
do receive substantial money from social services, and certainly 
more than they would receive in virtually any other jurisdiction 
in North America, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 94 — An Act respecting the Protection of Children 
and the Provision of Support Services to Families 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Protection of Children and the Provision of 
Support Services to Families. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 95 — An Act to Promote the Growth and 
Development of Children and to Support the Provisions of 

Child Day Care Services to Saskatchewan Families 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to Promote the Growth and Development of Children and 
to Support the Provisions of Child Day Care Services to 
Saskatchewan Families. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 96 — An Act respecting Adoption 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Adoption. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 98 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance 

Act, 1983 (No. 2) 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Department of Finance Act, 1983 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 99 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Small Claims Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Small Claims Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Prior to orders of the day, I should like to 
make the following statement. 
 
Yesterday the member for Quill Lakes raised a point of order 
regarding a ministerial statement made by the Premier. I have 
reviewed the record and will now make my ruling. 
 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, 
paragraph 262 states: 
 

The Speaker has emphasized that both the Government 
and the Opposition contribution should be brief and 
factual. The purpose of the ministerial statement is to 
convey information, not to encourage debate. 

 
This is based on Standing Order 15 of the House of Commons 
which I quote: 
 

On statements by Ministers . . . a Minister of the Crown 
may make a short factual announcement or statement of 
government policy. 

 
I find that the Premier’s statement was factual and its  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2015 
 

intent was to convey information to this Assembly. 
 
But while the House of Commons in Ottawa has left the 
Speaker considerable latitude in setting the limits of ministerial 
statements, the same cannot be said about Saskatchewan. I refer 
members to a ruling of the Chair on April 4, 1979, which states: 
 

The purpose of a ministerial statement is to provide an 
opportunity for statements on government policy and 
administration. 

 
The Premier’s statement did not deal with a policy of the 
Saskatchewan government or its administration. 
 
Again, I refer hon. members to a ruling of this House dated 
April 30, 1985. On that occasion the Chair was asked to rule on 
a statement made by a minister regarding the federal 
government’s Western Grain Transportation Act. The ruling 
stated: 
 

. . . I have reviewed the statement and find that it covered a 
federal government programme and was not, strictly 
speaking, a new programme under a provincial 
government department . . . While the matter raised in the 
statement is one of provincial interest, it should be dealt 
with by some other avenue, not as a ministerial statement. 

 
I would suggest that the Premier’s statement yesterday was of a 
similar nature — certainly of significant provincial interest, but 
the statement did not announce new or existing government 
initiatives which pertain to the problem. I once more caution 
ministers that statements should be brief and not lengthy in 
nature. 
 
I there find the point of order well taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I’m sure the House can’t hear the 
Clerk. I certainly can’t, so I’d just like to ask for your 
co-operation. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 37 — An Act to 
provide for Security for Saskatchewan Family Farms be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take a few 
moments of the House today to enter into the debate on Bill 37 
— The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. The government 
seems to have put out a document that does not address the 
problem. 
 
Through some of their propaganda and political posturing, 
they’re saying that they’re protecting the Saskatchewan farm by 
the introduction of this legislation. 
 

And what they’re doing is, they’re placing a three-year 
moratorium on the home quarter and the assets that are fixed to 
that home quarter, which is appreciated in many instances, at 
least on an initial look at the legislation. If a farmer is in the 
position of being foreclosed on, they at least are assured the 
protection of the home quarter and the assets that are on that 
home quarter. 
 
However, on a closer examination, there are other problems 
which arise. The main problem is that financial institutions can 
no longer use the home quarter as security for loans that farmers 
receive from those financial institutions. I suppose the chartered 
banks have been putting the screws down on credit for quite 
some time in terms of credit to agricultural people. The credit 
unions and the Farm Credit Corporation are just now recently 
starting to tighten up credit to farmers because of this Bill 37. 
 
I suppose I should go back a bit in history, in that the protection 
to a home quarter was always there, Mr. Speaker. The home 
quarter was protected by legislation, but people were allowed to 
sign exemptions, and so if someone went into their local credit 
union or to the Farm Credit Corporation office, they would be 
allowed to sign a waiver which would exempt the right of the 
farmer for the home quarter. And if there was foreclosure 
action, the financial institution could in fact take action on the 
home quarter and the assets that were there. And what this 
moratorium actually does is that it stops the right to sign 
exemptions to use home quarters for security. 
 
(1045) 
 
One of the problems with that, Mr. Speaker, I think can be best 
said in relationship to a case that a farmer related to me just 
recently upon the introduction of this Bill. 
 
And he said, well I have a very intensive farming operation. I 
have a lot of activity on my home quarter. I farm with my 
brother, my brother lives with me so we have two families, two 
houses. We have garages, we have a hog barn, we have an 
intense operation on that home quarter. And he said, the loans 
that I have currently depend very heavily on the right of the 
financial institution to hold that home quarter as security. And 
now what will they do if in fact they can’t have that home 
quarter for security? They’re going to want me to come up with 
something else as security for the loans I have with these 
financial institutions. 
 
And he said that his farming operation was quite viable; they’re 
doing well. They didn’t have a large amount of debt because 
they were diversified. They’re into a mixed farming operation, 
that they’re at least holding their own. 
 
They’re not in danger of losing their farm. But if the financial 
institution says to him that, well we can no longer hold that 
home quarter as security; what else have you got to offer us as 
security? — he may not have enough to offer as security to the 
financial institution. 
 
So what happens if he can’t come up with some other security 
for the loan, then he’s going to be required to come up with 
some cash so that he has the acceptable amount of equity in the 
loans that he has at the financial  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2016 
 

institution. 
 
So in this case, I’m sure the government, through their lack of 
planning, has put a viable farming operation into a position of 
being not viable because the farmer does not have the equity in 
his operation any longer and the financial institutions are going 
to want other equity for their loan that they have there. 
 
The other area where they’re not helping is in positions where 
some people are able to handle the debt. But if they don’t have 
to handle the debt, because of the action by the government 
through Bill 37, why would they want to service their debt to 
the financial institution if they have other priorities in terms of 
their meagre financial resources that they have available to 
them. 
 
So that if one knows that you can’t be foreclosed on, if there’s a 
co-signer in some cases that are very wealthy individuals who 
have co-signed a loan, co-signers are now exempt also and it’s 
retroactive under this legislation, as we understand it, Mr. 
Speaker. If a co-signer has a couple of hundred thousand, even 
a million dollars in assets in a credit union, they no longer have 
to make good for the co-signing on the loan that’s there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to go on at length. However, 
there is one other thing that concerns me in the Bill, and that is 
the increase in the amount of foreign ownership of agricultural 
land in the province of Saskatchewan. Currently under the old 
legislation foreign ownership, or a non-resident of 
Saskatchewan could in fact own 10 acres of land within the 
province. Under this Bill 37 they’ll be now allowed, as a 
non-resident, to own some 320 acres. Or in another provision of 
the Bill, non-residents would be able to own up to an assessed 
value of $15,000. In some areas of the province that’s a 
significant amount of land. You’re looking at possibly three 
sections, four sections of land if the assessment is low, 
compared to what is currently under the Act, being 10 acres. 
 
And I think that what the government is doing is that they’re 
paving the way for equity financing, which has been very 
unpopular in the province of Saskatchewan. They heard that 
through a number of hearings that they held throughout the 
province earlier, late last year. And I do believe, as the member 
from Weyburn has pointed out, that it is part of the whole free 
trade package. 
 
Under the free trade package, indirect investment in the country 
of Canada by Americans is virtually unlimited after a five-year 
period. And so when you look at the increase in the amount of 
land that non-residents can own, the paving of the way for 
equity financing corporations to be set up or equity financing of 
farm land, and you look at the free trade agreement, it all ties in 
to Saskatchewan farmers in the near future not being owners 
and family farm operators, but being serfs on the land that they 
once owned, because of the policies of this government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would have to summarize by saying, short 
term, helpful to a very few farmers that are being foreclosed on 
or expect to be foreclosed on in the near  

future. 
 
Many farmers who are in a viable position may be in an 
unviable position or not viable position because of this 
legislation. It paves the way for equity financing. We’re 
concerned about the farm ownership. It ties into the whole free 
trade with the federal government. 
 
We’re very anxious to address this Bill in committee. We have 
many questions about it. It’s a very complex piece of 
legislation. And when the government says that they’re saving 
farms in Saskatchewan, there are very few that may be saved 
for a three-year period under Bill 37. But it’s forestalling the 
debt problem, and when that three-year moratorium ends, the 
debt problem will be even more serious than what it was when 
this Bill was introduced. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to asking many 
questions about this complex piece of legislation, and I would 
ask . . . I move to adjourn the debate at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
move second reading on this Bill, The Urban Municipality Act, 
1988. It is perhaps one of the most significant Bills I have had 
the privilege of introducing into this House, Mr. Speaker. It has 
four major parts. 
 
First, it provides fair and enforceable store hours legislation that 
will allow municipalities to regulate shopping hours according 
to the wishes of the local community. 
 
Secondly, it protects Saskatchewan families with strong and 
responsible legislation to control dangerous dogs. 
 
Third, this Bill sets out a new electoral structure for the four 
largest Saskatchewan cities, a structure which couples the 
benefits of representation of communities within the city with 
the efficiencies that flow from the election of some members of 
council by all voters, all the citizens of the city. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, there are a series of administrative 
reforms in this Bill, reforms related to citizen petitions, 
financial accountability, and tax reduction measures, and other 
minor housekeeping measures. 
 
I want to deal briefly with the store hours legislation first, Mr. 
Speaker. Last December this government announced that 
legislation would be passed permitting shopping up to seven 
days per week, with a municipal option to close stores for a 
weekly day of rest and during evenings. 
 
Well the legislation does just that. It should come as no 
surprise, because its main features have been discussed 
publicly. We’ve also discussed this for some time with 
municipal representatives. Wherever possible, we have  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2017 
 

incorporated the wishes of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and urban municipalities into the 
Bill. 
 
Before I get to the key features of the shopping hours part of the 
Bill, let me mention why we’re giving municipalities improved 
tools to regulate store hours in each community. 
 
As all members know, we have tried many times to tighten up 
our provincial legislation, later to find courts throwing them 
out. Then there’s the fact that increasingly, consumers are 
demanding more shopping opportunities. Times are changing. 
There’s a new social and economic reality out there. 
 
In many families today, both the moms and the dads work. This 
phenomenon of double income families is quite a contrast to 
conditions of a decade ago. Also, about 11 per cent of 
Saskatchewan families are headed by single parents. 
 
These people are voting with support, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
crowding these stores that do offer extended shopping hours. 
These realities have lead to legislation in our two neighbouring 
provinces to the west, which permit municipalities to decide 
store hours. Ontario has recently embarked on a similar course, 
where regional municipal units will soon determine their own 
store hours. 
 
This underlines the fact, Mr. Speaker, that a universal 
provincial law on store hours is simply not workable. Factors 
that affect Humboldt or Yorkton differ quite dramatically from 
those in Regina and Saskatoon, and require different 
approaches. These approaches are best determined by the 
locally elected councils. 
 
I will briefly point out the key permissive features of this 
legislation. First, seven days per week shopping, unless 
municipalities restrict store hours by by-law. 
 
Secondly, municipalities can close stores for up to two days per 
week and on any evening. This allows councils to provide for a 
weekly day of rest. As a result, there need not be any expansion 
of Sunday shopping unless local councils and local voters in a 
particular municipality support it. 
 
Third, municipalities will have expanded powers to control 
store hours through new features such as restrictions on the 
number of persons employed in a store. SUMA asked for this 
powerful tool to curb Sunday shopping where it is desired. 
 
And finally, convenience store hours will be determined by 
municipalities at the local level where they can best determine 
what a convenience store is. 
 
There remain, Mr. Speaker, some mandatory provincial 
restrictions in the Act. For example, all stores in urban 
municipalities will be required to close on public holidays 
unless municipalities permit certain types of stores to open. And 
those holidays include Christmas, Easter, New Year’s Day and 
the like, through the list of the common public holidays. The 
religious exemption  

permitting owners of small stores to open on Sunday if they 
close on one previous day in the week will be retained to 
protect those store owners of minority religions. 
 
Stores that occupy leased premises in shopping malls are 
protected from being forced to remain open during the extended 
hours by virtue of their lease. Independent stores in malls will 
be able to close at least one day per week and four evenings per 
week. 
 
And what about the employees who work in stores, you may 
ask. Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan already has labour 
legislation which is unique to retail workers which gives them 
two consecutive days off work in many instances. Secondly, our 
human rights legislation permits an employee to refuse to work 
if on a day of worship, and that it is a matter of religious 
conviction, unless his or her employer can prove to court that 
this time off creates an undue hardship on the business. 
 
Also another Bill dealing with employment standards will give 
part-time workers further protection and benefits. Nevertheless, 
Mr. Speaker, we will monitor the situation of workers in retail 
shops in the ensuing months and years as this shopping 
legislation works its way into municipal by-laws. 
 
A word on enforcement. Municipalities will continue to enforce 
the legislation but with new and more powerful legislative 
tools. Our constitutional branch of justice will continue to take 
an active part wherever provincial constitutional rights to 
legislate in the area of store hours regulation is challenged. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the so-called domino effect that 
some fear will appear in this province. By this I mean the 
whip-saw effect where expanding store hours in one 
municipality levers the neighbouring centre to open its stores to 
protect market share. Saskatchewan urban municipalities — and 
the member mentioned it already has — I want him to know 
that rural Saskatchewan has already been competing with the 
balance of the province. 
 
(1100) 
 
And as these court challenges continue, Mr. Speaker, they 
continue on legislation that we can’t provide provincially, and 
that’s why we can do it this way and provide it to the 
municipalities. We’re trying to create a level playing field for 
the businesses, for the municipalities, and for the consumer. 
And provincially, Mr. Speaker, that can’t be done. 
 
Extended store hours in one municipality will not lever the 
neighbouring centre to open its stores to protect the market 
share. Saskatchewan urban municipalities are typically 
separated by miles of prairie, unlike the multi-municipality, 
urban conglomerates of Vancouver and Toronto, for instance. 
Some communities in B.C. and Alberta still have Sunday and 
evening closings. Even those centres have wide open shopping, 
and it hasn’t affected rural Alberta. So, Mr. Speaker, there’s not 
much substance to the domino theory in the Saskatchewan 
market-place. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2018 
 

Saskatchewan municipalities have had shop closing legislation 
for decades. They have enjoyed a local choice on a variety of 
economic and quality of life issues, and this legislation is in 
keeping with that tradition. It removes some of the rigid 
province-wide restrictions on shopping and allows municipal 
values and individual community traditions. 
 
I’ll now turn, for a few moments, to another important part of 
this Bill, the new legislation on dangerous dogs, something that 
the opposition finds very humorous, and I noticed the members 
from Saskatoon smiling. Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious Bill, 
and I only wish that the members of the NDP caucus would 
recognize that this Bill is designed to protect kids, like are 
sitting up in that gallery now, and you should be ashamed for 
sitting with a smug look on your face. It’s designed to protect 
all of our citizens: our seniors, your mom and mine, theirs. And 
they laugh about it. 
 
There’s been a growing concern in North America, Mr. 
Speaker, with not only dangerous dogs but new types of breeds, 
and there also seems to be growing numbers of irresponsible 
owners. In Canada, several cities — notably Vancouver, 
Edmonton, and Winnipeg — have tried to pass by-laws to 
control dangerous dogs, but often the provincial legislation was 
found to be inadequate. 
 
I’m pleased to say that this Bill contains the toughest and most 
responsible legislation in Canada on the subject of dangerous 
dogs. It strengthens this government’s long-standing 
commitment to protecting Saskatchewan families, something 
that the NDP lacks and don’t care about, and that is families. 
When the interest rates were 22 per cent and people were losing 
their homes, the NDP did nothing. They probably laughed, as 
they are laughing now, while we try to protect our families 
against dangerous dogs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pet ownership, I mean responsible pet ownership, 
is an important part of family life in Saskatchewan and I dare 
say that the young people in our gallery, many would own pets 
and are responsible owners. They will not be affected by this 
legislation, and that’s why I fail to see the humour. 
 
But you only have to look at one picture of a child whose face 
has been severely disfigured by a vicious dog to comprehend 
the grief and the suffering inflicted on that family. And the 
NDP still smiles. 
 
Well a number of municipalities and SUMA have in recent 
years being asking us, Mr. Speaker, to pass stronger legislation 
to deal with the issue of dangerous dogs. We’ve spent some 
months in intense discussions with municipal legal experts in 
this province, with veterinarians, with kennel clubs, with the 
SPCA (Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) and 
other interested parties, and we’ve cast the net across North 
America to get the best features of their legislation. 
 
And what do we have as a result, Mr. Speaker? First, we 
removed the old “one free bite” principle in common law, the 
principle that very often allowed an owner to escape any form 
of sanction. Owners of dangerous dogs  

that attack people or other domestic animals will now be subject 
to a fine as high as $10,000, and, where the judge considers the 
case drastic enough, to a jail term as well. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the courts, and to some degree the 
municipality, will be given greater expanded powers to order 
controls of dangerous dogs. And as before, courts will retain the 
power to have particularly vicious dogs destroyed. 
 
Thirdly in this Bill, and in regulations which we are now 
writing, we are saying that judges must impose mandatory 
controls on dogs once they are declared dangerous. And this is a 
big step from the past where the courts were given no guidance 
as to the controls on dangerous dogs. As a result, there were no 
standard sanctions to give uniform protection across the 
province. We’ve built on control features from Rhode Island, 
the American state with the toughest dog legislation, and we’ve 
added features suitable to the Canadian legal system which are 
unique and which will, in my view, serve as a model across 
Canada. 
 
Fourthly, municipalities are given the authority to regulate, 
control, or prohibit dogs by breed, by sex, by size, and so on. 
 
I think a fifth key feature of this Bill is found in the mandatory 
controls that are imposed by the court when a dog is deemed 
dangerous. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There’s no doubt you’ll go down in 
history. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And yes, Mr. Speaker, as the member from 
Regina North East says from his seat, I do hope I go down in 
history with this very important piece of legislation that still, all 
in all, you find humorous. It’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
crying shame that the members of the NDP find this Bill 
humorous. I just can’t believe what I see from the benches 
opposite. 
 
The dangerous dog will have to be kept in a secure, locked, 
escape-proof, child-proof enclosure, Mr. Speaker, or in the 
owner’s dwelling. When off the owner’s premises, the dog will 
have to be humanely muzzled and secured. 
 
Liability insurance will be required, and the regulations will 
likely set this at a minimum of $300,000 coverage. A prescribed 
sign warning of the presence of a dangerous dog will be 
required at every point of access to the property where such dog 
is kept, and the authorities must be notified when a dangerous 
dog is sold or moved into a different municipality. 
 
Other controls in the Bill include: a judge may order that a 
dangerous dog be tatooed for identification and enforcement 
purposes; owning dogs for purposes of dogfighting is prohibited 
— and I suppose you’ll laugh at that as well; search and seizure 
powers are strengthened — peace officers can destroy dogs 
actually attacking a person or domestic animal. 
 
There is of course an appeal procedure built into the legislation 
to ensure that the rights of owners are  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2019 
 

protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that our legislation is the strongest and most 
responsible dog control legislation in North America. It has 
received the support of the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical 
Association, the SPCA, and the Canadian Kennel Club. I 
certainly hope that it will get the support of the NDP. It 
promotes responsible pet ownership practices that are advocated 
by those professional groups. Our department is currently 
developing an information campaign to inform dog owners and 
the public about their rights and their responsibilities under the 
new legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now turn to another part of this Bill dealing 
with a new electoral structure available to Saskatchewan cities 
over 30,000 in population. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
would like to make some introductions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would like to introduce to you, and through you to the members 
of this Assembly, a group of 56 students from the town of 
Martensville. These are grade 8 students. 
 
I am very familiar with the town of Martensville, Mr. Speaker. 
It has the distinction of being the fastest-growing town in the 
entire province of Saskatchewan. It is a very aggressive 
community . . . a very progressive community, I might add. 
 
And I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce them to the Assembly; and their teachers Sheryl 
Kleckner, Michelle Schaff; the bus drivers . . . I think I 
pronounced that wrong by the reaction . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Schaff is it? All right. And the bus drivers Ron 
and Darryl; chaperons Mrs. Baker and Dave Stevenson, Mrs. 
John and Mrs. Redekopp. And I might just add at this time that 
as far as Mrs. Redekopp is concerned, I know that she is a very 
pleasant, hard-working, efficient secretary by profession 
because she does work in my constituency office. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would wish the students well on their 
trip. I hope they have an enjoyable stay here, find it 
informative, and I would ask all members here to join in a 
hearty round of welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too welcome 
the school group. And I would point out, on my last bit of about 
the dogs, that the member that just introduced you certainly 
supports this Bill. When you get home tonight you can tell your 
folks that the NDP are still  

laughing about it, and it’s unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now turn to another part of this Bill dealing 
with the new electoral structure available to Saskatchewan 
cities. Over a year ago, at SUMA’s annual meeting, I 
announced that the existing legislation permitting cities to adopt 
a ward system would be reviewed. That review has resulted in a 
new system which permits the four largest cities in the province 
to retain or adopt a split ward system, electing half of their 
aldermen from wards and half from the city at large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government gave serious consideration to 
requiring the three Saskatchewan cities that currently have 
wards to move completely to the at-large forms of elections as 
was done in the fourth, the city of Moose Jaw. However, there 
was concern expressed by the councils of these cities about 
losing a form of representation that they had grown used to. We 
listened, Mr. Speaker, and we are retaining elements of the 
current ward system if the four largest cities want it. 
 
This is quite a contrast to the previous government, Mr. 
Speaker. That government imposed the ward system on the two 
major cities in 1973 in the face of several plebiscites in 
opposition to wards. There is no escaping that fact, Mr. 
Speaker. The ward system was imposed by the NDP 
government in spite of the two largest cities in the province 
saying they didn’t want it. And not just the councils, Mr. 
Speaker, but the plebiscites said no, we don’t want the ward 
system, and yet it was imposed. There was no compromise, no 
middle ground in that instance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, that regime also introduced a Bill imposing wards on 
school systems in the large cities, despite a virtually unanimous 
outcry from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) and school boards — unanimous outcry, and they 
still announced the Bill. That Bill was repealed during the first 
term of our government. 
 
The question can be asked: why is this government requiring 
cities which have wards to adopt a split ward, at-large system? 
Similarly, why is the move away from a full ward system not 
subject to a vote of electors? Why not give the cities carte 
blanche? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me quote the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount, who wrote in a letter to the Leader-Post on May 3, 
1973, and I quote: 
 

The British North America Act puts the responsibility for 
creating local government institutions on the provincial 
government. The provincial government should design and 
put into effect the best democratic system of local 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are doing just that. But we have done so with a 
great deal of sensitivity to the expressed wishes of the elected 
members of the city councils concerned. We have limited the 
new split system to cities over 30,000, because the system . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the guests not to 
participate in the debate, and I think we have to adhere to  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2020 
 

that rule because once we allow the line to be crossed, it’s 
difficult to draw back. 
 
I understand you’re interested in the debate and certainly there 
are humorous phrases and incidents, but I’m afraid I must ask 
you to try to refrain from participating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have limited 
the new split system to cities over 30,000, Mr. Speaker, because 
the system is not needed in smaller cities. If any value exists in 
the ward system for these centres, it hasn’t been apparent to 
their councils or their citizens for they have ignored the ward 
system for years although it was available to them in legislation. 
The city of Moose Jaw, a major city, didn’t prefer the ward 
system. 
 
Let me deal with some of the concerns raised with the split 
ward system from time to time in Canada. I mentioned two such 
concerns a month or two ago to the press. First, what about the 
concern that the split system produces two classes of aldermen. 
And I said that, and I was concerned. 
 
I’ve since learned that problems exist only where a board of 
control is part of the split system. The board of control model, it 
was largely an Ontario model, gave special executive powers to 
those aldermen that were elected at large, so a natural division 
occurred. 
 
(1115) 
 
Our model, Mr. Speaker, does not do that. In fact, my officials 
have been in touch with academics and city officials in Thunder 
Bay and St. John’s, Newfoundland, where the split system is 
used, and it seems that all aldermen enjoy the same status, not 
only legally but certainly in the eyes of the voters. And that’s 
the important thing that I have the concern with, Mr. Speaker — 
the voters, the taxpayers. 
 
Then there’s the concern that the split system requires a change 
in the form of the ballot. Well in the first instance, the split 
system will have a shorter ballot than the at-large. And also, 
local election legislation permits councils to rotate the names of 
the ballots to provide a fairness to all candidates, rather than the 
old alphabetical system. 
 
An additional ballot is a small price to pay for the fact that our 
people benefit a lot by being able to vote for more aldermen on 
council. This will give the electorate greater clout at city hall 
since both the ward-based and the at-large aldermen will now 
be accountable to a larger portion of the electorate. 
 
Speaking of accountability, I’ve made the point before that 
there’s no parliamentary opposition in city councils, and this 
places greater importance on the city council accountability to 
the public. There’s also a three-year term that’s fixed for city 
councils, and hence no chance to call council before the court of 
electors that automatically will judge all of us. 
 
Let me deal with some of the specifics of the legislation. Cities 
that currently use the ward system will be permitted by the 
legislation to retain wards, but in a modified form. The 
proposed legislation provides that those cities which  

now have ward-based elections will be required to elect half the 
number of aldermen from the city at large beginning with the 
upcoming October 1988 civic election. 
 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, is a special case. That city chose not 
to adopt the ward system prior to the statutory deadline of April 
15 for the 1988 election. However, in future years Moose Jaw 
will have the option to move to the new split system. 
 
The ward boundaries commission, chaired by a judge, which is 
provided in existing legislation, will establish new ward 
boundaries in each of the three cities with existing wards by 
August 1, 1988. A key task of this commission will be to reduce 
the number of wards by one-half of their current number. 
 
If the councils of the three cities that currently operate under 
wards prefer not to adopt this new split ward system, they may, 
prior to August 1, 1988, choose to revert to an at-large system, 
beginning with the fall 1988 elections. Cities under 30,000 
which currently operate under the at-large system will see no 
change, as this new split ward system will be applicable only to 
cities greater than 30,000 population. 
 
These reforms reflect the provincial government’s 
constitutional responsibility to provide an effective and 
democratic institutional framework for municipal governments. 
We have tried to balance the value of representation of districts 
and neighbourhoods within the city with the equally valid 
principle of efficiency and concern for the general good of the 
city. I think that we have the best of both models. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to bring my remarks to a 
close. This is a long Bill, but I should mention, in closing, some 
of the important administrative reforms in this piece of 
legislation. 
 
It contains a provision to streamline the procedure under which 
municipalities may reduce the local business tax. This is to 
make it easier to participate in our government’s new $10 
million business tax reduction initiative. 
 
The Bill also requires a new annual municipal public accounts 
procedure for our 12 Saskatchewan cities. This requirement 
parallels the public accounts tradition of the provision of the 
provincial government. And it will give cities the opportunity to 
display their financial affairs, their financial efficiencies, if you 
will, to local taxpayers. 
 
And finally, the Bill allows urban municipal councils the right 
to ask a court to clarify the wording of citizen petitions before 
they are submitted to a vote of electors. This will ensure clear 
and comprehensive by-law questions resulting from petitions 
and will also ensure that a fair and neutral arbiter has looked at 
the wording of the petition, to save the voters any confusion on 
the issue. 
 
Apart from these major legislative amendments, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there are also a number of housekeeping changes of an 
administrative nature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this Bill is a responsible and  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2021 
 

thoughtful response to request for reforms made by citizens and 
by their elected municipal councils. It also reflects our duty as a 
provincial government to carry out our constitutional 
responsibility for ensuring effective, democratic local 
government institutions and structures. 
 
These reforms, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are a milestone in our 
efforts to prepare our urban municipal legislation to meet the 
challenges of the 1990s. I will urge all members to support this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to make a few remarks on this Bill. I want to, first of all, 
say that before this Bill can pass through this House in its 
present form, we need to allow, as legislators, a considerable 
amount of time for the public and for municipal councillors and 
for the business community and church organizations to have 
input into this legislation because of the impact that it has on 
the very structure of Saskatchewan and the very structure of 
family life in Saskatchewan. 
 
And because of that, Mr. Speaker, and Because I’ve already 
spoken to several people who are on the board of SUMA, none 
of whom had yet an opportunity to look at this Bill, or see it — 
they had not received it — I am going to be adjourning this 
debate at the end of my remarks. 
 
I find it rather unusual that the minister would not take the time, 
after having introduced the Bill, to make sure that it was made 
available to all of these people, and I think that that in itself 
says a great deal about the approach that the government has 
taken on this legislation. 
 
I listened to the minister with some care. It was hard at times, 
but I did. And I found it rather . . . not amusing. I found it rather 
sad at how hard he tried to sound sincere about this legislation. 
It was a new face over there. He said that this is one of the most 
significant Bills he’s ever introduced in this legislature. 
 
Well it’s significant, Mr. Speaker. It’s significant for its 
notoriety. It’s significant because of the unethical, the cynical, 
and the dishonest approach taken by this government and this 
minister to this issue. That is well known. It is significant 
because this minister has stubbornly ignored all of the advice 
that has been given to him by all of the people who have made a 
submission on some aspects of this legislation, mainly the store 
hours question and the ward system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s why it’s significant, not because 
of its value or for the good that it’s going to create, it’s 
significant for all of the wrong reasons. 
 
The minister said that wherever possible — and I underline his 
words wherever possible, those are the copping out words — he 
said, wherever possible he has incorporated the wishes of 
SUMA and urban municipalities in this legislation. I ask him 
whether he can in all honesty and sincerity say that he’s 
incorporated the wishes and the advice of SUMA and 
municipalities and councillors with respect to the elimination of 
the ward system. I would like him, some day when we do  

committee, to stand up in the House and categorically say that 
he has listened to that advice and he’s followed it, because he 
can’t do it, because the advice is contrary to what this 
legislation does. 
 
I would like him to stand up in this House, which he didn’t do 
once again, and say categorically and honestly and sincerely 
that he has followed the advice of SUMA with regard to the 
store hours. He has not. There are resolutions passed at the most 
recent convention of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association saying to the minister: you are wrong. These are 
people who represent every urban municipality in the province 
of Saskatchewan. They know what is in the best interests of the 
people who live in Martensville or live in Hudson Bay, 
Saskatchewan, or live in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan, and they 
all came and in a very loud voice said to the minister: do not do 
this. And yet, he stands in this House and says that he has 
incorporated the wishes of SUMA and urban municipalities, 
and I say that he has not. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the minister thinks he can play 
God. He says he knows better than SUMA. He says he knows 
better than the elected officials at the municipal level. He says 
he knows better than the people who run our shops and stores 
all over Saskatchewan — the people in Canora, who under this 
legislation are going to be hard pressed because of the domino 
effect that the minister mentioned with regard to the opening 
and closing of stores. 
 
I say to the member from Canora that your merchants in the 
town of Canora don’t want to be open seven days a week, but 
they’re going to be forced to be open seven days a week 
because they are going to be . . . the big chain stores are going 
to make the policy, and they won’t have any choice. 
 
And I would like to know, I would like to know how all of 
those members from rural Saskatchewan are going to vote on 
this legislation, because this will be a very interesting thing for 
their electors to know, because they are now telling these 
members, in large numbers, that they should not allow that part 
of the Bill to pass. And if the member from Canora or 
Shaunavon or Nipawin or Pelly can deny that, I would like 
them to stand up in the House and say it. I hope that they will 
all stand up and join in this debate and say what their position is 
on this. They might as well, because when it comes to the vote 
they’re going to have to stand up in this House and take that 
position, unless many of them are going to duck and not be 
here, which is, I think, going to be the case with some of them. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, the private members who 
are not in the cabinet, do the right thing. You will be judged in 
your constituencies by how you vote on this issue. Tell your 
minister this Bill is yet at a stage where it doesn’t have to 
proceed through the House. Nobody will be embarrassed if it is 
stopped on the government side. Nobody will be embarrassed 
— maybe the minister because he’s been so stubborn about it 
— but you can be proud of having made a decision based on the 
arguments that your constituencies bring to you. 
 
What is wrong with saying, look, I have consulted with the 
people who I represent, and they have told me that the  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2022 
 

Bill shouldn’t go. There’s nothing wrong with that. That’s not a 
negative thing or a negative light in which you as a politician 
portray yourself. That’s a very positive thing and a positive way 
in which you can show yourself representing the people who 
elected you. 
 
I want to correct the minister on another comment he made. He 
made no reference to the fact that the people in the cities of 
Saskatoon and Regina and Prince Albert actually voted for the 
ward system in 1976, and in Prince Albert a little later. 
 
(1130) 
 
It’s interesting how the minister ignores those kinds of facts. 
But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that those people in those 
municipalities, by large margins in plebiscite and in a vote of 
the electors and taxpayers in that year, voted by as much as 70 
per cent in Regina to have the ward system. 
 
Now I know this government philosophically is against the 
ward system because they have other motives, but why not let 
the people have a choice. At least they had a choice in 1976. 
What this legislation will do, according to the minister, is take 
away that choice. He is going to impose on them his two 
choices, and will not give them the opportunity to vote on the 
third one, which is the ward system, if they choose to have it, 
because he categorically says in the Bill, they can’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other cities who did not choose the ward 
system, and the minister is correct, but that was their choice. 
That wasn’t a Conservative government’s choice. That was 
those cities who made that choice. Why should they not 
continue to have that choice? 
 
Now in spite of the fact that they chose not to make that choice, 
Mr. Speaker, every single one of those cities that does not have 
a ward system has passed a resolution in this last several 
months and has written to the minister saying that he should 
give all the cities the choice. And he is ignoring those 
resolutions and those submissions — every one of those cities 
— because they believe in democracy, and they believe in the 
right for local people to choose their system of municipal 
electoral government. 
 
Before I go on to some of the remarks which I had prepared, I 
want to make one other point about something the minister said, 
and there was a lot of irony in that one, and maybe . . . it almost 
sounds cynical when you hear that minister, speaking on behalf 
of that government, talk about the important provision on 
proposals regarding public accounts for municipalities. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to oppose that provision in that 
legislation, and neither is anybody else. But for this government 
to talk about the importance of public accounts and public 
accounting is really a case of . . . a sheer case of hypocrisy. 
Because here is a government, Mr. Speaker, who sat on the 
Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan for over 14 
months before they tabled them in this legislature, because they 
didn’t want the people to know how they had spent their 
money. 
 
There’s a double standard here. This is a government that says 
everybody should be publicly accountable; we’re  

going to improve the legislation to make sure that the cities are 
publicly accountable, that the municipal councillors are public 
accountable; but as far as we’re concerned, we don’t have to be. 
That’s the double standard that has put this government in such 
ill repute with all of the people in Saskatchewan. That’s the 
kind of double standard that caused this government to lose 
their deposit in the Eastview by-election and the Regina 
Elphinstone by-election. 
 
And although there are some vague references to, oh, we are 
listening to what the people are telling us, that seemed to last 
only the night of election. And then after that it’s just plough 
right along; ignore the wishes of the people; we’re going to do 
whatever we want to do, and nobody is going to stop us, is what 
the approach has been over here. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, you should know, as a member 
of a rural constituency, that that kind of approach in 
Saskatchewan is unacceptable. The people of this province 
cherish the democratic rights which they have developed over 
many, many years. They cherish the institutions which they’ve 
built with their own hands because no outside interests would 
do it. And for this government to come along and tear them 
down and destroy them is not acceptable today, and it’s not 
going to be acceptable at the next provincial election when they 
finally go to the polls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there are three 
portions of this Bill of major significance, and there are others, 
some of which the minister referred to, which are important. 
But there is first of all the issue . . . one of the issues is the 
attack by this government on the right of urban residents to 
choose the electoral system under which they wish to elect their 
council. Arbitrary elimination of the ward system without even 
leaving it as an option, is what this Bill does. It’s an attack on 
democracy itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second issue here is . . . well the minister 
keeps harping from his seat, well you did it in ’73. Well I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, if that was wrong, two wrongs don’t make a 
right. And that’s not what was done. Because it 1973, Mr. 
Speaker, it was written into the legislation that if the electors 
chose to do away with the ward system, they could do it or they 
could choose to keep it. What the minister is doing in this 
legislation is saying, you don’t have a choice any more. And 
that is the difference, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a significant 
difference. 
 
Now the other issue, Mr. Speaker, is that the government is 
turning the decisions on store hours over to the corporate 
boardrooms in Toronto and New York. That is the very 
substance of what this legislation does on store hours 
throughout Saskatchewan, because these amendments to store 
hours really are a question of whether or not we allow 
Saskatchewan people to control shopping in Saskatchewan, or 
whether we allow the corporate boardrooms in Toronto and 
New York to decide what’s going to happen in Saskatchewan. 
 
And when this government was faced with having to  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2023 
 

make the choice, do you know who they chose? They chose the 
corporate boardrooms of Toronto and New York. And that’s not 
unusual; they have been doing this as government policy on 
economic development, on their whole privatization approach, 
and it’s consistent with their approach, but it doesn’t make it 
right. 
 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh now, here’s the Minister 
of Finance speaking as he comes into the House. When he feels 
pressed, he feels he has to speak from his seat as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The minister opposite says that the legislature can’t provide 
provincial regulation that is enforced, that is enforceable 
provincially. And I say to you, he’s wrong again. It’s just that 
the government and he do not have the will to do it. 
 
Right now in the province of New Brunswick, that provincial 
government is bringing in legislation to provide one day of 
pause provincially, because they’ve had the other experience 
and they have found that it didn’t work. In the province of 
Manitoba, if that government and that minister had taken the 
time to look, they have provincial legislation which is about a 
year and a half old, which works very effectively, and no one 
has yet challenged it. 
 
So for the minister to say that you can’t have provincial 
legislation which is enforceable is wrong, and it’s only an 
attempt to provide a weak argument for a bad provision in a bad 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third major issue is — and I will admit that it’s 
major — is the question of giving municipalities to pass 
by-laws which can effectively control dangerous dogs. And 
nobody’s going to argue about that. I mean, the evidence of 
some of the problems that are there is self-evident. And there 
appears to be . . . this in my view appears to be appropriate 
legislation and municipalities will welcome it. And so the 
government will not hear any arguments contrary to that from 
the opposition. We may have to take a look at some of the 
specific provisions and see whether they in fact do what it is 
suggested by the government that they will do, but in principle 
it’s not a bad approach. 
 
But I may add, Mr. Minister, that although this legislation has 
been dubbed the “mad dog legislation,” it’s interesting that it’s 
in the same Bill as the other provisions, because all it does is 
seems to highlight the madness that appears to have overcome 
this government with respect to the first two issues which I have 
discussed in my remarks. 
 
There is widespread concern with respect to the ward system 
and to the store hours issue. No one can deny that, and no one 
on that side of the House can deny that. On the ward system, the 
minister is carrying out a personal vendetta. And I think that’s 
really sad and unfortunate that the minister would carry out a 
personal vendetta and refuse to consider what is right. That is 
not what government is all about; that is not what legislators 
elected to this Assembly are all about. We’re here to represent 
the interests of all people, and not represent some impersonal 
hate that we have developed, as the  

minister seems to be doing in this case. 
 
He has no support for his proposals, but he insists on charging 
ahead in spite of the many individuals and organizations 
advising otherwise. The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, the councils of cities and towns, concerned citizens 
and others have said that the minister should not proceed. And 
in the face of all of the reasoned arguments presented to the 
government, it is surprising that the government caucus, which I 
referred to earlier, has become so insensitive as to permit this 
legislation to proceed. 
 
And I say to them and to the minister, reconsider. Reconsider. 
Do what’s right. 
 
It is not just I who make these arguments, or my colleagues on 
this side of the House because we happen to be politicians, and 
therefore maybe we tend to oppose things of the government. 
That’s not the issue here. There are many others who have said 
to the government what we are saying here. 
 
I have a clipping here from the Leader-Post in which, after the 
introduction of the legislation, city aldermen in Regina were 
saying the following: 
 

It is wrong for the provincial government to interfere in 
matters they believe are of local jurisdiction. 

 
The president of SUMA himself — and the minister should 
listen to the president of SUMA because they’re pretty close — 
but the president of SUMA himself has said, and I quote the 
article and the write-up from the paper that is written here on 
the June 1 edition of the Leader-Post: 
 

Some municipal politicians accused Urban Affairs 
Minister (the member from Regina South, I guess I can’t 
use his name) of ignoring them by announcing plans to 
replace the ward system for city councils with a combined 
ward and at-large system. 

 
The president of SUMA said, I quote: 
 

It’s quite a departure from what we wanted. 
 

And then he said: 
 

SUMA has repeatedly asked Klein . . . (sorry) has 
repeatedly asked (the minister, the member from Regina 
South, the Minister of Urban Affairs) to leave the ward 
system alone, and let municipalities decide for themselves 
which election system they prefer, said Abel. 

 
(The minister) certainly hasn’t listened to us. 

 
And I think that’s a key point when the president of SUMA 
says categorically and in print that the minister has not listened 
to us. And that’s a major reason why this Bill has received the 
title of being as notorious as it has. 
 
Now we’ve heard the minister talk about his silly notion  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2024 
 

that somehow this is a compromise on the ward system. What a 
bunch of . . . It’s humorous and it’s sad, and quite frankly, it’s 
disgusting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this was truly a compromise, if the minister was 
really intending to compromise, wouldn’t you believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that the compromise would have been to say in the 
legislation, okay, we’re going to give you the choice; we’re 
going to allow you to choose between an at-large system and 
the worst possible system of all, the dual system, or the ward 
system. That would have been a compromise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to say to the people in the urban municipalities, we’re going 
to just let you pick the two and you can’t have the three, no 
compromise. That is arbitrary. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why the editorial writers in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
— certainly not a paper that has any historical connection to the 
New Democratic Party and would not be thought to be one that 
would support things that the New Democratic Party would say, 
but, I think, has some editorial honesty. And the editorial in the 
Star-Phoenix on June 2 said, right at the headline, “Re-design 
or resign,” and they’re right. 
 
And the minister doesn’t like to stay when we get to that 
editorial, because I don’t think he wants to hear it. But I say 
what the Star-Phoenix has said. It says: 
 

(The minister’s) . . . creation of five ward representatives 
and five at-large council members would give urban voters 
the worst of all possible systems. 

 
Now here is a government that chooses the worst of all possible 
systems and tries to force it on the people. It goes on to say: 
 

Cabinet ministers should know better than to let their 
personal vendettas influence their judgment and 
governments should not allow individual (anger) . . . to 
dictate policy. 

 
And I agree with that statement in the editorial. It says: 
 

. . . this ridiculous proposal to change the ward system (is 
an example). 

 
(1145) 
 
The editorial goes on to say: 
 

The Devine government is facing almost universal 
opposition for this wrong-headed move. 
 
The government should reverse itself at once and toss (the 
minister’s) . . . proposals on the (scrap-heap) . . . It would 
be appropriate at the same time to ask for his resignation 
or at least reassign him to a lesser portfolio. This attack on 
the ward system isn’t the work of a capable minister with 
sound judgment. 

 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I say that the honourable thing for the 
Premier to do in this kind of a situation is demand the 
resignation of his minister. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now there is a way, Mr. Speaker, that 
you can deal with this. There are some provisions of the Bill 
that are good. This portion of the Bill that we are talking about 
here, that I am referring to, should be separated from the Bill. 
It’s been done before and it can be done again. And if the 
House Leader was in the House, I would be saying to him . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member knows that he 
shouldn’t be referring to the absence of members. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I agree. But the 
Deputy House Leader is here, so I will make the 
recommendation to him. 
 
And I say to the Deputy House Leader to carry the message to 
his House Leader, to carry the message to the Premier, that this 
. . . the smart thing to do would be to split this Bill and take this 
portion of the Bill out of the main Bill so that we could deal 
with it separately so that other portions of the Bill that are good 
and positive proposals can be left intact. 
 
I urge the government to consider this option in dealing with 
this Bill. And I hope that they . . . And I do it in a serious way. I 
don’t do it in a partisan political way. I do it because I think it’s 
the appropriate thing to do, and I hope that the government over 
there will take it as a serious consideration. 
 
The ward legislation and the store hours legislation could be 
delayed until after the plebiscites on the ward system in the 
cities, and they’re already setting up to have them. That would 
be the right thing to do. The people of the cities want to vote on 
them to decide whether they want to keep it. Give them a 
chance to do that. Give them a chance to do that before you 
pass this legislation. 
 
And also we should provide an opportunity for small businesses 
and businesses in rural communities to have input on the store 
hours legislation, and therefore that is a separate piece of 
legislation that should be removed and split from the Bill so that 
we could provide them an opportunity to deal with that. 
 
Having done that, Mr. Speaker, we could deal with the dog 
legislation and we could deal with some of the technical 
amendments that are in the Bill in this spring session and put 
them into place — and put them into place. Take the other two 
portions out and give people a chance to deal with them. 
 
Now I say, if I may spend some time on the question of the 
store hours legislation, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said before and I say 
again, that this legislation is a cop-out by the government. 
 
It’s a government that will not live up to its responsibilities as 
an elected government of the day. It’s a government that is out 
of touch with the realities of Saskatchewan and simply has 
become mesmerized by their experiences in the trips that they 
take to Tokyo and New York and Chicago and Toronto and 
London and Geneva, and  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2025 
 

somehow think that you can take what you have over there and 
implement it into a province, widely distributed geographically, 
of a population of a million people, and that’s the right thing to 
do. 
 
That’s not why we are here and the way we are here because we 
did that. We are here because we set up a system and a province 
which we put together to suit our own environment. Now the 
government says that’s not good enough; we’re going to impose 
somebody else’s experience into this province in spite of our 
environment. 
 
Now the comments that have been made in argument by the 
government opposite, and particularly the minister in support of 
this Bill, are full of contradictions, full of contradictions 
because here he has argued on this portion on store hours that 
municipalities should have a choice. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, give it to the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — He says, give it to the municipalities 
because that’s the right thing to do. But when he comes to the 
other part of the Bill dealing with the ward systems, he said, 
I’m not going to give them a choice; they don’t know what to 
do with it; I’m going to impose it on them. Now that is the 
height of contradiction, Mr. Speaker, and I think it says a great 
deal about the kind of motivations that’s behind this legislation. 
 
He’s saying that when it comes to the electoral system, there 
should be no local autonomy, that people who live in Moose 
Jaw and Estevan and Weyburn and Regina and Saskatoon 
shouldn’t be allowed to choose. Ah! but when it comes to 
something that the government doesn’t want to deal with, like 
store hours, they say, oh, but that’s local autonomy and the 
government shouldn’t interfere and we should give them the 
choice. Now what kind of a cop-out and contradiction is that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I say to you, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation 
on store hours as well as being a cop-out, is a direct frontal 
attack on small business and particularly business in rural 
Saskatchewan, that’s what it is. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, this: 
that this government will go down in history as the government 
which has caused more destruction to family life than any other 
government in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We witnessed today, 60 dental therapists 
representing 440 dental therapists who, on this day last year, 
this government fired outright when they abolished the 
children’s dental plan. Those dental therapists have families. 
Now this is the sensitive government that said to them that their 
families are not important, their families aren’t important. 
We’re going to fire you outright on no notice because we don’t 
want this children’s dental plan, we want to privatize it. That’s a 
frontal attack on family life in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the government that talks about families and introduces 
liquor legislation that is going to open up the whole question of 
liquor distribution to the extent that we have never known to be 
possible in Saskatchewan before.  

Now they do that at the same time as they open up a facility in 
Yorkton called Whitespruce to treat drug and alcohol . . . 
teenage drug and alcohol abusers. That’s an attack on family 
life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we see, in this Bill, this government 
charging headlong into the undermining of the viability of rural 
Saskatchewan’s small business run by Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And also workers who work in these 
stores, in these shops who need some time with their families, 
they’re saying to them: it doesn’t matter to us whether you need 
some time with your families, we’re going to do whatever the 
chain stores headquartered in Toronto and New York decide 
that they want to do in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an organization in Saskatchewan, called 
the coalition against open on Sundays, and they’re more 
concerned about a common pause day across the province. They 
are speaking loud and clear and they are speaking to every 
business family in Saskatchewan today — they have been for 
the last several weeks. 
 
They wanted to meet with this minister for a long time. The 
minister refused to arrange a time to meet with them until the 
day when he introduced this Bill, after saying . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It is true, Mr. Minister. After saying to 
them, I will not introduce this Bill until I have consulted, until 
I’ve heard what you want to say, and then saying, come at 9 
o’clock in the morning. Talking to them, and saying what he 
said, then, at 2:30 in the afternoon, introduces the Bill. Now 
what kind of consultation is that? That is not consultation, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a mockery of consultation. 
 
And I say to the minister, and to the government, these people 
want to get a hearing from every business place in 
Saskatchewan, every business operated in Saskatchewan. They 
need the time to do that. Split this Bill from the main Bill, and 
give them the time to do that. 
 
There are others who have said, Mr. Speaker, and I know, I 
believe there is a letter that has been written to the Premier 
saying that there should be public hearings on this legislation. 
And I think that that’s a good suggestion. There is no reason 
why this legislature could not hold public hearings by a 
committee, a joint committee of all the legislators of this 
Assembly. But there needs to be time for that to happen. 
Another reason why the minister should split this legislation, as 
well as the ward legislation, away from the main Bill so it can 
be handled separately so that there can be that kind of time, so 
that this kind of a major decision can be made in consultation 
with the people who it’s going to affect the most. And I hope 
that it will be considered. 
 
Before I adjourn, I say one more time to the government 
opposite: there is a way to handle this appropriately. There is a 
way in which you can save face, if that’s what’s  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2026 
 

important to you, on two issues which you know you’re in 
trouble with, and that is to say what is true. And that is that 
there’s people out there, organizations and individuals across 
the complete spectrum of Saskatchewan society, who want you 
to delay this part of the legislation. If you do it, will be a 
positive move, and they will, and so will I, commend you for it. 
 
Don’t go headlong into this thing in spite of their wishes, in 
spite of the need to be able to make sure you do the right thing. 
Delay the Bill. Split off the portions that need to be passed this 
spring, and I can assure the members opposite, and the House 
Leader opposite, that I will make sure that those portions of the 
Bill that need to be passed this spring pass expeditiously and 
quickly so that they can be implemented and have the good 
effect that I think they have the potential for having, and that is 
the legislation dealing with dangerous dogs, the technical 
amendments on public accounts, and some other provisions of 
the Bill. Because there is something there that is worth 
supporting and everybody would support them. 
 
Now it may be that the government opposite doesn’t want to 
provide that opportunity for the public to have an input. Maybe 
they don’t want to provide the opportunity for the shopkeepers 
throughout Saskatchewan to have an input. Maybe they don’t 
want to provide an opportunity for the people in the urban 
centres of Saskatchewan to have a vote on whether they want to 
keep a ward system or an at-large system. That’s their choice 
and I can’t make it for them. 
 
But I want to provide them that opportunity, and every member 
on this side of the House in the New Democratic Party caucus 
wants to provide them that opportunity. And we’re going to do 
whatever we can to make sure that they have a chance to make 
that input. My colleague and I, the member from Prince Albert, 
are meeting with some people on Monday in Humboldt to 
discuss a number of issues concerning legislation brought into 
this House. We will continue to do that. 
 
I intend to send out to the urban municipalities of this province 
a questionnaire in which I will be asking about the matter of 
store hours and the legislation which this government has 
introduced, and the matter of the ward system and whether they 
believe municipalities should have a right to choose. But 
they’re going to need time to consider those questions and 
return them so that they can make some input and so they can 
be reported in this House. 
 
And because all of these things are so crucially important, and 
because they need time, Mr. Speaker, I want to adjourn debate 
for now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — With leave of the House, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to make a few introductions. 
 
Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you, and through you to the members 
of this Legislative Assembly, a group of 18 grade 12 students 
from a town in my constituency, of Waldheim. I would like to 
introduce to you their teacher Mr. Dave Hinz; Mrs. Redekopp 
and Mrs. Heppner as chaperons, and Dave Yule as bus driver. 
 
I already, Mr. Speaker, have had the opportunity to meet with 
this group and to discuss the democratic process and what was 
going on in the legislature. I hope you have enjoyed what you 
heard, as the member of Regina North East gave his version of 
a Bill introduced by the Urban Affairs minister. That, by the 
way, is the opposition’s viewpoint that you have heard; it’s 
unfortunate that you were not here while the minister was 
speaking. But I’m sure that you will enjoy the rest of your visit 
here in the legislature. I understand you came in last night 
already, and I guess that explains some of the looks that I’m 
seeing here. But I hope that you enjoy the rest of your visit and 
that you have a safe journey home. 
 
And I’d like to ask all members to welcome the students from 
Waldheim. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I would, too, like to ask for 
leave to introduce some guests in the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a distinct pleasure for me to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of the Assembly, a group from 
beyond our borders, Mr. Speaker, the Gizha Thunderbirds, 
Wa-Wa Shriners from Victoria, B.C. There are 16 visitors in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On behalf of the members, I would certainly welcome these 
visitors from British Columbia to our Assembly, to Regina, and 
of course our province of Saskatchewan. They are guests 
attending the Wa-Wa Temple ceremonial services where new 
members are joining the Shrine. So with that, I would ask all 
members to please welcome these distinct visitors to our 
Assembly this afternoon. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
move second reading of The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
I too would like to welcome the people from B.C. It’s tourism 
at its best; they’re bringing all that British  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2027 
 

Columbia money to Saskatchewan. It’s helping diversify our 
economy. We’ve got a little bit of a drought. You haven’t, but 
we need the money. So spend it freely while you’re here. Thank 
you for visiting. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, The Local Government 
Election Act was approved by this House about six years ago. 
The upcoming October civic elections will be the third civic 
general elections to be held under the Act. Those who know the 
local election process, Mr. Speaker, will attest to the fact that 
the 1985 civic elections process were much smooth than 1982. 
However, Mr. Speaker, the 1985 elections were not without 
hitches. The need for further adjustments to The Local 
Government Election Act was quite apparent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s in the tradition of our commitment to reform 
of the local election process that this Bill is being presented to 
this Assembly. As has been the case in the past, this Bill has 
been prepared in close consultation with local officials 
representing both school and municipal sectors. 
 
One of the major reforms in this Bill is that we are requiring 
that urban, municipal, and school division voters reside in the 
municipality or the school division, as the case may be, for 
three months instead of six months before becoming eligible to 
vote. 
 
You might ask, Mr. Speaker, why we’re doing this. Well we’re 
doing this because we want to expand the local franchise and 
increase participation in local government. One of the problems 
with the current six-months residency requirement is that if a 
person is, for example, transferred from, say, Regina to 
Saskatoon, he’s not able to vote in elections in Saskatoon until 
he has spent at least six months in that city. 
 
Now we agree that newcomers need to get to know the 
community issues before they vote; however, it’s obvious that 
six months is far too long a period to wait; it’s inappropriate for 
today’s mobile society. Therefore we are reducing the residency 
requirement by one-half of the current standard. 
 
I would mention that this three-month residency requirement 
will also apply to candidates for all school and municipal 
offices, as well as lessees of land and resort village who wish to 
vote in elections in their municipalities. 
 
Another major problem, where reform relates to voting by 
non-resident land owners. Mr. Speaker, during my remarks on 
The Controverted Municipal Election Amendment Act in this 
House a few days ago, I spoke about two solutions that we 
propose to introduce to discourage voting irregularities such 
that apparently occurred in the 1985 local election in the village 
of Ferland. I mentioned that one of the solutions would be in 
this Bill. 
 
To refresh the memory of the members and yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, on the irregularities, I said that the alleged abuse of the 
election process involved land transactions,  

specifically a number of names of people living outside of the 
community were added to the titles of land within the village, 
allegedly permitting them to influence the results of the 
election. I also emphasize that if we do not change the rules 
now, the possibility for voting irregularities to happen in other 
communities in the 1988 municipal election will continue to 
exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the solution that we are proposing in this Bill is to 
require landowners to own the land for three months prior to the 
election in order to qualify to vote in urban municipalities. 
Previously non-residents could vote by becoming landowners of 
up to one day before the election. 
 
The three-month ownership rule parallels the three-month 
residency requirement for new voters who move into a 
municipality, which I just outlined. It also squares with the 
three-month period for leasing of land in a resort village before 
becoming qualified to vote. 
 
We believe that this new requirement for non-residents to own 
land for three months before the election will go a long way in 
eliminating abuse by people who might be tempted to buy land 
to influence their election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased with a significant change in this 
Bill which will permit handicapped people to vote in their own 
homes. This involves a mobile poll, Mr. Speaker. It will 
authorize villages, towns and cities, as well as school boards, to 
set up mobile polls if they wish. The mobile poll simply means 
that the physically incapacitated voters’ homes can be declared 
a poll, and they can then vote at home if they are unable to get 
to the regular polling place because of their physical incapacity. 
 
It’s a significant step forward, in my opinion, supported by 
SUMA and it is parallel to a provision in the Saskatchewan 
Election Act which allows handicapped people to vote by mail. 
Mr. Speaker, no province, at this time, has a mail-in ballot 
provision in their local election law. However, Alberta and B.C. 
have the mobile poll option at the municipal level, and we feel 
that this is more practical in local elections. 
 
I’ll briefly mention that there are several amendments of a 
housekeeping nature in the Bill. For example, Saskatoon felt 
that the Act was ambiguous with respect to voting by students 
who attend post-secondary educations away from their home 
towns. We’ve clarified this position . . . this provision. In short, 
students will have the same voting rights as all other electors, 
and that is they will have to reside in a municipality for at least 
three months prior to the election to be eligible to vote. 
 
In addition, several local election officials asked us to reduce 
the minimum amount of time which polls in institutions such as 
special care homes are required to open, from four hours to two 
hours. We have agreed to this change to allow local election 
officials to use their personnel efficiently and cut their election 
expenses. We are satisfied that the voting rights of those in 
institutions will not be compromised with this change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe these amendments provide a  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2028 
 

necessary and timely update to the local election rules. It 
reflects the changing times in which we live. I would therefore 
urge all members to support this Bill. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I will not take a great deal 
of time on this Bill. There are many provisions, some of which 
the minister has referred to, which I think are positive, and we 
need to look at them, I think, with some more time. 
 
There is one provision which he referred to, and that is 
respecting students voting in municipal elections. The House 
may remember, and you probably no doubt will, Mr. Speaker, 
that I think it was last year when the minister produced some 
amendments with regard to that which became very unpopular 
and no one supported or agreed them. And we want to take a 
look carefully at these proposals to see whether they are the 
same or whether they repair some of the shortcomings of the 
earlier proposals of a little over a year ago. 
 
I noted with some interest that in describing the Bill, no 
mention was made that a large portion of the provisions in this 
Bill are to provide for the new system of election of municipal 
councillors, the dual system. The minister made no reference to 
that at all, and I don’t know whether that was an attempt to 
make the opposition feel that they could let this Bill go by, but I 
want to assure the minister that we take the time to read the 
legislation which this House sees from the government 
opposite. 
 
I have read that one and really, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, there 
are provisions in this Bill that may not be necessary if the 
government’s legislation on the ward system does not proceed 
in this House. Until we know that, these consequential 
amendments, Mr. Speaker, should not be passed, and so I, at 
this time, with the indication that we need to hold onto this Bill 
to see whether some of those provisions need to be eliminated, I 
think the only thing we can do at this time is adjourn debate on 
this Bill until the other Bill, which we’ve discussed previously 
is dealt with in this House. 
 
(1214) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 39 
 

Duncan Andrew 
Berntson Lane 
Taylor Smith 
Muirhead Hodgins 
Gerich Hepworth 
Klein Meiklejohn 
Martin Toth 
Johnson McLaren 
Petersen Gardner 
Kopelchuk Britton 
Romanow Prebble 
Lingenfelter Shillington 
Tchorzewski Koskie 
Thompson Mitchell 
Simard Kowalsky 
Solomon Anguish 
Pringle Lautermilch 
 
 

Swenson Martens 
Gleim Trew 
Van Mulligen  
 

Nays — 00 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope that as 
some of those other votes are taken, the opposition would have 
the courtesy to vote with us, as we did just now. And for the 
visitors in the gallery, it’s Friday, the opposition has had a 
tough day, you’ve probably seen a little history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise this afternoon to move second 
reading of The Tax Enforcement Amendment Act, 1988. And 
the purpose of the majority of these amendments is to reduce 
the role of the registrar of land titles in municipal tax 
enforcement proceedings, and provides a procedure in The Tax 
Enforcement Act, which requires the enforcing body to perform 
most of the steps independently of the land titles officials. 
 
The emphasis of these amendments is on ensuring that land 
owners are properly served in accordance with existing time 
frames, and with the same frequency as presently exists under 
The Tax Enforcement Act. The most significant change which 
is being made is to require municipalities to determine on their 
own who will be served with notice of the municipalities intent 
to acquire title to property on which tax arrears exist, and to 
require the municipalities to take responsibility for those 
services. 
 
Presently, the land titles registrar’s involvement in assisting the 
municipalities in the tax enforcement process is extensive. This 
involvement is significantly reduced by the amendments 
included in this Act. The municipality will no longer be 
required to publish, in the Saskatchewan Gazette, a copy of the 
list indicating tax arrears. This function, which is currently 
performed by the municipality, serves no purpose. 
 
Tax liens will continue to be filed in the Land Titles Office, and 
after one year has expired and the municipality has passed the 
appropriate resolution, the municipality will request a copy of 
the certificate of title and a general record certificate from the 
Land Titles Office. From this information, the municipality will 
determine upon whom service must be made. The treasurer of 
the municipality shall serve all persons appearing to have an 
interest in the land, requiring them within six months to consent 
the claim or to redeem the land . . . contest the claim, I’m sorry. 
 
In accordance with existing procedure, the municipality will 
continue to provide notice to the Provincial Mediation Board 
and obtain the consent of the Provincial Mediation Board prior 
to obtaining certificate of title. 
 
Finally, no change will be made to the existing procedure of 
providing an additional 30-day service at the expiration of six 
months from the date of the last service by the treasurer. 
 
Finally, the proposed Act includes less significant  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2029 
 

housekeeping amendments dealing with the interaction of the 
land title system and the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Tax Enforcement 
Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, my study of the Bill, to 
date, indicates that it is not a Bill that I see any great difficulty 
with, but I have not completed by consultation with 
municipalities and I have not had yet a response from SUMA 
with regard to this legislation. In order for me to be able to do 
that, including discussions I will be having with representatives 
of SUMA at regional meetings, which I will be attending in the 
next little while, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 72, a Bill to establish the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board. 
 
In last year’s budget address my colleague, the Minister of 
Finance, announced the government’s intention to consolidate, 
under a single new board, the jurisdiction and responsibilities of 
the present Local Government Board, the Provincial Planning 
Appeals Board, and the Saskatchewan Assessment Appeal 
Board. This Bill follows through on this announcement. 
 
The scope of the new board has necessitated an extensive and 
thorough review, taking some time to prepare this piece of 
legislation. The consolidation of these three board functions 
offers a number of benefits for both the Saskatchewan public 
and local governments. Before reviewing the contents of the 
Bill, I will identify some of the benefits. 
 
First, it has provided an opportunity for us to review and, where 
appropriate, update their responsibilities. 
 
Secondly, consolidation will permit the application of a broader 
range of expertise to local government needs from a single 
board. Board members will have the opportunity to become 
familiar with and assist communities in an expanded 
jurisdiction. For example, there are relationships among local 
government finance, assessment, and planning matters. And 
now the board will be able to take these into account more 
readily. Sharing the expert staff drawn from the three present 
boards will also reinforce the objective. 
 
Thirdly, consolidation of these boards will offer greater 
flexibility and efficiency in scheduling appeal hearings of 
various types and in providing service to the public and local 
governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the jurisdiction of the new municipal board will be 
drawn from the three existing boards. From the Local 
Government Board the new board will approve and advise on 
debt financing by local governments; review and approval local 
financial matters arising under numerous statutes; consider 
applications to alter  

municipal boundaries and, on infrequent occasions, be 
responsible for looking into and, as necessary, supervising the 
financial affairs of local governments which have encountered 
serious financial troubles. 
 
From the Provincial Planning Appeals Boards, the new 
municipal board will consider and decide appeals by the public 
from the local government level on planning and development 
matters. 
 
And finally, from the Saskatchewan Assessment Appeal Board, 
the new board will handle property, business, and other 
assessment appeals under several Acts. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the new Bill simply pulls together 
existing powers and duties of the three into one and creates one 
board from the existing three boards. 
 
The municipal board will consist of both full-time and part-time 
members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. To 
continue to ensure the independence of the board as a 
quasi-judicial body, appointments will be for 10 years and three 
years for full- and part-time members respectively. Including 
part-time members in a way of readily broadening the range and 
depths of expertise on the board and responding to fluctuations 
in demands made of the board. The members of both the PPAB 
(Provincial Planning Appeals Board) and SAAB (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Appeals Board) are currently part time. 
 
The board may appoint an executive director, secretaries for its 
various jurisdictional areas, plus other employees that may be 
required. The existing employees of the local government, 
planning appeals, and assessment appeal board, will be 
transferred to the new board. And these employees will 
continue to be appointed under The Public Service Act. 
 
The board will have the scope to establish its own procedures 
and set various types of charges and fees. A committee structure 
will be established to hear matters in the three major 
jurisdictional areas. The quorum for the board and its 
committees will be two members. 
 
For determining matters of fact, board members will have the 
powers of commissioners under The Public Inquiries Act. The 
board may require information from local governments and the 
assessment management agency, appoint advisory committees, 
conduct inquiries, and exercise other related powers. Appeals 
from the board on matters of law or jurisdiction will be 
permitted as stated cases to the Court of Appeal for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Local Government Board has had powers 
related to public utilities under various Acts, which are not 
carried forward into this new legislation. These have proved to 
be largely inactive and out of date. The new municipal board’s 
mandate is thus more sharply focused by the adjustments which 
have been made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the consolidation of these boards into a 
single more comprehensive municipal board is a good move for 
local governments, and for the Saskatchewan public. It parallels 
similar established bodies in other provinces, including 
Manitoba, Alberta,  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2030 
 

Ontario and Nova Scotia. Preparation of the Bill has involved 
extension consultation among provincial departments 
responsible for the various local governments which will be 
subject to the municipal board’s jurisdiction. As well, I have 
spoken to the board’s establishment at regional SUMA 
meetings to provide an opportunity for additional feedback. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention again that this new 
Act simply brings together the existing powers of three separate 
boards and fuses them together in one single board, the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this legislature to 
support this progressive Bill. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would be the last one to 
pretend that I was an expert on all of the three Bills that are 
being amalgamated under this Municipal Board Act, but I am 
working hard at becoming one. And I have spent considerable 
time comparing the new provisions with the existing provisions. 
I have sought the advice of SUMA and I am also seeking the 
advice of . . . some legal advice from legal people who have 
expertise in municipal law. 
 
I realize — and I don’t know whether the minister said so; he 
may have — that to a large extent this appears to be modelled 
after the Ontario situation where much the same operation 
exists there. 
 
The problems that some people who are familiar with the 
Ontario board, is that it has become an operation which seems 
to second guess the decisions of local municipal councils. If the 
provisions and the powers of this board are such that municipal 
councils will always be subject to appeals to the board by major 
developers who want to have their way, costing a great deal of 
expense, then I think there may be some problems here that I 
hope the government has looked into with some care. 
 
But the other provision in the legislation which I see which 
troubles me considerably, knowing the history of the 
government opposite, is the fact that this board will now be 
politically appointed. The board will be appointed by the 
minister and Executive Council, leaving it wide open to once 
again Conservative, PC patronage appointment rather than 
providing the expertise and the broad range of experience and 
knowledge that is so greatly necessary on this kind of a board. 
 
Also, the appointment of the executive director, I don’t know 
who that will be, and I guess we’ll have to wait and see. But 
there are rumours around that once again — and there’s always 
a distinct possibility that former people connected with this 
government and this political party may be the first choices, 
rather than someone who has got the expertise, once again, 
which is required. 
 
That will be an interesting phenomenon to watch when this Bill 
is passed through the House, to see what the repercussions are 
with respect to that. 
 
But as I said, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, I am seeking some 
further advice on it. I know that the minister’s office has offered 
some of his officials to meet with me, and I’m considering that 
as well, because this in many ways is a  

lawyer’s document. I am not a lawyer, but until I have had an 
opportunity to avail myself of that advice I would at this time 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1230) 
 

Bill No. 80 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to outline 
amendments to The Education Act. A number of the proposed 
changes are simply technical or housekeeping amendments 
being made in response to concerns raised by the Department of 
Justice and the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The other amendments deal with a variety of matters relating to 
the policies and procedures used by school boards. And I want 
to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that these amendments have been 
developed in full consultation with officials of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association who have indicated 
their agreement with the proposals as presented here. 
 
Let me briefly outline the key points. School boards are 
currently required to set their members’ remuneration as a 
certain amount per day. They will now be given the flexibility 
to define a member’s remuneration in other ways if they 
consider it more effective to do so, such as a monthly or annual 
amount. 
 
I should point out however that school board members will still 
not be paid where they miss a board meeting without valid 
reason. In other words, a balance is being maintained between 
the board’s authority to establish remuneration and whatever 
they may consider most efficient; on the other hand, the need 
for public accountability with respect to remuneration. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, boards will now be clearly required to 
make their adopted minutes available to the public and also to 
establish written policies with respect to the release of other 
information of documents. This is a reasonable requirement 
which should help to clarify the public’s right of access to board 
documents. 
 
The third amendment to note involves the conduct of board 
meetings. It is generally accepted, Mr. Speaker, that school 
boards have the right to discuss sensitive and confidential 
matters in camera. However, the Act provides no authority for 
this practice, but states that all board meetings are to be open to 
the public. The amendment, Mr. Speaker, will authorize boards 
to hold in camera discussions, but will require any votes arising 
from such discussions to be conducted in an open meeting. 
 
Another amendment relates to the ability of boards to establish 
committees. This is obviously a power which is important to 
many boards, particularly the larger ones, since they cannot 
reasonably be expected to deal with every matter in full board 
sessions. The amendment gives boards the authority to delegate 
matters to committees and set out the powers and duties to be 
assigned to such committees. 
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2031 
 

It is important to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that boards are not 
being allowed to delegate their ultimate responsibility for 
decisions. Any recommendations or decisions of a board 
committee will have to be ratified by the board in the usual way 
at an open board meeting. 
 
The final amendment I want to mention deals with provisions 
for the supervision and expulsion of students. At present the 
maximum possible suspension is four weeks. For longer 
periods, the only options are to keep renewing suspensions or to 
expel the student. A provision is now being included whereby a 
board will be able to suspend a pupil for a period of more than 
four weeks, up to a maximum of one year. The option of 
expulsion will remain for those cases where a one-year 
suspension is considered inadequate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new provision will provide the flexibility to 
deal with disciplinary matters in more appropriate ways. I 
should also mention that suspensions for reasons of irregular 
attendance are now being incorporated in the general discipline 
section to ensure consistency in the application of criteria and 
procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all want to see our school system operate as 
effectively and as efficiently as possible, in the best interests of 
students and of the public at large and all the parents. For this to 
happen, we need a balance between the powers of the school 
boards, on the one hand, to operate in ways which they consider 
most appropriate; and legal obligations, on the other hand, to 
guarantee openness and accountability in board activities. 
 
These amendments to The Education Act are designed to 
enhance an effective balance between these two aspects. As I 
said earlier, they have the support of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 80, 
An Act to amend The Education Act, be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will make a few 
comments regarding the Bill, after which time I will move 
adjournment of debate on this motion. 
 
I think that this Bill is rather of a great deal of significance to a 
lot of people. It appears as if it’s a housekeeping Bill. The 
SSTA has asked for certain changes. I think that they should be 
allowed time, and now en masse to take a look at it and go 
through it with a fine-tooth comb to be certain that all the 
provisions are workable. I would want to have some time to do 
that. 
 
I want to make reference to a couple of the provisions in the 
Bill. One provision here where . . . in one of the sections where 
the minister is giving himself power to appoint a committee to 
inquire any complaint or disagreement arising from the decision 
of the board, I think is an appropriate move. 
 
I think that the minister should be able to do that in the event of 
there being a dispute at the local level where the issues need to 
be clarified and where you need a third party. I’ve heard boards 
request that that happen from  

time to time, and I believe that that’s a provision that should be 
made and we should have in the education system. 
 
I note also that one of the sections provides, as the minister 
indicated, that the board should be authorized to fix its own 
remuneration for its board members. And I want to add that in 
all of the dealings that I’ve had with school boards — and that 
members on this side, and I’m sure members on both sides of 
the House have had in dealing with school boards — school 
boards have shown a great sense of efficiency and a great sense 
of responsibility. 
 
It’s only right that this power be extended to them, that they be 
given the power to self-regulate and to set their own priorities. 
The school boards have, along with municipal councils, have 
certainly shown that they are quite capable and very efficient 
managers of money, much better than perhaps provincial 
governments, this one in particular. 
 
One last comment I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is with respect to the provisions of disciplining students, which 
relates to the suspension, something that is a very difficult thing 
to deal with in the schools — difficult to deal with because the 
mandate of the school is to take a child and help that child 
progress through his or her growth in the way of . . . in content, 
and in the processes in dealing with other people. And the most 
important thing that is necessary here I would say, is that the 
school programs are what really attracts the students there and 
what keeps students in school. 
 
I notice a new provision in here with respect to suspension of 
students for truancy. This is a very difficult thing to do, and it’s 
the last measure that schools and school principals usually like 
to refer to. It’s the last measure. 
 
They first want to put in good school programs. They want to 
make sure that the children, and on an increasing basis now, are 
coming to school in a condition where they actually can learn 
and participate. But there are times that arise when a student’s 
behaviour, quite often beyond the control of the school, is 
disruptive to some of the other students that are there. So I 
believe it’s quite necessary to have a provision where the 
principal of the school is able to exclude the student from class 
and hopefully some type of remedial measures are provided. 
 
There is one thing left to be very cautious of. As we give the 
principals and the schools more power to do this, we have to be 
very careful that there is an appeal procedure for the parents and 
the students. Now I have not heard of any cases, or certainly if 
there are, they are very far and few between, where the parents 
feel maligned by the school or by the school system. But 
nevertheless, it is very important that the appeal procedure be 
looked at and I would . . . I’m going to be asking our 
researchers, I’m going to be asking the people in the trustees 
association, to be assured that those appeal procedures are in 
place. 
 
And with those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment 
of debate on this motion. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2032 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund, 1985 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, item no. 7, Bill No. 63, 
by leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the Minister of Economic Development, that the order for 
second reading of Bill No. 63, An Act to amend The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 1985, be discharged, and 
the Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move, seconded by the member from Maple Creek, that the 
order for second reading of Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The 
Provincial Court Act be discharged, and the Bill referred to the 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Small Claims in the 
Provincial Court of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 
Assembly, I move, seconded by the member from Maple Creek, 
that the order for second reading of Bill No. 68, An Act 
respecting Small Claims in the Provincial Court in 
Saskatchewan be discharged and the Bill referred to the 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Federation 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Maple Creek, by leave of the Assembly, that the 
order for second reading of Bill No. 77, An Act to amend The 
Teachers’ Federation Act be discharged and the Bill referred to 
the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
(1245) 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation 
Board Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Maple Creek, by leave of the Assembly, that the 
order for second reading of Bill No. 53, An Act to  

amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act, be discharged, and 
the Bill referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

MOTION 
 

Amendments to Rules of Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to have leave 
to move this motion to amend the rules of Non-Controversial 
Bills Committee, and this was the recommendation that came 
out of the committee and presented by the member for Regina 
North East, I think, a few days ago, to deal with minor 
amendments. Maybe it was your Centre guy. 
 
But to deal with minor amendments . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sir, to you, not the Centre guy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Sir, the Centre guy, sir. And the 
recommendation came out of the committee to deal with minor 
amendments in Non-Controversial Bills Committee to fix up 
typos and that kind of thing rather than refer them back to the 
House. I will read it into the record, and I’ll send it over to you. 
 

That rule no. 87(3) be deleted, and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 
(3) The Non-Controversial Bills Committee shall have 
power to amend by unanimous consent, and the 
government may withdraw a Bill therefrom at any time 
without notice, and a Bill may be sent back to the 
Assembly for second reading upon the request of one or 
more of the members of the committee. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I can beg the indulgence of the House to 
have a copy sent over to the member opposite. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill NO. 83 — An Act respecting the Operation of All 
Terrain Vehicles 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I today would 
like to speak about legislation that demonstrates this 
government’s commitment to the safety of the Saskatchewan 
people and especially the safety of our youth in this province. 
 
In the last few years the government has been very concerned 
over the increasing trend of accidents involving all-terrain 
vehicles. And, Mr. Speaker, many of these accidents have 
involved severe injury and even, sadly to say, in some cases, 
deaths of our young people.  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2033 
 

This government, Mr. Speaker, is committed to taking concrete 
steps that will decrease the number of tragedies caused by the 
use of all-terrain vehicles. 
 
And I am pleased today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce the second 
reading of a Bill which I fell will promote the safe use of these 
vehicles. And, Mr. Speaker, before I outline the important 
aspects of this Bill, I would like to explain a little bit of the 
background behind the development of this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, it is important to clarify the recent change 
in the availability of the three-wheeled, all-terrain vehicles, 
which I feel has caused some confusion among the public. And 
I’d like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that all-terrain vehicles, the 
three-wheel type, were not banned either in Canada or in the 
United States. 
 
Alternatively, what happened was an agreement was reached 
between our federal government and the industry in February of 
this year, where the industry voluntarily agreed — and I would 
like to repeat, Mr. Speaker, voluntarily agreed — that in a spirit 
of co-operation the industry would withdraw three-wheeled, 
all-terrain vehicles from the market. This is a very similar 
agreement to that which was reached in the United States last 
year. And I want to assure owners of these all-terrain vehicles 
that they still enjoy the right to operate these vehicles. 
 
With this new legislation, Mr. Speaker, the government has 
now taken the necessary steps to ensure that these vehicles are 
operated safely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in creating this piece of legislation it was 
necessary for the government to balance two very important 
needs. First and foremost, we wanted a law that would clearly 
focus on the need for safety and the proper operation of 
all-terrain vehicles. However, we also understood that the law 
must be realistic in acknowledging the role of all-terrain 
vehicles for recreational purposes, industrial purposes, as well 
as farm purposes. 
 
These vehicles, Mr. Speaker, play a very important role in the 
operation of many of our farm families, and I am advised, Mr. 
Speaker, that their use is highly valued in a number of industrial 
operations as well. Both the Canadian National Railway, for 
instance, and our own Department of parks, Recreation and 
Culture make extensive use of all-terrain vehicles. The 
government, as well, very much appreciates the hours of 
recreational enjoyment that these vehicles can provide. Our 
concern, frankly, Mr. Speaker, is that people operate them as 
safely and as properly as possible. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this particular Bill is a reasonable 
mix of measures that will ensure safety while acknowledging 
the important role that all-terrain vehicles play in many families 
throughout this province. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that this 
Bill is what the public wants. The public has provided much, 
very much, a great deal of valuable input in formulating this 
legislation. 
 
As hon. members may know, a few years ago a white paper on 
all-terrain vehicles in a layman’s draft was laid  

before the people of this province. Since that time, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to indicate that we have received literally hundreds 
of representations from individuals and groups throughout the 
province, and indeed beyond the borders of this province. These 
people have offered their suggestions on what an all-terrain 
vehicle Act should contain. This government values those 
suggestions, and we have recently intensified our consultations 
with groups most directly affected by the legislation in an effort 
to provide very tough safety measures for all-terrain vehicle 
use. 
 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the 
efforts of many organizations who have offered their 
suggestions to us for our consideration. The chief instructor in 
Saskatchewan for the Canadian All-Terrain Vehicle 
Distributors Council, the Saskatchewan Safety Council, the 
Office of the Provincial Coroner, SUMA and SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), have all 
provided very helpful information in developing this Bill. The 
medical association, various women’s interest groups, and 
countless hundreds of others, I want to personally acknowledge, 
Mr. Speaker, for their efforts in bringing forth to this 
government, ideas, opinions and advice on the safe and efficient 
operation of all-terrain vehicles. 
 
I would now like, Mr. Speaker, to outline for the House the 
basic principles in this very important Bill that is before the 
legislature today. First and foremost, this government wanted a 
Bill that would provide tough safety measures to decrease the 
number of tragedies caused by the misuse of all-terrain 
vehicles. In recognition of the special handling characteristics 
of all-terrain vehicles, this Bill contains provisions regulating 
who can drive all-terrain vehicles and where they can be 
operated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these machines, frankly, are not toys, and they 
should not be treated as such; and that is why this Bill specifies 
that anyone who drives an all-terrain vehicle off of 
family-owned property must hold a valid driver’s licence. 
However, the government also recognizes that many of our 
young people under the age of 16 still want to operate all-terrain 
vehicles. Following the arrangement contained in The 
Snowmobile Act, this Bill permits people between the ages of 
12 and 15 to drive all-terrain vehicles off of family-owned 
property only if they are supervised by someone who has a 
licence. 
 
To promote safety training courses, this Bill also permits young 
people between the ages of 12 and 15 the freedom to operate 
all-terrain vehicles off of family property if they have taken an 
approved all-terrain vehicle course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am advised that the current rider course being 
offered by the Canadian All-Terrain Vehicle Distributors 
Council is a very good course for anyone interested in operating 
an all-terrain vehicle. It is important that young people 
operating all-terrain vehicles understand the basic essential 
rules of safety, or in the alternative, have supervision of 
someone who does. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill clearly 
provides just for that. 
 
The Bill also specifies that for the safety of others, third  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2034 
 

party liability insurance is required whenever an all-terrain 
vehicle is operated off private property. I understand, Mr. 
Speaker, that that type of insurance is being offered now by the 
larger insurance companies under existing home or farm or 
tenant pak policies. And I encourage anyone who operates an 
all-terrain vehicle to check this liability insurance out with their 
insurer of choice. 
 
It is apparent, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill takes great steps 
towards protecting the safety of all-terrain vehicle operators and 
of the public in general. Safety, and a realistic approach, Mr. 
Speaker, to the use of all-terrain vehicles, has also been 
addressed in outlining where all-terrain vehicles can be 
operated. 
 
As the members are aware, Mr. Speaker, all-terrain vehicles are 
primarily designed for off-road or off-highway use. In 
consideration of this, and in response to suggestions from local 
governments, this legislation provides some freedom for 
off-road use, while restricting all-terrain vehicles access to 
roads and highways. Operation on private property is allowed 
only with the permission of the landowner, and the rural 
property owner is not required to post signs if he does not allow 
all-terrain vehicle use on his land. With the possible damage 
done to crops, we feel that our farmers should not have to post 
signs. And I believe that the operators, for the most part, of 
all-terrain vehicles have the courtesy to ask permission prior to 
going on any farmer’s lands. 
 
Although access to public property is allowed, communities are 
allowed to pass by-laws prohibiting all-terrain vehicle use. It 
has been brought to my attention that our smaller resort 
villages, Mr. Speaker, have experienced some problems with 
all-terrain vehicle use. And this law will allow these resort 
villages and other villages to resolve these problems through the 
traditional by-law process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, all-terrain vehicles are not 
designed for use on roads, and the Bill addresses this by 
prohibiting their use on roads and highways. Any necessary 
road crossing must be done in a very restrictive manner. It is my 
hope that operators of all-terrain vehicles will ensure that their 
operation has little effect on motorists and pedestrians on our 
highways. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, local governments and the Highway 
Traffic Board can pass by-laws or orders permitting limited 
highway operation for those people with a valid driver’s 
license. All-terrain vehicles will be allowed to operate in 
ditches unless local governments or the Highway Traffic Board 
pass by-laws or orders and post signs prohibiting access. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk briefly about safety 
equipment. I am advised that the single most important piece of 
equipment is a properly fitting safety helmet. Many of the 
fatalities could have been avoided, Mr. Speaker, if helmets had 
been worn. And I cannot stress enough the importance of 
helmets. While this Bill will not require helmets to be worn on 
family property, I strongly urge all all-terrain vehicle riders to 
wear helmets at all times. 
 

While this Bill takes effective steps to ensure safety as part of 
operating an all-terrain vehicle, it is up to every individual who 
owns or operates these vehicles to ensure that they are used 
properly. 
 
(1300) 
 
I’d be pleased to get into more of the specifics of the Bill during 
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, but I feel that this 
speech today fairly outlines in general terms what this piece of 
legislation is about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation came after a tremendous 
amount of consultation with various groups across the province. 
This legislation came about as a result of an effective caucus on 
the government side of the House working together with their 
transportation subcommittee, who spent countless hours going 
through the details of this Bill, many of them who own 
all-terrain vehicles themselves, many of them who have young 
families at home who operate all-terrain vehicles. 
 
And I feel that this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, very 
clearly, very fairly represents what the people of Saskatchewan 
want in a legislation of this sort. 
 
Safety has been uppermost in our minds, Mr. Speaker, and I 
feel that this piece of legislation will go a long ways towards 
reducing the many tragedies that we have with the use of 
all-terrain vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you were to go into the hospitals of the province 
of Saskatchewan, you would find a few people who are placed 
in these hospitals, Mr. Speaker, as a result of injuries on 
all-terrain vehicles. And it is very sad, Mr. Speaker, to see these 
individuals who have been harmed by accidents involving 
all-terrain vehicles. 
 
I feel, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation, although it will not 
absolutely eliminate accidents, I feel, Mr. Speaker, that this 
legislation is fulfilling the responsibilities that we have as 
legislators in the legislature of Saskatchewan to deal with this 
very important issue. 
 
I would urge all members on both sides of the House to treat 
this piece of legislation very seriously, to scrutinize it, to offer 
your suggestions, but to do so in a very non-partisan fashion. 
 
I believe that politics has no place in a piece of legislation such 
as we are dealing with here today. And I would urge all 
members . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And I would urge all members to study 
this carefully, and I look forward to dealing more specifically 
with the debate at a later time. I now move second reading of an 
Act respecting all-terrain vehicles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Notwithstanding the words of the member 
from Melfort, I think we will be adjourning this and taking time 
to consider it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m conscious of the hour and will be very  
  



 
June 10, 1988 

 

2035 
 

brief. I remember about 10, 15 years ago in the same session we 
brought in two Bills, one dealing with snowmobiles, one 
dealing with The Vehicles Act. Nobody cared about the one 
dealing with The Vehicles Act, and the one dealing with 
snowmobiles just about caused a riot. 
 
I know these things are very sensitive. We may go back to some 
of those speeches about curtailment of individual freedoms. 
 
We will certainly, Mr. Speaker, at a minimum, want to discuss 
this with the various groups involved. And I say, in a serious 
way, it is really unfortunate that this Bill was introduced so late 
in the year. It would have been a good deal better if this Bill had 
been introduced earlier so it could have received a more 
thorough discussion. 
 
With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be asking . . . I’ll be 
moving that this debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 
 
 


