


















































May 16, 1988 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 16, 1988 
 

1339 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you 
to the Assembly and to the members, some 19 grade 10 students 
from the Muenster High School. They are accompanied by their 
teach, Paul Reist, student teacher Jacquie Ackerman, and 
chaperon, Audrey Maier. 
 
I want to extend a welcome to the students for attending. I will 
be meeting with you a little later in the afternoon about 3 o’clock. 
I would ask all members to join in extending a welcome to the 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour today to 
introduce to this Assembly a delegation representing the College 
Mathieu at Gravelbourg. They are seated in the public gallery 
behind me. Include in the delegation are Madam Irene Chabot, 
president of College Mathieu; Monsieur Armand Dion, 
vice-president, and Monsieur Florent Bilodeau, the 
director-general of the college, together with a number of 
students from the college, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Members of this Assembly will know of the tragedy that struck 
the college this weekend in the devastating fire that reduced to 
rubble this venerable institution of some 70 years of history in 
the educational and cultural fabric of Saskatchewan. I know we 
would all want to wish the College Mathieu every success in their 
drive to rebuild their institution. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming this delegation from 
College Mathieu to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Monsieur le Président, l’opposition officielle 
voudrait dir aux étudiants du Collège Mathieu, bienvenue à 
Regina, et nous sommes désolés de leur feu terrible. Bienvenue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with real pleasure that I introduce to the Assembly 22 students. 
These are a little different than the ordinary student which come 
to the Assembly. These are students who are learning English as 
a second language. As the name implies, almost all of these 
people were born in a country other than Canada, and most have 
come here fairly recently. In many cases this is their first 
exposure of any sort to parliamentary democracy. 
 
I always find their comments afterwards interesting and 
enlightening. I look forward to meeting with you following this 
question period. I know all members will want to join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and to members of the Assembly, some guests 
from the province of Ontario. The delegation is headed by Mr. 
Richard Paton, the Minister of Government Services of the 
province of Ontario. 
 
They are in Saskatchewan today to announce the signing of a 
contract with SaskTel International. The contract for nearly 
$200,000 is as a result of a public call for proposals by the 
Ontario ministry. And in that study SaskTel will produce a 
feasibility study that analyses the technical capabilities and 
cost-effectiveness of adding fibre optics technology to the large 
multi-vendor data and voice network system operated by the 
Ontario ministry. 
 
I am greatly pleased, as I’m sure all hon. members are, Mr. 
Speaker, that the province of Ontario has selected SaskTel 
International and its expertise to help design and develop a new 
system for the government in the province of Ontario. 
 
I might add as well, Mr. Speaker, that in the province of Ontario, 
SaskTel International is actively pursuing the major 
telecommunications contract to both own and operate the 
communications system in the new terminal 3 at the Pearson 
International Airport, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The hon. minister is accompanied by the deputy minister of 
Government Services, Mr. Caplice. I hope the hon. member is 
listening to this because I think it’s good for the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and it would be good for him to listen. 
 
And as well, Mr. Paton is accompanied by Mr. McNaughton, 
assistant deputy minister of Government Services — Computer 
and Telecommunications Services of the province of Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to give a warm 
welcome to our guests from the province of Ontario. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Assistance to College Mathieu 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education, Mr. Minister, it deals with the tragic weekend that the 
residents of Gravelbourg experienced this past weekend. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the devastating fire that occurred at 
College Mathieu, I’d like to ask you: what will your department 
do in order to ensure that the students will get all necessary 
assistance that they need in order that they will be able to 
complete their academic year on schedule? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well relative to the displacement of the 
students and them completing their academic year, we’ll be 
co-operating with the College Mathieu officials in any way we 
can, and to that end I’ll be meeting with them this afternoon. 
Indeed it was fortunate that no one  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1340 
 

was hurt in this fire. As has been pointed out in the Assembly 
earlier, this is an historic institution. I think everybody wants to 
see it back and up and running, and we’ll be meeting with the 
officials to that end. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, in your meeting with the people from Gravelbourg, 
would you give this House the assurance, since this college was 
a landmark in Saskatchewan and a vital part of the community of 
Gravelbourg, will you give us the assurances today that you will 
do whatever you can to make sure that this institution, this most 
valuable institution, will be able to be rebuilt at the earliest 
possible time limit? Would you give the House that assurance 
today and the people of Gravelbourg? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, we’ll be doing what we can and 
we’ll be fully co-operating. Indeed, there’s already been some 
discussions between my officials and officials in Ottawa. As I 
said earlier, there’s meetings planned for yet this afternoon. We 
want to see College Mathieu rebuilt. We want to see those 
students who are displaced today finish their academic year and 
their exams and continue on with their careers as well. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the same 
minister on the same subject, having to do with the devastation 
at College Mathieu. Mr. Minister, you will know that the college 
has had certain financial proposals before your government for 
some length of time, and one of the difficulties, I understand, in 
the government making a response to those proposals has to do 
with the fact that the government has not established a position 
in terms of general policy in dealing with the funding or with 
capital construction projects at private schools. 
 
In view of the very unique circumstances respecting College 
Mathieu, not only the most recent fire but the unique place which 
that institution plays in the cultural and educational fabric of 
Saskatchewan, I wonder if you could give us your assurance that 
any ongoing policy decisions with respect to a general policy 
covering the funding of private schools will not be allowed to 
interfere with a speedy decision in respect of College Mathieu in 
these most serious of circumstances. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I too wouldn’t want to see 
bureaucratic delay or that kind of thing stand in the way of 
rebuilding College Mathieu. There has been a proposal before us. 
I think now with the fire, all that may well be substantially 
changed in so far as what the new proposal might look like, and 
I can’t say much more until I meet with the people from College 
Mathieu. But I think it’s in everyone’s best interest — students, 
the community, the province of Saskatchewan — to see College 
Mathieu rebuilt as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
grateful for the minister’s reassurance in his answer. Mr. 
Speaker, could I ask the minister if he is in a position at this 
moment to indicate to us the nature of the discussions which he 
says he has already had, and thankfully so, with his federal 
counterparts. The Government of Canada, of course, has always 
had a  

substantial financial interest in College Mathieu, and I wonder if 
the minister could share with us the nature of the discussions that 
he, or any other members of his government, have had with the 
Government of Canada to ensure their active and full 
participation in the necessary solution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t think I can just say much 
about the discussions that have gone on to this point, except to 
say that they were exploratory and informational and sharing of 
information, to some degree. And when something more can be 
said, we will. But at this point in time, I haven’t yet had a chance 
to meet with College Mathieu officials to indeed get a full 
assessment of the situation right from how are they going to 
handle the student classes between now and the end of the year; 
and as well, what the insurance implications might be, what the 
new project might look like, the costs, so and so forth. 
 
But it’ll be handled as expeditiously as possible, I’ll give you that 
assurance. 
 

Lease-back of Library Books at U of R 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education, and it concerns the reports that the University of 
Regina has plans to see off its library collection and then lease 
back the books. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you expressed concern to the university that 
it would even consider such a plan, giving up ownership and 
control of its books which are absolutely vital to university life? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the university has 
not raised this with me, although I understand there’s been at 
least some examination of that possibility. I will give the 
university credit for this in that they have been very innovative 
over at the University of Regina when it comes to equipping their 
library. 
 
I think most recently of the Sask What Pool University of Regina 
co-operative initiative called “Bushels for Books.” I think a year 
or two back to the joint venture with UMI (University Microfilms 
International) to put in several millions of dollars worth of 
material in a different formal, other than books. 
 
As it relates to this latest press report, at least, and cursory 
examination by the university, I am somewhat reluctant to take a 
position until I have some greater understanding because, as I 
said, the board has not raised it with me. 
 
Your question also raises the question of university autonomy 
and interference b y the government, and I know you have been 
very quick to criticize our government for interfering with 
autonomy, and yet you ask the question. 
 
On the surface, I suppose there are some who would say it has 
some merits; it makes better use of their cash. On the other hand, 
there are some who would say on the surface it strikes them as 
unusual that a university would be  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1341 
 

selling its books and leasing them back. I suspect if one was to 
examine it in some detail, which I have not, you would find that 
they probably, if they were to pursue this, would want to have 
some pretty ironclad guarantees. But to this date no one has 
raised it with me. It’s something that I’ll be monitoring. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it’s 
because of your government’s chronic underfunding of the 
universities that they’ve become in this state. And tax credits for 
the sale of books now does nothing to provide money for the 
purchase of books in the future. And I ask you to assure us today 
that the University of Regina will be adequately funded 
immediately so that it doesn’t have to see off its library resources 
which are so precious and vital to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this 
debate before in the legislature in terms of funding for 
universities. And our record, relative to any other university in 
western Canada, is one that we can be proud of, and certainly 
when it comes to the libraries where we have put substantial 
amounts of money into both university libraries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Another supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the Ontario government has voiced strong opposition 
to the universities selling off their resources. The Ontario 
government has threatened to cut the grants to the universities 
which are following this program. The reports that the University 
of Regina is considering this plan is absolutely true. And does 
your government intend to take a similar, tough stand with the 
University of Regina to prevent this travesty? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 
monitoring the situation. No one has raised it with me, and I’m 
reluctant to make any decision at this point based on some news 
reports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Final supplementary. Mr. Minister, I have raised 
it with you. The CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio 
has raised it in the province. The tax credits that go from these 
kinds of schemes do not provide resources in the future. I want 
assurances that the university is going to be adequately funded so 
that the library resources can stay in the public domain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I too, Mr. Speaker, am very much of 
the view that a good strong library is very important in 
universities. I think the initiatives that the university themselves 
have undertaken, as well as the funding that has come from 
government, have all been to that end, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
we can be proud of what’s been done in the past, and as well, I 
think you’ll see them continue to be supported, and supported 
soundly, in the future. 
 

Commencement of Shand Power Plant Project 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My  

question today is to the Premier, in the absence of the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. Premier, 
my question is this. Yesterday you had the official opening of the 
Shand power plant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — An opening, Mr. Premier, an opening which 
ignored the wishes and the massive opposition of the people of 
Saskatchewan to this project we don’t need. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question is this: will you today in this House 
table the studies which show the economic justification for the 
Shand power plant, or is it true, as we’ve been saying, Mr. 
Premier, that you don’t have them and it’s nothing more than 
your own political boondoggle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I could just say 
to the hon. member that the demand for electricity has been going 
up substantially in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of a 
fair amount of diversification, and we need more electricity. We 
can either get it from Manitoba, or get it from Alberta or North 
Dakota, or build out own projects here in the province. 
 
We’ve just completed the Nipawin hydro project. We have been 
blessed with coal supplies in southern Saskatchewan, and to 
manage and get the most out of those resources you should 
develop them. so we can have another coal-fired generator with 
the best technology, manufacturing the turbines here by 
Marubeni-Hitachi in the province of Saskatchewan, so that in fact 
we can build our own, save a great deal of money as opposed to 
buying it from another jurisdiction, and provide electricity at low 
cost, with about 7,500 man-years of work here in the province of 
Saskatchewan so that local people can use local resources to 
provide electricity for decades to come. 
 
Now our research and our analysis that we have provided to the 
public has shown it saves over $100 million to do it ourselves as 
opposed to doing it outside the province. 
 
Now I will not take the hon. member’s point that people in 
Saskatchewan don’t think we should make our own electricity. 
We have been building electrical plants for some time, and we 
will continue, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a good idea to build them 
in Saskatchewan if you have the resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, in 
light of your remarks, and in light of the question which I 
originally asked, which was, if it is true what you are saying, will 
you produce the documentation which proves it? — when your 
own engineers from SaskPower tells us that your $10 million per 
job project is something that we don’t need and you have 
constantly refused to  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1342 
 

produce the documentation which says we need more power, will 
you put it on the table and show the people of Saskatchewan that 
what you’re saying is right and that what we’re saying is wrong? 
Will you produce the documentation, Mr. Premiere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I missed the first 
question from the hon. member. I was busy trying to get some 
information on the question that he asked last week, but I 
understand it was similar to the one that he asked this morning. 
During Crown Corporations Committee of the last session, a lot 
of these questions were dealt with and the information was given 
to the member at that time. 
 
He talked about the levelized . . . or he talked about the 10.5 cost 
per kilowatt-hour that showed up in the EIS (environmental 
impact study) report. And it’s true, it’s true that it’s there, Mr. 
Speaker. This, I’m told, is an engineering formula to get levelized 
costs to do comparisons between hydro, which might have a 
50-year life, and thermal, which must have a 25- or 30-year life, 
and so they have a formula that they go through to get a levelized 
cost to do the comparison. And the levelized cost, Mr. Speaker, 
of Shand shows up as 10.5 cents, as indicated by the member 
opposite the other day. 
 
Grainland was 12.56 of public . . . the Coronach plants I and II, 
that was their option, Mr. Speaker, with 10.71, Wintego was the 
best at 7.91 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I’m trying to answer the question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — New question. And the welcome return of the 
Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Premier, we’ve just heard 
you . . . Mr. Deputy Premier, we’ve heard you go on and on with 
your usual bafflegab. 
 
My question is this: will you and can you stand here in this House 
and unequivocally tell the people of Saskatchewan that Shand is 
the cheapest power option available for our province, all other 
facts included; will you and do you have that kind of 
documentation to stand here and tell them that? Because what I 
heard you say was exactly the opposite, that it’s not the cheapest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Wintego would have been better, Mr. 
Speaker, but it was a non-starter for all kinds of environmental 
and social reasons. 
 

Incentive Program for Cattle Feeding 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I was asking the Premier 
when I left off, I want to ask you a question about the severe 
drought that is occurring in southern Saskatchewan, Manitoba, 
and Alberta; and I want to ask you a very important question as 
it relates to the cattle producer. It’s my understanding that you’ve 
announced a program to give incentives to drill deep wells and to 
pump water. 
 
The ranchers I was talking with this morning are saying there’s 
no water to pump, and in many cases drilling deep  

wells is simply not an option. And what they’re asking for is a 
grant or a subsidy to move the cattle to the grass, where it’s 
available, or to move hay to the cattle, or just a direct grant per 
head for the cattle in south-west and southern Saskatchewan. I’m 
wondering if you’ve had time now to contemplate over the last 
couple of weeks and whether you have an announcement to make 
today on that issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena chaired a meeting with the cattlemen’s 
association and farmers and ranchers from south-western 
Saskatchewan on Thursday and Friday, and they continue to 
provide him with the kind of advice that they think is necessary 
and the information necessary to come up with a program. 
 
They advised him, at that time, that payment should be made 
directly to cattlemen; that is, to farmers and ranchers as opposed 
to truckers or other people. and they suggested that the amount 
of money is in a range, and we’re now trying to establish what 
would be the most appropriate to provide directly to the farmer 
and the rancher so that they could either move cattle or move feed 
or move water, or any combination. If we provide the money, 
according to the ranchers and the farmers, to the individual, then 
they can manage their own situation to the best of heir ability. So 
we don’t want to provide incentives for feed or incentives for 
moving cattle, but just money to the individual and they can 
move accordingly. So yes, we are certainly on top of it, and we 
meet with them every week to get the latest information. 
 
In some areas, as you know, in the constituency of Estevan and 
the constituencies going through the south-east part of the 
province, it’s been a dramatic change in the last eight or nine 
days, in the last 10 days, two to three inches of rain as a matter 
of fact. We were all hoping for more rain this weekend when we 
saw it raining in Melville, but not so much in the south-west 
corner. So we are watching it very carefully, and for many people 
in the south-west we’re prepared to respond as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question to the Minister. I know 
that you’ve been talking about getting a program going to 
subsidize the beef producer, but there’s been nothing coming, 
and literally thousands of cattle are going to market, over the last 
few weeks, from people who can’t get feed for their cattle 
because it’s costing over $100 a tonne to bring it in from Alberta 
or northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Premier, while you’re at the 
western premiers’ conference — and I have a quote here from 
the Toronto Globe and Mail that in fact says that you are going 
to be attending a conference: 
 

William (Bill) Vander Zalm of British Columbia, Donald 
(Don) Getty of Alberta, Grant Devine of Saskatchewan and 
Gary Filmon of Manitoba will do their . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order.  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1343 
 

Order. I realize that the hon. member has been away for a short 
period of time, but we don’t use the names of members in the 
Chamber, even in quotes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I will refrain from using the name of the 
member, but I would like to just repeat the preamble to the 
question, and I’ll exclude the name of the Premier and the 
minister. But it says: 
 

William (Bill) Vander Zalm of British Columbia, Donald 
(Don) Getty of Alberta, (the member of Estevan from) 
Saskatchewan and Gary Filmon from Manitoba will be 
doing their talking on board an opulent 35-metre yacht that 
is complete with a hot tub and three bars. 

 
I wonder, while you’re out there in the bay floating around 
talking about the drought in south-west Saskatchewan, if you’d 
have time to consider that there are thousands of cattle going to 
market while you doddle along getting a program together. 
 
Can you make an announcement today that would help those beef 
producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. 
member that while he has, I’m sure, legitimate concerns for the 
south-west, that he no longer represents the south-west, as 
obviously the people of Saskatchewan know. I will say to the 
hon. member that it’s not my information . . . it’s not my 
information that literally thousands of cattle are being sold today, 
as we speak, as a result of the drought. 
 
And farmers and ranchers know, and they’ve advised us and 
we’ve told them, if they have to make decisions now, this spring, 
as a result of dry weather, we’re going to have a program in place 
that will provide assistance for them, even though they’ve made 
some decisions with respect to feed and cattle. They know that, 
and they’re comfortable with that. 
 
So this program, while it will be initiated in the very near future, 
it applies to the management decisions that have taken place this 
spring. So I want to make it very clear that individuals are not 
panicking — there’s no panic. They’ve met with us and they’ve 
talked with us, and they said this is the kind of thing that we 
should be initiating. 
 
And I don’t think it’s accurate at all for you to say that there’s a 
panic in south-western Saskatchewan. We’ve met with them as 
late as Friday, and they said yes, you should have the program; 
yes, you should have some money to the farmer. The farmers 
now are making the decisions, and we will provide assistance to 
the farmer. And if we continue to provide money to them, as we 
have in the past, they may be marketing some cattle anyway. And 
you know that. They may be hauling some feed, which they are. 
 

University Hospital Cardiology Department 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
member is to the Minister of Health, the minister who  

ducked my question last Friday. Mr. Minister, on May 6 in this 
House I brought to your attention the complaints raised by the 
head of the cardiology unit at the Saskatoon University Hospital. 
And in your arrogant and offhanded manner, you chose to 
respond by implying that doctors always complain if they don’t 
have enough equipment. 
 
Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that a month ago a 10-year-old 
monitoring unit in the coronary care unit broke down, and 
patients being admitted with heart attacks had to make do with 
makeshift equipment put together by the staff? Are you aware of 
that, Mr. Minister, and does that sound to you like the doctors on 
that ware are complaining frivolously for new equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of things. 
First of all, I certainly did not duck the question, any question, 
from the hon. member. She knows, as I know, that health care is 
the most important thing. And if it isn’t lead-off question, well 
then how can she consider it be important? 
 
Anyway I would say that, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the cardiac 
unit at the University Hospital, Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of 
things I would like to report to the House because it’s important 
that this stuff be laid out here. And it was raised, as the member 
has said, it was raised here once before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year, about a year ago, University Hospital and 
our department reviewed the equipment needs of the department 
of cardiology. Through these co-operative discussions it was 
greed that government would provide funds to assist to purchase 
hemodynamic lab equipment — hemodynamic lab equipment 
worth $1.5 million, Mr. Speaker, which is to be placed in that 
hospital. 
 
The member refers to Dr. Lopez’s comments, and so on. I’m 
sure, at least I believe very strongly, that Dr. Lopez knows this 
equipment is coming in — state of the art equipment for that type 
of facility. 
 
The space within which this hemodynamic equipment is going 
into is now under construction. Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of 
circumstance that’s there; that’s not the circumstance that was 
portrayed by that member over there. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the facts are as I’ve outlined them. The 
executive director of the University Hospital says it is absolutely 
without foundation that patients re at risk in any way, and it is 
absolutely without foundation that there is a lack of equipment. 
Obviously there’s a need for new equipment. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we, and the University Hospital, are responding by putting new 
equipment into that hospital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend the Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act 

 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1344 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Wascana Centre Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Agricultural Returns 
Stabilization Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Occupational Health 
and Safety Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of an Act 
to amend the Oil and (Gas) Conservation Act 1988 be now read 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to adopt the Model Law on 
International Commercial Arbitration 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to adopt the Model Law on International Commercial 
Arbitration. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend the Matrimonial Property 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Matrimonial Property Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act respecting the Convention Between 
Canada and the United Kingdom of Great  

Britain and Northern Ireland providing for the Reciprocal 
Recognition and Enforcement of Judgements in Civil and 

Commercial Matters 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Convention Between Canada and the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland providing for the 
Reciprocal Recognition and Enforcement of Judgements in Civil 
and Commercial Matters. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Research Council Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Research Council Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to refer the 
said Bill to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can I ask whether the Bill has been . . . 
I’m not sure that our critic has had an opportunity to see this. And 
I think that’s probably the case. If he’s agreed to it then it’ll go 
non-controversial . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We can refer it 
back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, just before moving the first 
resolution, as I’ve passed a note to the opposition Finance critic, 
the Appropriation Bill is for two-twelfths, which is the traditional 
request of the second . . . two-twelfths of the second 
Appropriation Bill in a session. The first one is one-twelfth; the 
second one, two-twelfths; the third one, one-twelfth, and it goes 
back to 1973. 
 
Secondly, all of the items are two-twelfths except for the 
following, and I have given a note to the hon. member from the 
Quill Lakes: Education receives two-twelfths in this 
appropriation — that simply maintains the traditional payment 
schedule to school boards; legislation is receiving an additional 
$130,700, that’s Legislative Assembly Office, primarily 
translation services, and some other expenditures of the office; 
and finally, Urban Affairs is receiving $2.8 million over and 
above the two-twelfths. That again is in meeting the established 
payment schedule for grants to local governments. 
 
So I have advised the hon. member to that effect. If the hon. 
member wishes, I can give him a rather lengthy list of  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1345 
 

the interim supply. But I’m advised all interim supply since at 
least ’72-73, the second motion for . . . Bill for interim supply in 
every session that has had a second one, it has been for 
two-twelfths. 
 
So I put forward the following motion: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $644,270,200 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1989. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Just a point of information, I propose to let the 
minister move the four motions, and then I want to make a few 
comments and to ask a few questions, if that is in order, or 
whether you rule that I have to ask the questions on the specific 
resolutions. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The member can make . . . 
Order. The member can make comments any time prior to the 
moving of the last resolution. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolve that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, the sum 
of $644,270,200 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $84,062,000 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1989. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, the sum 
of $84,062,000 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to make a few 
comments, and I have a few questions that I want to direct to the 
minister in respect to the appropriation. 
 
First of all, I want to extend an appreciation to the minister for 
sending an advanced copy of the Bill to my office which helps to 
expedite the matter. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what I want to indicate is that the procedure that 
we are doing here is a procedure that is not unusual and certainly 
there is appropriation until the budget has been finalized and 
approved. And this procedure has been followed in the past, Mr. 
Chairman, and we are prepared, I think, to co-operate with the  

minister, as the precedent, as he has indicated, has been 
established. 
 
But I think I want to indicate also, Mr. Chairman, that we have 
some basic concerns because what we are dealing with here is 
the operation of a democratic process, and in order to operate 
within the framework of a democratic system there are certain 
procedures and rules and legislation which should in fact be 
adhered to in helping the democratic process. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that whether we’re in government 
or whether we’re in opposition, it seems to me that it is our duty 
to respect the democratic process; whether they are beneficial to 
the government at the time, or indeed to the opposition, is not the 
question. For in a democratic society the interests of the people 
of this province must take precedence over the interests of the 
government, indeed, the opposition. 
 
I think it’s rather regrettable that we come to the House here and 
the Minister of Finance is asking this House to appropriate a little 
over two-twelfths of the entire budget for the carrying out of the 
purposes of the government and making payments. But at the 
same time we’re sitting here, at about the 40th day that the 
legislature has reconvened, and to date we have not received 
from the Minister of Finance who comes to this House and asks 
for an appropriation, we have not received the courtesy of him 
filing the Public Accounts with the legislature. 
 
It’s our intention to co-operate with the Minister of Finance, but 
it seems to me it’s incumbent upon also the Minister of Finance 
to also co-operate with the opposition, indeed to protect the 
interests of the public, to have an accountability of his 
expenditures. For certainly it’s not only our duty to agree with 
the appropriation and to scrutinize that, but it’s our duty on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan to take a look at what expenditures 
were made and how they were spent in the previous years. 
 
I think the record of the Minister of Finance in respect to previous 
budgets, and the extent of the overexpenditures and the direction 
as to where expenditures were in fact made, is of interest to the 
people of this province, is an interest to the opposition. 
 
As I indicated, that there are precedents for the filing of the 
Public Accounts. And I want to refer the minister to the record as 
he has indicated . . . he has referred to the procedure that is 
followed in respect to the appropriation. 
 
But ever since 1974-75, Mr. Speaker, the government had always 
filed, as soon as possible the Public Accounts. I take in 1974-75, 
the date of the Provincial Auditor’s report was filed on March 16, 
9176, but if you look and see when the date the Public Accounts 
were filed, it was January 28, 1976. So the Public Accounts were 
filed prior to the receiving of the Provincial Auditor’s, but both 
were filed by March. 
 
In ’75-76 we find the same established principle, that the date the 
Public Accounts were tabled is March 7, and the auditor’s report 
on March 14. They do not, in fact, according to precedence, have 
to be simultaneously filed. 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1346 
 

In 1976-77, March 28, the Public Accounts were filed, and March 
28, ’78, the auditor’s report was filed with the legislature. 
 
In ’78-79, December 14, ’79, the Public Accounts were filed, and 
March 24 for the auditor’s report. 
 
And the list goes on, Mr. Chairman, indicating that it’s not 
necessary to file the Public Accounts at the same date that you 
file the Provincial Auditor’s report. And that is the practice that 
has been followed in this House. And I indicate to the chairman 
and to the members of this legislature that the people of this 
province are entitled to look at the expenditures in detail. And we 
would be only looking at the ’86-87 expenditures in detail. 
 
I want to indicate also that more than that, Mr. Speaker, not only 
is there a precedent that should be followed, but I want to indicate 
to you, Mr. Chairman, that there is authority set out in the 
(Department of) Finance Act which clearly indicates that the 
Public Accounts should be filed in this legislature as soon as is 
practical. 
 
It says, notwithstanding The Tabling of Documents Act, the 
minister shall, as soon as practicable after the Public Accounts 
are prepared, lay the Public Accounts before the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And what I’m talking about here, is the minister comes forward 
here wanting an appropriation of over two-twelfths of the budget 
in the Consolidated Fund and the Heritage Fund. And at the same 
time he has shown disregard, it seems to me, both to the 
opposition, in carrying out their duties, and he has scorned the 
public their right to know how expenditures have been made. 
 
And I say to the minister that it’s difficult for the opposition to 
totally co-operate with you if it is your intent to stifle the 
opposition. And in so doing, I want to indicate that you’re 
trampling on the rights of the people of Saskatchewan, the right 
to know. 
 
I would not raise this, Mr. Chairman, but it seems to me that in 
operating the House, in proceeding in an orderly manner, then 
it’s incumbent also upon the Minister of Finance to bring forward 
the Public Accounts. 
 
And this is not the sole, isolated incident, the lack of filing the 
Public Accounts. There are some worrisome other legislation and 
practices that had been followed that are a concern to us. we 
recall back in . . . a year ago the Minister of Finance did not bring 
down the budget until some time in June, and operated on special 
warrants up until the time that the opposition sought legal advice 
in respect to it. And this is wrong, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But if you look at other aspects of it, you find this government 
has attacked some of the other traditions that we have here. Well 
I think that they have — putting forward the most vicious 
gerrymander Bill in the history of this province — we have seen 
ministers attack the independence of the Legislative Counsel; we 
have seen the delay in the bringing forward of the by-election 
when one of their members resigned, and now we find the failure 
to file the Public Accounts. 
 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is a major transgression of the 
democratic principles and procedures that we have adopted, and 
only can we operate in a proper manner if each of us have respect 
for the traditions that have been established. Each of us here have 
a moral obligation to protect the rights of the people. and this is 
not a mere political sparring by the opposition. It seems to me 
that this is a very significant principle that is at stake — the right 
of information to prevent any cover-up, to have a full and total 
disclosure of the expenditures. 
 
So I want to say to the Minister of Finance, while we are prepared 
to operate, it seems to me that it’ s incumbent upon him to explain 
to this House, in light of the practices that had been followed 
previously in so far as the Appropriation Bill — and he’s 
depending upon that as a precedent — I ask him directly: why 
will he not indeed follow the precedent of filing the Public 
Accounts at the earliest possible date? 
 
And all of us know, as a result of Public Accounts, that he had 
the Public Accounts in his possession as early as April 4, and 
today we still have not seen the Public Accounts. And so I’d like 
to ask the Minister, when does he intend to table the Public 
Accounts? It’s part and parcel of the right of the people of this 
province to know. 
 
He has brought forward an Appropriation Bill here for the review 
of the legislature. Similarly, the Public Accounts are an integral 
part of it, and I think the people of Saskatchewan, particularly 
during the election year, when the Minister of Finance went on a 
spending rampage and underestimated his deficit by $800 million 
— and it seems to me that the people of Saskatchewan have a 
right to know, would like to know how much they spent on 
self-advertising during that election year. We’d like to know 
what the specific overexpenditures were. 
 
And so I ask the Minister to stick to the precedence, if he’s going 
to use the practices of the previous administration in previous 
years, in so far as bringing in the Appropriation Bill and asking 
for two-twelfths. Why will he not follow the practices and 
procedures that have been followed and that are documented for 
the filing of the Public Accounts. I’d like him to indicate to the 
House when we can expect him to table the Public Accounts in 
this legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me first of all clear 
up some of the statements made by the hon. member. First of all, 
the practice in the past was more often to table the Public 
Accounts on the last day of a session. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m telling the hon. member that that was 
very, very common to table the Public Accounts on the last day 
of the session, and I believe during an earlier debate on this 
matter that that information was put forward. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the court matter, the courts have rule 
son that; I think we’ve discussed it. I can assure the hon. member 
that not only will he have the Public  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1347 
 

Accounts in the very near future, he will have ample time to 
debate them during this session. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I want a clarification from the minister 
because he indicates that in a previous precedent was that the 
Public Accounts were filed at the end of the session; 1974-75, 
Public Accounts tabled January 28, ’76. I’d suggest that the 
session went beyond that, and the Provincial Auditor’s report was 
filed when it was prepared, March 16; ’75-76, March; ’76-77, 
March 28; ’77-78, March 15; ’78-79, December 14; ’79-80, they 
were filed in December 10. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you explain what you meant by indicating 
that in the past the precedent was to file them at the last day of 
the sittings, in light of the facts of the record that I have just read 
to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member is right, I should 
clarify. The December 14 and December 10 filings, I think if you 
go back and check you’ll find are the last day of the fall session 
of the legislature and they were filed. Obviously the opposition 
in those days did not get a chance to debate them during the 
Assembly when they were filed on the 10th and the 14th. I’ve 
just given you the assurance that you will have ample time to 
debate them during this session. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like you facts to be straight then, and not try 
to deceive the public. I mean, what better opportunity, for 
instance, could you have with a fall session which lasts 10 to 12 
days, having those report tabled during that period of time. You 
had up until the spring session then to review them. 
 
So I’m asking the minister, you indicated in a very unsatisfactory 
manner that they’ll be filed as soon as possible. What is stopping 
you from filing them forthwith? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated to the hon. member that he 
would be getting them very soon and would have ample time to 
not only peruse them, review them, debate them, do whatever 
else he wanted to with the Public Accounts. He will have ample 
opportunity to ask questions in question period during this 
session, and I’ve indicated to him that he’ll get them very, very 
soon. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if the minister could indicate when he 
came . . . when the Public Accounts were made available to him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Sorry, what was the question? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When were the Public Accounts made available 
to you for filing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I would have to go back and check that. 
I do believe that when the matter came up in question period that 
my predecessor had indicated to the hon. member that in at least 
some occasions they were filed along with the Provincial 
Auditor’s report. I can simply reiterate to the hon. member that 
he will have some reading. I don’t think it’ll be quite as enjoyable 
as he thought it was going to be, but he will have ample time to  

review the Public Accounts in the very, very near future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s be a little more specific. 
Surely you know when you had the Public Accounts provided to 
you for filing. And I’m going to ask you specifically, according 
to the Public Accounts (Committee) they indicated April 4. Is 
that in fact a correct date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can’t indicate to the member whether 
that’s correct or not. I did not look up that information. But again, 
I can give the hon. member the assurance that he will have the 
Public Accounts in the not too distance future and ample time to 
review them, peruse them, and question the government, 
although I don’t think the government will be seriously 
questioned when the hon. members have the opportunity to 
review them in some detail. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think it’s up to you 
to make a decision whether we’re going to have good reading or 
not good reading. And I don’t think it should be up to your 
decision as to withhold it from this House, because obviously 
you’re afraid of disclosure of the facts. 
 
And all I indicate to you is that you’re flaunting the institution 
here. You are refusing to follow the precedent, and you’re 
begging here today that you’re following the precedent that has 
been followed previously in respect to the appropriation. And I 
want to ask you, Mr. Minister, is it your intention to wait until 
the auditor’s report is finalized before filing the Public Accounts? 
Is that your intention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can’t comment on the latter because I 
don’t know what the Provincial Auditor’s position is. I’ve given 
the hon. member that he will get the Public Accounts very, very 
soon. 
 
And I know that it’s speculation on my part when I say that it 
won’t be as enjoyable reading as the hon. member might expect. 
I think it will be reading that the hon. members opposite will be 
somewhat disappointed in, but I have given you the assurance 
that you’ll get it very soon. 
 
Secondly, you will have ample time to both peruse, read, study 
and consider the Public Accounts in this session, as well as ample 
time to question the government. I’ve indicated now, I think on 
five occasions, it will be very, very soon. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you indicate “very soon.” Could 
you indicate what is stopping you from doing it forthwith, 
tomorrow. What is stopping you from filing the Public Accounts 
forthwith? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well they will be tabled very, very soon. We 
can define “forthwith” and “very, very soon” as perhaps 
reasonably close to each other. I suppose we could get into a 
dictionary debate, but I have indicated to you that they’ll be very 
soon. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — is it true then that it’s not contingent upon the 
auditor completing his report that you will be filing the Public 
Accounts in this House? 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1348 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated that I don’t know when the 
Provincial Auditor will be tabling his report; that that could come 
very soon as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I think it’s incumbent upon you to 
file the Public Accounts with us, with the opposition, in the 
Assembly. I want to, just in closing indicate that the precedent 
has been set, has been honoured in the past by the Blakeney 
government, and only has there been a departure under your 
administration. 
 
One can only conclude, if you have nothing to hide, if it’s not as 
much good reading as what you think we are entitled to, than I 
don’t know why you want to delay. And as has been indicated, if 
you’re waiting for the auditor’s report, it can’t be completed 
some time till the middle of June. And if you’re hanging your hat 
on that, you’re hoping that we’ll be out of the legislature and use 
that for a reason. And that’s the reason that has been used by your 
counterpart, the former minister of Finance, but you had to file 
the two together. 
 
I’m going to ask you again: will you give us an undertaking that 
you will file the Public Accounts prior to receiving the auditor’s 
report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I don’t think you really expect me to 
give you that assurance. I don’t know when it’s coming down . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that was a guesstimate on his 
part. I think he made that abundantly clear. 
 
I’ve indicated to the hon. member that you will not only have 
ample time to read it, study it, review it, consider it, do whatever 
you wish with it, and have ample time to debate the matter in the 
legislature, as well as have ample time to question the treasury 
benches on Public Accounts. So that will be very soon. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that 
it’s just absolutely ludicrous that the Legislative Assembly, the 
members here, are being asked to approve a Bill to spend money 
out of the current year’s budget before we know how the 
government has spent to taxpayer’s money in the past. The 
people of Saskatchewan might well ask the minister: how are the 
people of Saskatchewan and the opposition to be able to make a 
sound judgement on proposed expenditures when we don’t have 
a clue about past expenditures? 
 
Now I know, Mr. Chairman, that it’s standard practice and 
tradition to consider these appropriation measures, these interim 
supply measures, pending completion of the budget process. But 
it’s also been standard practice and tradition to table the Public 
Accounts so that the public can know how their money has been 
spent; to table these Public Accounts before or at about the same 
time that the public is first presented with the budget for the 
coming year. 
 
I would point out that parliament in every legislature in Canada 
the Public Accounts have been tabled with the sole exception of 
the Government of Saskatchewan which hitherto has failed to 
table those Public Accounts.  

And I know, Mr. Chairman, that’s it traditional for the opposition 
to ensure passage of the appropriation measures to make sure that 
the government can meet all of its spending commitments; to 
make sure that there’s money for education; to make sure that 
there’s money for urban affairs; to make sure that the government 
can pay its bills. But there will come a day when the opposition 
can no longer acquiesce to the government’s agency and rules if 
the government continues to make rules every day when it comes 
to tabled the Public Accounts and when it comes to the release of 
public information that the public has a right to. 
 
I want to make it clear that we are prepared to co-operate with 
the government to ensure passage of the measures that are before 
us today. We have done this; we have co-operated in the past. 
Although we may have debated the various Appropriation Bills, 
these have always been passed the day that they were presented. 
And we will co-operate again today. 
 
But I think co-operation needs to be a two-way exercise if it is to 
be strengthened. For example, there are discussions between our 
House Leader and their House Leader about setting aside time on 
the private member’s day, Tuesday, for government business, 
and we are prepared to do that. And in return, the government 
says, we’ll move to the motions for return, which the opposition 
is interested in. there we see co-operation on both sides to make 
parliament, the legislature, work more effectively. Co-operation 
in that context is a two-way street. 
 
But the government cannot expect co-operation on the one hand 
from the opposition, while giving the back of their hand when 
co-operation is being asked for from the government. 
 
My colleagues and I will vote for this Bill. We will not be 
filibuster or otherwise use the rules of this House to frustrate the 
government. We will help the government to expedite the 
public’s business. 
 
But we are not happy about the arrogance and the abuse of power 
that the government displays when it comes to other traditions, 
such as tabling of the Public Accounts. 
 
We will vote for the Bill, but we do so with great reluctance, and 
not without having registered our protest about the government’s 
lack of even-handedness, their lack of concern for traditions of 
the House, and their arrogance and absolute abuse of power. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that’s it’s just absolutely regrettable that 
the government would ask us, on the one hand, for our 
co-operation and the support of all the members of the Assembly 
to help them to expedite their business. Yet when it comes to 
something that they have control over, and will all due respect to 
the traditions of this House, they say, well we’re going to 
establish new rules; we don’t want to co-operate with the House; 
we don’t want to co-operate with the people of Saskatchewan — 
that we should somehow accept that and accept that gladly. 
 
I say to the minister that a time will come that our co-operation 
will simply not be there; that we will not  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1349 
 

acquiesce to their agenda if he continues to flaunt his power, to 
abuse the traditions of this House and say, we’re not prepared to 
table the Public Accounts. 
 
And to stand here and to try and twist the facts, he’s a bigger 
twister than any Texas tornado, Mr. Chairman. When he stands 
here and says, well in the past these things have only been tabled 
on the last day of the session, but when he’s pressed he admits, 
well it was the last day of the fall session, and ignores the facts 
that these Public Accounts have in the past been tabled some six 
months prior to this time; that it’s his government and it’s him 
that’s setting new records every year for the lateness of the 
tabling of the Public Accounts, and trying to avoid tabling those 
Public Accounts to give the public some idea of how their money 
is being spent. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re prepared to vote for this Bill, to vote for 
this measure, as I indicated. But I want to make it very clear to 
the government members that we on this side of the House cannot 
be expected to continue to co-operate with them if we get no 
co-operation from them when it comes to something as 
elementary as the Public Accounts, something that he’s had in his 
possession now for a month, month and a half. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I thank the hon. member for his willing 
endorsement of the legislation. And in the interests of 
co-operation I won’t get into any discussion about the hon. 
member’s past practices and the secretiveness of Regina city 
council on budget. That was a great public debate, which I know 
the hon. member participated in. And I won’t comment on the 
court case and the frivolity of the court application and the judges 
on it. 
 
I do raise a concern because I know it would be shared by all hon. 
members — and I put it in a positive manner as I possibly can — 
but I had always been of the view that discussions between House 
leaders and caucus chairmen between parties have always been 
treated in a confidential measure and have not been brought to 
the floor of the Assembly unless both parties agree. 
 
So I just throw out as a general caution that we do have an 
informal process that has worked well in the democratic system, 
that it has worked well in the British parliamentary system. I take 
the hon. member’s statements as not being aware of that and 
simply let it go. And I know that all hon. members will assume 
that the practice will continue as it has in the past, and I thank the 
hon. member for his support. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, to get a lecture from that 
particular member about traditions of the House is the height of 
hypocrisy; it simply is . . . that minister to stand in his place and 
to lecture someone else about tradition and secrecy is simple 
poppycock for him to say those kinds of things, to borrow a 
phrase from the Minister of Justice. 
 
For him to talk about secrecy and traditions is just simply 
ludicrous, Mr. Chairman. There’s the Minister of Finance  

who set a new record last year, a record for all of Saskatchewan 
when it comes to the late tabling of Public Accounts. There’s the 
minister who’s heading for a new record when it comes to the 
tabling of Public Accounts. There’s the only Minister of Finance 
in all of Canada, with no exception, the only Minister of Finance 
who has not yet tabled the Public Accounts. 
 
The Minister of Finance in Ottawa in parliament has tabled the 
Public Accounts. Every other Minister of Finance in every other 
legislature in this country has tabled the Public Accounts, yet this 
man stands there without any regard for his hypocrisy and starts 
to lecture us and other members of this House about secrecy and 
tradition. I just think that it’s absolutely ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely ludicrous. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I accept the hon. member’s statement as to 
tradition and his avoidance of his position with regard to the 
secrecy of the city of Regina budgetary process. 
 
I do remind the hon. member that I believe the extreme in Canada 
was the refusal of, I believe, a former prime minister, Mr. 
Trudeau, who I think went a couple of years without a budget, as 
a matter of fact, so that your selection of precedent is not really 
accurate, so it’s not really a precedent. But I gave my views, I 
thought, in a rather constrained manner, and again I thank the 
hon. member for his support of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask a few questions of 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, you indicated to members 
on this side of the House that you did receive the Public Accounts 
and, as the Provincial Comptroller indicated to the Public 
Accounts Committee, that the Public Accounts were ready on 
April 4, and a few days later they were in your possession. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell us why it is taking this long to table 
the Public Accounts? I just want to know why we can’t have 
access to them so that the Public Accounts Committee can go on 
with its business of analysing and examining the expenditures of 
the government during this session, and not have to wait until the 
session is over and get at that between sessions. Could you tell 
me why you can’t table those accounts? We know you’ve got 
them. I think you’ve examined them. why won’t you table them 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can’t agree with the hon. member’s 
assumptions, but I have given the assurance to the opposition and 
to the opposition critic that — and I do believe you were here — 
that you would have them very, very soon; that you would have 
them in ample time to not only debate but to consider, to review, 
to question, whatever you wish, during this session. And I’ve 
given that assurance to the hon. member so the Public Accounts 
Committee will not be prejudiced. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, we heard this three weeks ago 
from either the member who has just spoken, or his colleague, 
that the Public Accounts would be tabled soon. Now that was 
three weeks ago. Now if that means soon again, another three 
weeks, that means we would be close to the end of the session. 
Mr. Chairman, you, as a  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1350 
 

member of the Public Accounts, know full well that we need a 
lot more time than that to amply analyse and examine the 
expenditures, not for last year but for 1986-87. 
 
It will already be 15 months at the end of that fiscal year, and I’m 
simply asking the member: why can’t you table them? why won’t 
you table them tomorrow? Why can’t you simply stand up in the 
House and say to the people of Saskatchewan: yes, I know I have 
an obligation to table it; you have a right to examine our 
expenditures, and I’ve had them now for over a month, I will 
table them tomorrow. Why can’t you give me that assurance? Not 
soon, but tomorrow. Why won’t you do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated that you will have them 
soon, and I think I used the descriptive phrase, very soon. It will 
not certainly be three weeks. I can give the hon. member that 
assurance. You will have it very soon, and you will have ample 
time to, as I say, to not only read them, study them, take them 
home with you, whatever you wish. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Memorize them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And memorize them, as has been suggested 
by some . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about Wes Robbins? He’ll memorize 
them too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can give you the assurance, as well, 
that Wes Robbins can have your copy, and will have ample 
opportunity . . . That’s a political bit of advice that I wouldn’t 
hesitate to give the hon. members, to have Wes Robbins take a 
look at them. and I’m sure that the detail with which you will 
have questions for orders . . . question period will be of interest 
to all hon. members, and probably particularly Mr. Speaker, 
should you go that route. 
 
But you will have ample time to review them and give them to 
Mr. Wes Robbins, if that’s the objective behind the questioning. 
He will have ample time to read them as well, and if from time 
to time he doesn’t understand them, due to the passage of time, I 
can give you the assurance that he can feel free to give me a call 
and I’ll take him through the Public Accounts when that situation 
arises. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, the flippant attitude of the 
minister opposite, and making light of the public’s right to Public 
Accounts. A man that was out . . . the man that was out over 200 
per cent on his estimate, he is the one that is going to tell a former 
minister of Finance how to run this province. 
 
The former minister of Finance that you’re alluding to, Mr. 
Minister, did not have consecutive deficits and run up a 
cumulated deficit of $3.7 billion. The former minister of Finance 
knew finances much more than you will ever understand, even if 
you live to be 140. 
 
Mr. Minister, I regret the attitude that you have taken. I regret the 
attitude that you say to the public, you have no right of how I 
expended your money in the year 1986-87; I will sit on these 
Public Accounts; I will not make them  

public; I will make them public when I feel like it. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, as my colleagues have pointed out, up until 
1982 when your party formed the government, Public Accounts 
have always been tabled before the end of March of that 
particular year — always. Last year they were tabled in June, and 
it looks very much again that they will be tabled very close to 
June again — full 15 months after the end of the fiscal year. 
 
I think the public have a right, and I think we, as the Public 
Accounts Committee, have a right to get those Public Accounts, 
not when you feel that we should have them, but when they are 
ready and they are offered to you, you should table them into the 
House. I don’t think you have the right to sit on those Public 
Accounts and not let us have access to them. 
 
Mr. Minister, the argument that your colleague made was that 
you couldn’t table them because you wanted to table them when 
the auditor’s report was done, that they should be tabled 
simultaneously. Now you’ve departed from that assumption and 
you said, no. I will table them soon. And I assume that that will 
mean within the next week. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, if the attitude that you have is 
that, look, I’m not going to let the Public Accounts do their job 
because they can do them when the session is over, so we can do 
them during the summer months of July and August, that is a 
betrayal of your responsibility, and that is abusing the privileges 
of your office. Maybe, Mr. Chairman, what we need in this 
House is some legislation which forces the minister, which forces 
the minister . . . and I hope that some government in the . . . 
we’ve never had to have this. In the past, governments have 
always respected the traditions of this House — always. 
 
Maybe what we need . . . we’ve seen this in the by-elections 
where the Premier simply ignored the people of Saskatoon East. 
The minister now ignores the right of the people to the Public 
Accounts. Maybe the time has passed and we need to have 
legislation which says, for example, the budget must be presented 
before a certain date; the Public Accounts must be presented 
before a certain date; the auditor’s report must be presented 
before a certain date. Maybe we need that. 
 
In the past, we haven’t had to because we respected the traditions. 
But this minister and this government have totally ignored those 
traditions, and maybe it’s time that we have some legislation 
brought forth which simply says, you have no choice. On such 
and such a date, you must table the Public Accounts; and by such 
and such a date, the Provincial Auditor’s report must be tabled in 
this House. 
 
I think it’s time that we do that; I think the public has a right. And 
if this government is attempting to withhold from the public the 
expenditures of 1986-87 — full 15 months ago — then maybe 
it’s time that we do something like that. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems like it’s . . . or, Mr. Chairman, it seems like 
it’s impossible to get any answers from this  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1351 
 

minister, so I have no further questions. Turn it over to my 
colleague. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if I 
can ask the minister whether he agrees with the statement of his 
colleague, the Minister of Finance . . . or the Minister of justice, 
who was the acting minister of Finance at one point. And on 
April 14, in discussing the last interim supply measure, the 
Minister of Justice said with regard to the Public Accounts, Mr. 
Chairman, and I quote here: 
 

. . . the Public Accounts of this province have traditionally 
been filed when the Provincial Auditor files his report. That 
has been the case for at least 25 years in this province, 25 
years in this province. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

The Public Accounts will be filed in the traditional way of 
parliament, and that is when the Provincial Auditor files his 
report. 

 
Do you agree with those statements; does he purport to speak for 
you when he says those things, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think the hon. member knows by now 
the rules as to who is speaking on those behalf. I haven’t read the 
comments the hon. member referred to; I will take a look at them 
if he wishes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what the Acting 
Minister of Finance, the Minister of Justice said on that day is 
something that he repeated over and over again. I think it’s 
reasonable to assume that you would have been briefed by your 
Acting Minister of Finance as to what he is saying when it comes 
to Finance. 
 
(1530) 
 
Are you trying to tell this house that you’re not aware of the 
comments made by your colleague, that you’re not of the same 
view that these Public Accounts will be tabled when the 
Provincial Auditor provides his report? Is that your view? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I indicated to the hon. member that I haven’t 
read Hansard or the remarks of the member to whom you’re 
referring. And until such time as I do that, I wouldn’t comment. 
But I certainly, if you wish, will at my convenience take a look 
at those remarks. 
 
I do wish that the member from Nutana had have been here when 
he talked about a date for the filing of . . . Saskatoon Nutana. I do 
note that that has not been a policy stated by the preceding 
governments of this province. 
 
And secondly, I note that, with ample opportunity — I see the 
hon. member is back there — to put motions before the 
Assembly, that he didn’t do that and take that opportunity. So it’s 
all right perhaps to get caught up in the passion of the moment, 
as the hon. member from Saskatoon is wont to do. But I suggest 
that it’s perhaps a bit of grandstanding, but hasn’t taken the 
opportunities to  

the traditional rules of the House to move a little further. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I’m not surprised that you 
don’t know what a colleague of yours said on a particular day in 
the House, and what specifically he might have said. 
 
But are you trying to tell this house that when you were away for 
your two-week jaunt to Japan and points east, and he was the 
Acting Minister of Finance and he was asked about the tabling of 
the Public Accounts, and again publicly he stated that the Public 
Accounts could be tabled in a traditional way when the Provincial 
Auditor provides his report, that when you returned, that you 
were not briefed on his comments, that you were not told that 
these are the things that I had to say in your absence, that you’re 
not familiar with the position that he took, both within this House 
and publicly outside this House? Is that what you’re trying to tell 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I must say that I have not been briefed nor 
have I ever asked on, frankly, any questions that the hon. member 
has asked, nor would I expect to be. I think that that quite frankly 
is a foolish question to ask, and I indicated that I haven’t read it 
and I did not go back and look at Hansard. 
 
We of course have the practice of no longer taking at face value 
necessarily the questions asked by some of the members of the 
opposition. And I’ve indicated now on three occasions that if you 
wish, I would take the time at my convenience to read over the 
record of what happened in my absence. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I just want to go through here and get a 
couple of specific answers. And the first one, I want to ask the 
minister whether or not the Public Accounts are available to him 
at this date to be filed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suggest to the hon. member that the real 
question, of course the Minister of Finance does get them, and as 
the courts have ruled we can file them at the government’s 
discretion. And I suggest to the hon. member that I’ve given the 
assurance now on numerous occasions this afternoon that they 
will be filed soon. 
 
You asked me earlier, and I said that I had not perused them. but 
the advice that I have is that you will be sadly disappointed. So 
all I can do is repeat, as I have several times this afternoon, is I 
have undertaken to give them to you very soon so that you would 
have ample time to discuss, review, consider, peruse, give them 
to Wes Robbins, whatever your practice is. 
 
I would hope you not fall into the trap of the hon. member from 
Saskatoon South in that you look at them yourself as opposed to 
delegating, as he proposes to do, but you will have ample time to 
debate and consider them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I note that you indicate that you would file them 
very soon, that — maybe the minister didn’t hear the question. 
 
The question was, specifically: are the Public Accounts available 
to you at this time, and could you, by that very nature of them 
being available, be in a position to file  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1352 
 

them today? In other words: have the Public Accounts been 
prepared, and are they in your possession, and could they be filed 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I indicated my position to the hon. 
member three or four times this afternoon. You will have them 
very soon. You will have ample time to read them and peruse 
them and study them, and you will also — I’m giving you the 
assurance, because I think that that is fundamental to your 
position that you want ample time during this particular session 
to be able to question the government on the expenditures. That 
was certainly the thrust of the questions of the members . . . 
member from Saskatoon South. 
 
And you will have ample opportunity and Public Accounts will 
have ample opportunity. I’m sure that you will find the reading 
of Public Accounts, although politically depressing, certainly 
interesting. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Could the minister indicate to the House, to the 
people of the province, why you are not prepared, or have not 
filed them up till this date? What particular reasons do you have 
for not having filed them by this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated the position. I think you’ve 
taken the court case — the court has ruled, the judge has ruled. 
And the fundamental question, will you have time to read them 
and study them and peruse them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No. but that’s fundamental; that’s what you want. Public 
Accounts are to allow governments to be held up to public 
scrutiny, and you will have ample time to do that. 
 
And I think as well that not only will you have ample time during 
this session to question the government and to review Public 
Accounts, you will have ample opportunity over the course of the 
next year as well to raise Public Accounts. 
 
So I just simply suggest to the hon. member that you won’t be 
prejudiced, Public Accounts Committee won’t be prejudiced 
during this session to be able to go through them and have the 
time, have the time after perusal to question the government. And 
I’ve given you that assurance. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to just read 
to you from the excerpt from the Public Accounts record, and a 
question asked by the member from Saskatoon South. He 
indicates: 
 

Mr. Chairman, just a very short question to Mr. Kraus. Mr. 
Kraus, can you tell me on what date your Public Accounts 
was completed (and) — printed and all? 
 
Mr. Kraus: The final . . . There’s three volumes, and the 
middle volume, (was) volume 2, was the last set that was 
completed, and it was Easter Monday. Is that April 4? I 
believe April 4 was the . . . Yes, April 4. 

 
And then the member went on to ask Mr. Kraus: 
 

When (do) you submit it to your minister? 
 
And Mr. Kraus indicated: 
 

Shortly thereafter. 
 
(Mr. Rolfes): Do you know the exact day? 
 
(Mr. Kraus): I can’t give you the exact date, but it would be 
within a few days of that (date). 

 
Now the facts, from that excerpt from one of your officials, a 
comptroller, indicates that shortly after April 4 you were 
presented with the Public Accounts. Do you deny that that is 
reasonably accurate? That you did in fact, shortly after April 4, 
come into possession of the completed Public Accounts, and 
now, it being May 16 and you still have not seen fit to file the 
Public Accounts? I ask you, Mr. Minister, what are you trying to 
hide? What is your basic reason for not having filed the Public 
Accounts when you got them shortly after April 4? That’s the 
simple question — come clean. Is there a reason? Give us the 
reason for not having filed them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — as I’ve indicated to the hon. member now, I 
think on 7, 8, 9, or 10 occasions this afternoon, that you will be 
getting the Public Accounts very, very soon. You will have ample 
opportunity to peruse them, study them, review them, whatever. 
You’ll be getting them very soon. You will decide then what 
we’ve had to hide, if anything. I think, from the advice I have, 
that you won’t get much. But having said that, you’ll get them 
very, very soon. I said that much earlier. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, it’s not up to you to decide whether 
or not there’s information that we can use or not. That’s not the 
question. The question is the record of the expenditures of the 
government, and the public is entitled to receive that information, 
and you stand before this House and stonewall the committee 
here today. 
 
You were asked for a reason why you haven’t filed them. you 
had them since April 4 or shortly thereafter, and you can’t stand 
up and give one legitimate reason, other than that you want to 
cover up. And I don’t expect you to say that, but you are ashamed 
of the expenditures, obviously, that you have made, because 
1986-87 was not the greatest year of any Finance minister’s 
records, I’ll tell you that. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I take it that you absolutely refuse to answer 
why you will not table the report. And I think the public therefore 
can assume from that, that you want to give the least possible 
time available for the public scrutiny of it, and that can be the 
only reason for not filing them. Because certainly the precedent 
indicates that the Public Accounts in many, many occasions have 
been filed prior to the auditor’s report. And if you are following 
the precedent, they would have been filed by now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go on and ask you in respect to the 
Appropriation Bill and the resolutions that you have put forward. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Well he won’t answer those. 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1353 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Well the resolutions then. You indicate the 
expenditures, and approximately two-twelfths in each instance, 
in looking at the Heritage Fund, there’s no doubt that in respect 
to the previous appropriation that it’s twice that amount of what 
we had the previous year when you indicated that it was 
one-twelfth. 
 
This time you indicated that for the Heritage Fund, it’s for a 
two-month period, or two-twelfths, and that is indeed double the 
amount that you had appropriated for Heritage Fund last 
Appropriation Bill, last month. 
 
In respect to the Consolidated Funds, there you indicate to me 
that it’s approximately two-twelfths, with some special 
expenditures over and beyond the two-twelfths. And the three 
areas that you have indicated to me, Mr. Minister, is the 
Education, where it’s the two-twelfths, the usual, and then you 
have added on the operating grants, cash-flow requirements of 
the boards. 
 
Legislation is the other item that you mention. There’s $130,700 
additional sessional costs, translation services, and Legislative 
Library. And Urban Affairs, you indicate 2.8 million, in addition 
to the funding for revenue sharing for established schedule for 
grant payments. 
 
What I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what is the total amount 
over and above the two-twelfths, in respect to the Consolidated 
Fund. What is the total amount over and above the two-twelfths 
appropriation that is being asked for in respect to Education, 
legislation, and Urban Affairs? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My quick calculations of the three amounts 
are $31 million made up as follows: of 28 thousand . . . for 
Education — 28,069,300; $130,700 for legislation; and 2.8 
million for Urban Affairs. Now I’ve quickly added those up to 
31 — subject to my inherent weaknesses — I think that’s 
accurate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, that was the figure that I had come up with 
is 31 million over and above the two-twelfths. 
 
Now in respect to education, the 28,069,300 that you indicate, 
can you indicate why the need for pulling that amount of . . . over 
and above the two-twelfths? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To be candid with the member, no, I can’t. 
the advice I have from my officials is that it’s simply to assist in 
maintaining the established payment schedule to school boards. 
I gather that some time in May or June they bump up payments, 
so I assume that that’s the case, to put them on a schedule track. 
 
I can’t answer more than that. I can undertake to get that answer 
for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — At the same time file the Public Accounts. 
 
This is a fairly substantial amount of money, and I would 
appreciate an indication as to specifically, if you would, provide 
me with the reason for the 28 million over and above the 
two-twelfths in respect to that, Urban Affairs . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s one-twelfth, 28. 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I want, in respect to that . . . and perhaps 
you could explain also, in respect to Urban Affairs, the 2.8 
million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again I am advised by officials that it’s 
simply to assist in meeting the established schedule for revenue 
sharing grant payments to local governments. Again I can 
undertake to advise the hon. member why three-twelfths would 
be needed at this particular time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I’d appreciate that as soon as possible. I 
don’t have many more questions in respect to it, but I just want 
to indicate to the minister that Public Accounts, and the filing of 
it, is an important matter, and we deal with it in an important way. 
We ask you for your co-operation and respect for the institution 
and the practices that we have followed in the past. 
 
I can only indicate to you that Public Accounts has been a very 
important issue in the two by-elections. I want to indicate to the 
minister that in Eastview the NDP received 6,685, the PCs, 
3,330, and the Liberals, 2,473 — the official count. Both lost 
their deposits. 
 
And I’ll tell you that you better start listening to the people of this 
province or the results are going to be throughout this province 
similar to Eastview. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to take seriously 
the demands of the public that they want an open government, 
they want entitlement to information. 
 
And I ask you then to consider those — losing your deposit in a 
seat that you held, by the refusal to provide the public with the 
information that they deserve. So I’m prepared, Mr. Chairman, 
on those comments, to proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I appreciate the advice from the hon. 
member. He gave us the same advice after the Regina North West 
by-election. We followed his advice and much to our success in 
the future. So I take the recommendation of the hon. member to 
heart. 
 
I have been advised that the Urban Affairs, the reason for the 
three-twelfths is that they are paid quarterly in June. And I 
assume that that’s probably the case with Education, but again I 
will check that out and advise the hon. member. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move that the resolutions be now read the 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1354 
 

That Bill No. 31, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year Ending on March 31, 1989, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, and under rule 
48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 16 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the Minister of Highways please 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d 
like to introduce to you the following officials from the 
department. To my immediate right is the deputy minister, Mr. 
Jack Sutherland, a man who’s been with the department some 20 
. . . 34 years, some 34 years; and right behind Mr. Sutherland is 
Mr. Myron Herasymuik, assistant deputy minister; directly 
behind me is Paul Fitzel, executive director of support services 
division; to Mr. Herasymuik’s right is Mr. Bob Cocks, director 
of operation services branch; and to my left is Dave Stewart, 
acting director of the legislation and safety branch representing 
the Highway Traffic Board. 
 
In addition we have Mr. Phil Pearson, executive director of 
transportation, planning and research division; and Mr. Bernie 
Churko, the director of transportation systems branch, seated in 
the back to provide additional support. 
 
We also have other departmental officials in the gallery and, I’m 
sure, some watching the proceedings on television. And it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the members 
of the Legislative Assembly, these officials who provide very, 
very good work for the Department of Highways and are for the 
most part long-standing employees. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister. 
Welcome to your officials and, indeed, welcome to Highways’ 
estimates. We’ve waited awhile to get on with this, not quite as 
long as we have waited for Public Accounts which have been 
printed now for six weeks. They are safely collecting dust on 
them, assuming they’re in a new warm, dry place. Failing that, if 
they’re in a damp place, they’re collecting mould and will 
probably have to be reprinted before we can get them. 
 
I want to ask you to get the Minister of Finance to come loose, 
spring loose with the Public Accounts because it makes our job 
that much easier if we can see what  

spending you did last year. I think you can appreciate we’re going 
through this year’s estimates with very little knowledge of what 
you and your department did last year. 
 
And just so you don’t feel left out, it’s not just the Minister of 
Finance that I’m concerned with. While you’re pressing the 
member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden for the Public Accounts, I 
would ask that you check with your office and have a request for 
information that was sent to you in April. And we still have not 
received any word, despite having called your office on Thursday 
afternoon, that’s May 12, to which the response was, well, we’ll 
check with the department and send that information to us and 
would confirm that with a telephone call later that day — 
presumably. We are still waiting for that telephone call. Do you 
have that information available, and would you send it across if 
you do? 
 
I guess one more item before I take my place and let you respond. 
Is Mr. Katzman, the former MLA from Rosthern, still working 
as you special assistant? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, hon. critic. I would agree with 
you that your office has asked of our department a long list of 
questions, very detailed-type questions in written form. And it 
was in the month of April; it was as of April 29 was the date of 
your letter. I believe we received it something like May 4 or 
thereabouts. 
 
And the departmental officials have been busy looking at your 
request, and I am very pleased to be able to provide to you right 
now. They just finished putting the finishing touches on it only 
moments ago, and we do have the information for you. I’m sorry 
I could not have got it to you a little bit earlier, but your request 
did come in the very last few days in April. 
 
Respecting Mr. Katzman, Mr. Katzman is on contract with the 
Department of Highways at the present time. 
 
Mr. Trew: — In what projects have you Mr. Katzman involved 
with right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Katzman is presently involved in a 
number of projects, and the one that comes to mind, that I am 
most proud of, is Mr. Katzman’s involvement with the 
community signing program. I do know that Mr. Katzman spent 
some time recently at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) convention and dealt with a number of 
rural municipalities regarding the question of signing in their 
communities; has gone out and met with city officials and 
chamber of commerces in promoting and advising and 
trouble-shooting on a very popular program called our 
community signing program. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Katzman is what I would call a 
trouble-shooter. And in certain cases where there are disputes as 
to between landowners, or if there are differences of opinion with 
respect to such things as gravel purchases or land purchases or 
accesses, Mr. Katzman does work on those types of problems of 
us,  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1355 
 

and in fact does a very good job. 
 
Mr. Trew: — It’s just great you’ve got him working on the 
community signing project, a project that was started, I believe, 
in 1984. It’s kind of rehashing old news. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are, in Saskatchewan, witnessing a return of our 
highways system to that of the Roman cobble-stone highways. 
Those highways were state of the art highways when they were 
built more than two millennium ago — more than two 
millennium ago. In Saskatchewan, when the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking and longing for a return to the good 
old days, they’re not longing for a return to two millennium ago 
when they could bounce from one cobble-stone to the next. 
Instead, the people of Saskatchewan are looking and longing for 
the day when they can again travel their highways with some 
degree of safety. 
 
We used to see signs advertising, “Join Us,” promoting seat-belt 
use. Now we see signs saying, “Lights On For Life.” It is clearly 
the signs of the future that are going to — at the rate we’re going 
— the signs of the future are going to say, “Hang on for life,” not 
“Lights On For Life,” but “Hang on for life.” 
 
I want to review the ’87-88 Supplementary Estimates. Your total 
departmental expenditures for the past fiscal year are $222 
million, broken down as follows: administration, 32.4 million; 
maintenance, 87.5 million, and capital construction, 103 million. 
This year the department’s estimates include . . . pardon me, 
indicate that a total of 231 million will be allocated. That’s going 
to result, on the surface, of an increase of 3.9 per cent, Mr. 
Minister, or an increase of just over eight and a half million 
dollars. 
 
But the allocations for 1988-89 are: for administration, 32.7 
million; maintenance, 87.4 million; and capital, $111 million. 
But these figures are somewhat deceiving. The reason that I say 
that is they include your infamous payments to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. This year, payments to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation have increased 
by nine and one-half per cent, from 8.2 million to over $9 million. 
 
If you take this bookkeeping transfer of money from one pocket 
to the other, take that out, you can see that your total expenditure 
for the department is significantly below the expenditures of your 
department of even two years ago when the total budget for 
Highways and Transportation was over $224 million. 
 
How can you claim that this is an increasing spending on roads 
and highways in this province when what you’re really doing is 
transferring money from one pocket to the other? And can you 
explain in detail what the estimated expenditure to Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation is for? What services and 
what facilities are being provided to the department for that huge 
amount of money. Because you see, Mr. Minister, this over $9 
million is virtually the same amount of money as you have 
announced for your new highway rehabilitation program. So can 
you give us a breakdown of the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation  

pay-out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to point 
out to the member opposite that in fact we are spending an 
additional 10 or $11 million on roads and transportation. And 
your point respecting the property management corporation is, in 
this instance, it is not relevant. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, that there is a new 
program that was announced in the budget, of which tenders have 
already gone out on a good number of the properties or a good 
number of the contracts. And we are spending an additional 
$10-point million in the enhanced highway resurfacing program. 
It is $10 million that I believe is needed out there on the ageing 
system, and it’s a $10 million that I feel very proud, as Minister 
of Highways and Transportation, that we have been able to 
achieve and spend directly on our highway system. 
 
So in total, Mr. Chairman, you will see that our capital budget is 
indeed $111 million. Last year it was $100.9 million. It is an 
increase of 10 or $11 million, and I believe, Mr. Chairman, that 
the people of Saskatchewan, the people who drive on our 
highways, the people who use the system, are indeed very 
pleased that we have chosen to spend those additional moneys on 
the highways in this province. 
 
Your question respecting property management corporation is a 
common question that has been asked by many of the critics in 
the opposition, and the answer there is, Mr. Speaker, that it has 
been this government who has chosen to fairly represent the rents 
that we pay, the services that we are provided with by the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation in a fair, 
reasonable, and realistic fashion. 
 
The increase in costs from ’87-88 to ’88-89 run from last year 
being $8.2 million, this year being $9 million — approximately 
$800,000 difference. And those are for services of . . . primarily 
rent is the big service that property management provides to us, 
but as well, mail services and photo services and records 
management and some small capital projects. 
 
So you speak of the property management payment going up by 
$9 million or something; in fact, it’s gone up about $800,000. We 
feel that it is a fair representation of the services that are provided 
to us, and I believe that it is prudent to allow individual 
departments to have the flexibility now, to go where the cost is 
least for these types of services, and I believe that that flexibility 
now exists in the system. 
 
Mr. Trew: — A number of points, Mr. Minister. I did not say 
that the payment to Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation went up $9 million; I said it went up nearly $1 
million. The 9 million is, coincidentally, almost identical to your 
new road rehabilitation program that you’ve announced, of $10 
million this year. 
 
I want to take a little exception to what you said about the capital 
spending project. In 1986-87, the Highways capital budget, you 
spent, or claimed to have spent,  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1356 
 

$109.6 million. This year your capital budget is 111.3, counting 
your so-called additional $10 million. Well 111.3, you subtract 
109.6, you certainly don’t have $10 million; you’ve got closer to 
$1 million difference than 10. So I mean the fact that you’re using 
all this smoke and mirrors to say there’s an additional $10 million 
just simply is not there. Your spending is clearly up from last 
year, but only because last year you decreased the spending from 
the year before. 
 
Minister, the maintenance budget I want to deal with. From 1980 
to ’81, from that year, that fiscal year, to ’81-82, the maintenance 
budget for your department increased 18.4 per cent. Since that 
time we have seen a subvote to the point where in, for instance, 
1986-87 the increase was 5.34 per cent; the next year, ’87-88, 
after the election was safely out of the way, we see a decrease of 
1.6 per cent in that subvote, and then this year, ’88-89, no change; 
it is absolutely static. You made the cut last year; you’ve 
maintained it static this year. 
 
The maintenance budget is clearly inadequate. Any and 
everybody who ever travel s a highway in Saskatchewan 
understands it. You can feel by the seat of your pants as you’re 
bouncing from one pot-hole to the next. What we need is some 
additional moneys spent on road maintenance. Clearly that is 
indicated. 
 
You look at any highway, but take No. 11, because it’s one of the 
most used highways in the province — I say one of the most; I 
don’t purport that it is the highest used highway — but you have 
shear failure on No. 11. Shear failure, just for . . . I suspect you 
know, Mr. Minister, but for any of your colleagues that may not 
know, a shear failure is when you have the pavement drop, 
usually in the outside, the passenger wheel area on the shoulder. 
When you have a shear failure it is simply too late to repave. 
There’s no resurfacing that can take care of that problem once 
you’ve got a shear failure. 
 
(1615) 
 
A shear failure is an indication of an inadequate maintenance 
budget because you failed to spend a few dimes or a few dollars 
in a timely manner. Because of that, the road-bed has to be 
substantially replaced before you can again repave it. And that’s 
the situation that we have on several stretches of No. 11 
Highway. 
 
I think it’s just a disgrace that you haven’t spent a few dimes to 
save many dollars at a later time. You’re now into the situation 
where you have to spend dollars, and lots of them, on No. 11 
Highway; either that or you’re going to see an awful lot of 
accidents. Hopefully we will not be seeing any increase in the 
death rate on that highway, but certainly when you have a failure 
in the highway like there is in many parts of it now, that is a risk 
that we run. 
 
Minister, I’ll give you one more thing before I sit down. I’m sure 
you want to respond to the maintenance budget being inadequate, 
but I want to talk also about the Highways capital budget which 
has done even worse than the maintenance budget. 
 

It had an annual increase of 12.1 per cent in 1981, and then it has 
had very erratic movement ever since. But inevitably you wind 
up spending less money than previous. 
 
In 1981-82 there was $113.7 million spent on the Highways 
capital budget. That dropped then, after you formed the 
government, to 104.4 million, and it has never reached $113.7 
million. This year is as close as you can say you have come to it 
with your capital budget of $111 million. 
 
You’re still some $2.4 million short, excluding inflation; totally 
ignoring inflation, you are still short. Inflation, from 1981-82 till 
to date, has totalled nearly 50 per cent. We may quarrel over 
whether it’s 40 or 50 or 60, but as a ballpark figure inflation has 
run at that rate. 
 
So even with your much touted rehabilitation program, the 
absolute level of capital expenditures this year is below what it 
was in 1981-82, and again, no account for inflation when I say 
that. That hardly represent, Mr. Minister, a record of continuing 
emphasis on maintaining and protecting one of the province’s 
largest public assets. And when I say one of our largest public 
assets, I remind you that the total investment in the highway 
system now exceeds over $3 billion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, first I would 
like to respond on the question of the amount of money spent on 
maintenance in the Highways and Transportation budget. 
 
The member can chat and quote figures, and in and out of 
context, but I’d like to quote the two figures, Mr. Chairman, to 
keep this debate and discussion very, very simple. 
 
And these are the facts, Mr. Chairman: in the year 1981-82 the 
maintenance budget was $56,965,420. Let’s call that, Mr. 
Chairman, $57 million — 1981-82, $57 million. The current 
budget at 1988-89 is $87,447,700 — let’s call that $87 million. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Chairman, 1981 budget brought down by the 
NDP administration in Highways and Transportation 
maintenance, $57 million; 1988-89, $87 million, a $30 million 
increase, if you want to take that over a longer period of time and 
add up the maintenance budget under the NDP administration 
from 1978 to ’81, compare that with the last four years, Mr. 
Chairman, it is total, an increase of 69.7 per cent increase in the 
maintenance budget under Highways and Transportation. So, 
Mr. Speaker, or, Mr. Chairman, there’s no question; we have 
spent more money in the maintenance part of the budget. 
 
I will now respond, Mr. Chairman, to the member’s comments 
on Highway No. 11. — a highway between Saskatoon . . . the 
portion between Saskatoon and Regina. It is a very, very busy 
highway, Mr. Chairman; it is a highway on which many of the 
members from the opposition do travel. I will certainly concede 
to the opposition that Highway No. 11 is one of the highways in 
the province that is in need of moneys being spent on it. 
 
I am very pleased to announce, Mr. Chairman, and much  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1357 
 

to the satisfaction of the member from Arm River, who has 
brought this to my attention on many occasions — a good portion 
of that highway travels through his constituency. And the 
member from Arm River, the member from Arm River, as many 
good MLAs on this side of the House, has represented his 
constituents well by bringing this to my attention, by bringing 
this to my attention. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, there is a contract that has been or 
will be very shortly let . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . it has been 
let, I’m advised, on No. 11 Highway — it is $1.7 million. I would 
add, Mr. Speaker, that this amount is over and above, this amount 
is in addition to another contracts that were other moneys that we 
have spent on No. 11 Highway. And indeed, it is an important 
highway for the people of Saskatchewan and we have every 
intention, every intention of expending as many dollars as we 
possibly can to make that a first-class highway. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, you spoke of my numbers not being 
accurate. I talked in terms of 1980-81, the maintenance budget 
being $51,127,860. I quote to you from the 1980-81 
Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation annual report, and 
it shows the maintenance budget $51,127,860. You can’t get any 
more close than to the dollar. 
 
I don’t appreciate for two seconds you telling me that the 
numbers I am quoting are in any way, shape, or form inaccurate. 
This side of the House, when we were the government, we are 
the group that gave 11 balanced . . . consecutive balanced 
budgets, 11 of them. that’s a record that you cannot even 
comprehend. 
 
In the six years you have been the government, we have a record 
of six deficit budget. We have a situation where last year the 
Minister of Finance said, oh, the projected deficit’s going to be 
380-some million dollars. It turned into more than $1.2 billion — 
out 300 per cent. And you have the audacity to say perhaps our 
figures are wrong when we take them from official reports. 
 
I take exception to you questioning. You have every right to 
question it, but I just want to make it very clear, our numbers are 
accurate. 
 
I want to deal with the changes that have taken place in regard to 
the Highways budget. In 1980-81, on administration for that 
department, there was $15.7 million spent. In 1988-89, you’re 
proposing $32.7 million. That is more than double, more than 
double for the administration. I am most anxious to hear your 
comments on how efficient you are at administering your own 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member 
brings up a very good question. I’m not surprised he would ask 
that. Any reasonable person looking at the increased 
administration would very soon see that there has been an 
increase in the administration portion of the budget. And it does 
have what I feel would be a very logical explanation. 
 
When we formed government and since we have formed 
government, there has been various reorganizations that have 
taken place under this administration,  

reorganizations that have taken place in the name of efficiency, 
reorganizations that have take place in the name of saving the 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And I speak of such amalgamations or reorganizations as the 
Department of Highways under the Progressive Conservative 
administration in rolling over or taking into their budget or 
administration such things as the portions of the DNS 
(department of northern Saskatchewan) unit. The DNS unit was 
the mini-bureaucracy created by the NDP administration in 
northern Saskatchewan, and portions of that were rolled into 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
I think it is clearly remembered, Mr. Chairman, by the people of 
Saskatchewan, the absolute bureaucratic mess that was created 
by the former administration in DNS, and Highways and 
Transportation has taken a portion of that bureaucratic mess into 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
As well, there has been reorganizations with respect to the 
Highway Traffic Board. Changes there have taken place to cause 
increases in administration. Department of Highways has taken 
on what used to be a separate agency, the transportation agency 
and the transportation policy unit. These were separate units set 
up by the NDP rolled into Highways and Transportation, and 
there certainly have been many, many efficiencies there. 
 
Now the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, will attempt to make 
the case that because the administration budget has gone up, that 
we are top-heavy in management, that a lot of the public’s dollars 
are being spent on management. And I want to defend that very 
strongly, Mr. Chairman, by stating to you that this administration 
and, in particular, this department has undergone a very 
significant down-sizing that came as a result of an early 
retirement program where, in the Department of Highways and 
Transportation, we lost, frankly, a number of very, very good 
people in our department. Those people took the early retirement 
package. 
 
(1630) 
 
We are operating now with less management than I believe the 
department has operated for a long, long time. And there are 
efficiencies, Mr. Chairman, and I want to at this time commend 
all of the officials in the Department of Highways and 
Transportation who are doing today an excellent job with less 
people, with less people, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I am sure that every one of them has had added 
responsibilities, added burdens on their shoulders, to make 
Highways and Transportation operate as efficiently and as 
effectively as possible. And I believe today, Mr. Speaker, the 
Department of Highways and Transportation is operating as 
efficiently as any department across the country, and I’m indeed 
pleased and proud of the people in the department who have 
down-sized and who are operating very efficiently. And to make 
the case that we have got more administration, more top-heavy 
in management, is not accurate. 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1358 
 

Mr. Trew: — So we have the Highway Traffic Board, which is 
now the regulation and traffic safety division — correct? Okay. 
 
And in the year’s vote I see we’ve got the regulation and traffic 
division, a total of $3,495,000. Now we’re just talking about a 
more than doubling of what it costs you to run your department, 
from $15.7 million to $32.7 million this year — just for the 
record, the $15.7 million being what was spent in 1980-81. 
 
You have taken some of the department of northern services into 
your department. You’ve described it as a mini-bureaucracy. 
Clearly by what you’re doing here you’ve changed that 
mini-bureaucracy into a maxi-bureaucracy within the 
Department of Highways. 
 
Take off three and half million dollars for the Highway Traffic 
Board, you still have a $13.5 million increase in cost of running 
your department. You have done such innovative things as laying 
off hundreds and hundreds of Saskatchewan former Department 
of Highways workers — hundreds of them out there, many of 
them still without work, many of them not working on our roads 
and streets and highways. 
 
Instead, you have now got people like the former MLA for 
Rosthern on your staff. You have also given yourselves, 
Executive Council, massive pay raises. My question is: what is 
the contract, what are the terms of employment for Mr. Katzman? 
Second question is: how large was the increase that you gave Gail 
Anderson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — To just respond a little bit further to your 
questions on the increase in administration — and here again, Mr. 
Chairman, I make the very strong point that those increases in 
administration were due to internal changes that, I believe, have 
created a far more efficient unit for Highways and Transportation 
with the amalgamation of different things from the Highway 
Traffic Board, the transportation agency and DNS, and a good 
portion of that in addition, was the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, a bill of approximately $9 million. 
 
So those types of reorganizations, Mr. Chairman, have been 
efficiency driven, I believe, in the interests of the taxpayers of 
this province. They have been wise and prudent moves. And 
today, as I once again said, Mr. Chairman, Highways and 
Transportation is operating with less people and operating very, 
very efficiently. 
 
I would, secondly, respond to your question regarding Mr. 
Katzman’s employment. And I would tell the hon. member that 
the terms of his employment are very similar to the terms of a 
contract that was in effect with the NDP administration. And they 
had on contract a former NDP MLA candidate — or was he a 
candidate? He was actually a former MLA, Mr. Martin Semchuk. 
And the terms and conditions of Mr. Katzman’s contract would 
be very, very similar to that. 
 
The difference would be, Mr. Chairman, the difference would be, 
Mr. Chairman, is that Mr. Katzman today and since he has 
become employed by the Department of Highways and 
Transportation, is actually doing some  

Highways and Transportation work. 
 
The difference is, Mr. Chairman, that I view Mr. Katzman as a 
trouble-shooter who has driven miles around this province and 
looked after very, very sensitive areas. When we’re talking about 
disputes about landowners, when we’re talking about accesses to 
businesses where small businesses want accesses onto highways, 
when we’re talking about community signing where business 
people in the province of Saskatchewan want to place up signs, 
there are rules and regulations that should be followed. 
 
And Mr. Katzman has worked very, very well and with the 
assistance of some people in the department, but has been out 
across Saskatchewan handling these sensitive matters and doing 
an excellent job. 
 
Your third question was with respect to an increase in wages or 
a reclassification in my office, and that reclassification moved 
Miss Gail Anderson from an MA (ministerial assistant) 3 to an 
MA 4 and the increase in salary was from $3,016 to $3,392. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So we have here an admission that the cost of 
administration has more than doubled from 1980-81 till to date 
— more than doubled. At the same time we see the proportion of 
administration of your department’s figures having gone from 
9.37 per cent in 1980-81, till today it’s 14.12 per cent. That’s an 
increase of nearly 5 per cent or one-third, as a percentage of your 
department’s budget. 
 
Had the same thing happened with regard to maintenance, instead 
of spending $51.1 million as we did in 1980-81, instead of that 
having gone to 87 million today, it would rather be in the range 
of $103 million. You’re far short of that. 
 
And in regards to the capital budget, that’s where the difference 
really shows up. Had we seen the same change there, a doubling, 
as we have seen in the cost of administering, instead of spending 
$111 million today, you would be spending $205 million — $205 
million. That’s if everything were done with the same efficiency 
that you handled the administration. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan simply cannot afford 
any more of your pork-barrel administration changes, your 
internal reorganization, your shuffling of cost from one pocket to 
another, such as we have with Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation where you have in effect siphoned off 
$9 million that used to be available to spend on highway 
maintenance and rebuilding and even building the odd new 
highway. That’s $9 million that now goes to Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation and thus is unavailable to do 
any real meaningful work to bring our highways back into shape. 
 
I think it’s a real shame the way you have not followed priorities 
as they should be. I’ve outlined that in Highway 11 and will be 
returning to that a little later in the estimates. 
 
But Highway 11 is simply symptomatic of the huge  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1359 
 

malaise that is out there. You can’t drive a highway anywhere in 
Saskatchewan without finding pot-hole after pot-hole after 
pot-hole. We used to make bad jokes about the golf-course and 
the 18 holes to the mile; I won’t even begin to do that. What you 
have done, Mr. Minister, is you have added an executive back 
nine to each and every kilometre of highway, and it’s just really 
a shame. 
 
I very much would appreciate hearing how you can justify 
holding the capital budget at such a low level, not taking anything 
into account for inflation but rather having a same capital budget 
this year as there was two years ago and has been for a number 
of years now, when all about you the highways are falling apart. 
How is that you can maintain such a woefully inadequate capital 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The member opposite and I are having a 
disagreement here, Mr. Speaker, on the increase in 
administration. Mr. Speaker, I once . . . or Mr. Chairman, I once 
again want to stress that those increase in administration are here 
and accounted for, and they break down as follows: rent to 
property management corporation, $9 million; Highway Traffic 
Board administration, $3.5 million; transportation agency, 
300,000; DNS, 500,000. And the fact, the fact, Mr. Chairman, is 
this: that this government and this department has undergone 
down-sizing, has undergone early retirement programs, and we 
are operating with less people, and we are operating efficiently. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would say that the public in Saskatchewan, for 
some time now, have demanded that governments be more lean 
and more efficient and that their tax dollars are used to better 
purposes. And, Mr. Chairman, beyond a shadow of a doubt, this 
administration has done exactly that, and the taxpayers of the day 
are getting very, very good value for the dollars that they put out 
towards the Department of Highways and Transportation with 
respect to administration. 
 
(1645) 
 
This department, Mr. Speaker, is no longer, no longer . . . I’ll start 
again, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Chairman, because this department 
never was that bad. But I’ll tell you that departments such as DNS 
were not all that lean and not all the efficient. Other departments 
under the NDP administration were not all that lean or not all that 
efficient. 
 
It has been this government that has done so — with a great deal 
of courage — has down-sized and early retired and has now a 
very, is a very efficient operating unit. And it is something, Mr. 
Chairman, that I frankly, and this government, and I believe the 
employees in this department, are proud of the work that they do. 
And there’s no top-heavy management in this administration, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now the member opposite has chatted about the capital level of 
budget and the maintenance level of budget. And the facts are 
simply these; that in 1987-88 the budget for capital was $100.9 
million of actual moneys spent on the highways in Saskatchewan 
on capital projects. The budget for 1988-89 is $111 million. That 
is a $10 million  

increase. I wished it could have been more. I don’t say that this 
amount of moneys is representative of the true needs that are out 
there today in Saskatchewan. we have a massive highway system 
in this province, probably more highways per capita than any 
jurisdiction in probably North American or maybe even a wider 
area than that. 
 
But the facts are, Mr. Chairman, that there has been an increase. 
It has been an increase of $10 million of dedicated money to 
resurfacing of our major high-volume paved highways. This is 
where the emphasis is currently on, Mr. Chairman. I believe that 
the public of Saskatchewan, for the most part, have accepted that 
that increase, given today’s economic realities and today’s 
environment, is fair and is reasonable. 
 
I wish the increase could have been more, and there were 
department that had no increase this year. this Department of 
Highways and Transportation has received $10 million more that 
is going directly into the highways system, and I don’t believe 
that the members opposite can deny that. If they denied that, Mr. 
Chairman, their heads are certainly in the sand. 
 
I’ll give you an example of the amount of resurfacing that we are 
doing this year. This year, 1988-89, more than 600 kilometres of 
major high-volume paved highways will be resurfaced. This is 
welcome news by the driving public in Saskatchewan, this is 
welcome news by the road-building industry and this is welcome 
news by this government. And it seems to me that the only people 
who are complaining, and with no justification, are the NDP. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, while you’re in the mood here for making 
announcements of welcome news, I bring to your attention a 
particular stretch of highway that is badly in need of attention. 
 
I was most encouraged by the fact that some 15 minutes ago or 
so that you announced that there would be one . . . some extra 
$1.7 million, I believe you said, of capital moneys going to 
improve Highway 11 coming south of Saskatoon. I certainly 
concur and agree with you, Mr. Minister, that driving that stretch 
of highway is truly a driving experience. It’s badly in need of 
improvement. 
 
But there is a stretch of highway, Mr. Minister, that makes 
Highway 11 look like highway heaven, and I’m referring to 
Highway 363, Mr. Minister, about which you’ve had some recent 
correspondence. I note that in a letter dated April 21 to the R.M. 
of Rodgers, Mr. Minister, you refer to an estimate that it would 
take some $10 million to reconstruct Highway 363 from the 
Crestwynd corner to . . . that would be to Hodgeville. 
 
And I bring to your attention, Mr. Minister, that there is a section 
of Highway 363 that is particularly in need of attention from your 
department. The section of Highway 363 between Courval and 
Crestwynd corner is particularly crucial to a good number of 
people who live in that area south and east of Moose Jaw. People 
from the areas north of Gravelbourg, Shamrock, Bateman, 
Coderre, and Courval rely very much on that stretch of highway, 
Mr. Minister, to travel to either Moose Jaw or  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1360 
 

Regina. And given that the hauling of grain to Moose Jaw, the 
patterns that exist now. It’s become an absolute must that we 
have to have a decent stretch of road for those trucks to travel. 
 
I note as well, Mr. Minister, and you’ll be aware, that there has 
been some dust-free surfacing done on that stretch of highway. 
But that stretch is full of pot-holes, not different from a lot of 
other roads in Saskatchewan, except perhaps in degree. There are 
a large number of pot-holes. The road is really quite narrow. I 
can’t say from personal experience, but I’m advised that it is a 
nip-and-tuck king of manoeuvre to get a couple of semi’s passing 
one another on 363 because of the width of the highway. 
 
Now my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: I recognize that 
you have recently indicated to the R.M. of Rodgers that there 
isn’t anything in the plan this year for reconstruction of Highway 
363, but I wonder whether you can see, in light especially of the 
fact that you just a few moments ago announced that there will 
be 1.7 additional dollars for Highway 11, whether you might be 
able to find it within your budget to make some extra funds 
available to do at least a portion of Highway 363, and noting 
particularly that the some-20 miles or so between Courval and 
the Crestwynd corner is particularly crucial. 
 
Let me ask at the same time, Mr. Minister, to roll two questions 
into one. So first of all, can you see it possible to make some 
funds available to do some reconstruction, particularly in that 
critical stretch; and if not for the whole stretch this year, would 
you see it as being possible to perhaps look at something like 6 
or 8 or 10 miles of construction this year, and a commitment 
down the road? 
 
It is, you can appreciate, a very important stretch of roadway for 
people in that part of the province. And what they badly need is 
some kind of commitment so that the R.M.s also can do some 
assessing in terms of their road-work, and they can make some 
plans knowing what the intentions of the province are. 
 
So the two questions: can you see some funds possibly this year 
for some reconstruction of that road, particularly in that Courval 
to Crestwynd corner, that stretch of highway — if not for the 
whole stretch, for a portion of it? And I also ask, then, whether 
you can make a commitment to some kind of long-term plan over 
the next one, two, three years that the R.M.s can use to rely on 
with confidence, and enter into their plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The member should be aware that each 
year, each spring in the legislature we table out annual project 
array of the projects that we would undertake in the current fiscal 
year. it was not as if I was making a sudden announcement on 
Highway No. 11. Highway No. 11 had been in our plans and was 
announced in the spring project array. 
 
When you speak of Highway No. 363 west of Moose Jaw, I 
would tell you that Highway 363 is indeed an important rural 
highway. The member, the current member for Thunder Creek 
has visited with me, on Highway No. 363, over the last few years 
and has made strong and firm  

representation to me for the need of reconstruction of Highway 
No. 363. The members opposite well know that contracts in the 
last few years have been undertaken on Highway No. 363, and 
some very significant improvements have been made. And I 
would trust that the member opposite would acknowledge that 
the work done on Highway No. 363 was good work, and the 
people in that area have been, I think, quite satisfied with the 
improvements to Highway No. 363. 
 
The member speaks of additional moneys being spent on 
Highway No. 363 further west of Moose Jaw. I once again 
remind you that the project array for this year has been set. It is 
certainly a highway that will be reviewed, along with all other 
highways that are in need of upgrading, within the context of our 
project array for 1989-99, and I’ll certainly take a look at it 
without making a firm commitment to you today. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the few minutes 
remaining this afternoon, I have two specific questions I would 
like to put to the minister affecting concerns I the south-western 
part of my constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. One is a 
highway concern and the other is a railroad concern. I’ll, in the 
interests of time, put both questions at once, even though they’re 
not directly related, and ask the minister to respond to them 
simultaneously. 
 
First of all, on the highways matter, Mr. Minister, you and I have 
corresponded with respect to a particular problem on Highway 
18, south of Wood Mountain, where there is a particularly blind 
and dangerous hill where there have been some mishaps and 
some incidents. Fortunately, to this point, they have not been of 
the most serious kind, but they do cause concern in that vicinity 
for the people who travel that highway on a daily basis. It’s an 
area that I think does need some immediate attention, in the 
interests of safety, from your department in terms of removing 
some of the blind areas on the highway and bringing it up to more 
safe standards. You indicated in a letter to me that you were 
looking at some things that might be done in respect of that 
particular spot on Highway 18, south of Wood Mountain, and I 
would ask you if you have anything further that you can report at 
the time in terms of what will be done to alleviate the safety 
concerns with respect to that particular patch of road. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, the railway concern — I bring to 
your attention the CP Rail Colony subdivision, the subdivision 
running west of Rockglen to the community of Killdeer. That is 
a particular branch line in Saskatchewan that has been the subject 
of an abandonment order by the CTC (Canadian Transport 
Commission). That order is presently under appeal by the 
Killdeer rail retention committee. On behalf of that committee, I 
have filed, in this legislature, a petition indicating the substance 
of the appeal, and calling upon the legislature and the 
government to support the Killdeer rail retention committee in 
their appeal against the CTC abandonment order. 
 
In my correspondence with the federal government, I have not 
yet been able to determine the exact status of this matter in the 
eyes of the governor in council at the federal level, and I wonder 
if you could, with respect to this rail issue,  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1361 
 

indicate first of all that the appeal against the abandonment order 
has the full support of the Government of Saskatchewan, which 
I think is the case, but I would be anxious to have that officially 
on the record, Mr. Minister. 
 
And secondly, I wonder if I could have your specific assurance 
that is there is some technical difficulty in the manner in which 
this appeal has been filed, that the Government of Saskatchewan 
would come to the assistance of the Killdeer rail retention 
committee and urge the Government of Canada to overlook any 
technical defect and hear the appeal on the basis of the substance 
of that appeal, which, in my opinion, is very sound an solid 
substance and should substantiate the allowing of the appeal and 
the varying, at least, if the abandonment order. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect 
to your question on Highway No. 18 and the blind spot, if you 
like, or spots that exist on that road and the safety concerns that 
you have, I would advise the member that I very much share 
those same concerns, and I am advised that indeed it is a valid 
concern. 
 
I do not have any further information to give you today other than 
what we wrote to you in a letter a short while ago, but I will give 
the member the following commitment that it will receive serious 
consideration by myself and by the department in future 
expenditures. So I very much share your view on it, and it is 
something that we would like to very seriously question. 
 
With respect to the Colony subdivision and the abandonment 
order by the CTC, and the ensuing appeal by the rail retention 
committee, the Killdeer rail retention committee, here again I 
share very much your same concern. And I want to tell you that 
we do support strongly the appeal by that committee. I have 
written to the minister in charge and, furthermore, I have met 
with the local rail retention committee on more than one 
occasion. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


