


















































May 26, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 26, 1988 
  

1597 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, we’ll get started off in regards to 
your task force. Have you got the names of your task force 
members? 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, many of the people at the community 
level have heard statements about the possibilities of a 
commitment by the minister in regards to parental involvement, 
but many of the parents are still worried whether or not this is 
really, truly a commitment not only in record but in action. Can 
we get a real strong assurance from the minister that indeed 
what he says in regards to parental involvement at the school 
level will be followed up by real action. Can we get the minister 
to make a commitment to the action on the issues that I raised 
earlier on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, yes. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I will now move on to another one of the major 
issues that parents have brought to the North, and maybe 
provide you with a little bit of a historical background on that 
— and that’s the area of the importance of language. And for 
the record I will read in what I hear a lot of the parents saying 
and I’ll say so in Cree, with due respect to all the languages in 
the provinces.  
 
I’ll say a few words in Cree and also have it in written form. 
I’ve done it in using the alphabet system of writing, you on the 
Cree language, you know for our record, so that it becomes not 
only a record in an oral view, but in a written view as well. So 
I’d like to read the following comments that are usually made 
by parents. 
 
Most of the time I hear parents referring to the language 
question in these terms. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree. The following is a 
transcript provided by the member. 
 
Meechet asuy nichuwasimisinanuk uti wuneetawuk 
otuyumihiniwaw. Noote wapumananuk weestuwaw tu 
guskeetachik oogomiwawu usichi omosoomiwawu. Egosi unisk 
pogo kuwes tu gee si gistenimewuk ketehiyu. 
 
Nuwuch unisk minwasin neesuyek apoo nistuyek awinu tu isi 
uyumit. Pogo mahu ochituw tu gisteneetak unisiniw 
otuyumihin.) 
 
And in translation, Mr. Minister, what many people will say is 
that many of our children are starting to lose their own 
language. We would like to see them to be . . . We would like to 
see our children to be able to speak to their own, to their own 
grandmothers and grandfathers, 

because this is the only way that they will learn to respect them 
in the future. It is always best to be able to speak two or three 
languages, but first a person must learn to respect their own 
language. 
 
So when I present the issue of language development, I present 
it in terms of real experience. I remember the university 
community when they introduced Cree language at the 
university in 1970, and I had the opportunity of teaching Cree 
language at the university in 1971. So it’s been well accepted at 
the university levels. 
 
At the elementary and high school level, we have seen Cree 
language development introduced by the former government in 
1973-74 period, and the Cree language development was 
brought into the North. I also became involved with the five 
communities where Cree language was taught, and these 
communities included La Ronge, Beauval, Weyakwin, Sandy 
Bay, and Deschambault. A lot of the other band school systems 
at that point of time in history were getting Cree language being 
taught in the schools, and many of the people knew that they 
were losing their language. 
 
So the issue became a very strong issue. There was even a 
Saskatchewan Indian language instruction association in the 
early ’70s that was formed to be, more or less, a voice so that 
governments would hear of the funding requirements to help, 
not only to protect but also to promote, the Indian languages of 
the province. And when I looked at that in the more modern, we 
take a jump to the future and what the parents are saying is that 
we have lost a lot of these programs because due to the 
cut-backs in government the boards have been forced to cut 
away some of the programs. 
 
And one of the programs that has fallen, particularly in La 
Ronge where this issue has been raised, you know, since the 
early ’70s, is the need for Cree language development. A lot of 
people are saying it’s very commendable to have French 
language taught in La Ronge, and that’s very good for the 
department, and very good for the person and the children who 
are able to learn French in the school system in La Ronge. But 
what the people are saying at the same time is that we would 
like to see our own language, which is Cree, and also Dene in 
northern Saskatchewan, being taught in the schools. And there 
was money for a Cree language consultant before, you know, 
the cut-backs, and also that Dene language consultant. But these 
positions have slowly gone away with the cut-backs in 
education. 
 
And we would like to, I suppose, hear from the minister, in light 
of the fact that the minister has now put in a position for 
language development — that there is indeed now going to be a 
person hired for languages — what degree of commitment he 
has to the Indian languages programs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Minister, what commitment do you have 
in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to teaching of Indian 
languages, we are very much of the view that it has a place. I 
mean, I think one would attach the caveats of where normal . . . 
where numbers warrant it, etc., etc. And indeed departmental 
officials have been quite busy 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1598 
 

in this area, with others in the educational community, to the 
point where, although it’s not yet a final version, we have a 
draft report entitled, “Rationale and Recommendation for the 
Teaching of Indian Languages in Saskatchewan Schools,” and 
hopefully that will become a final report shortly. 
 
The issues, as we see them, are the need for programs and 
teacher training and materials development, the special needs in 
the North. The need for special start-up I think would be an 
issue, implementation and maintenance grants, those kinds of 
things; I suppose even some guidance and direction for local 
school boards in terms of helping them with policy 
development and implementations. 
 
If I was to, as well, give a bit of an overview as to where we’re 
at, if you like, development work to date includes the fact that 
we are up to the point where we’ve got a draft report on it. A 
survey and needs assessment was done a couple of years ago, I 
guess now. 
 
We’ve contracted a person to help to adapt the curriculum that 
was, I think, originally developed by Alberta Education. We 
hope to have a limited pilot in grades 1 to 3 for the next school 
year and a wider pilot by ’89-90. And as well, we’ve advertised 
for position in Indian languages starting in September, and we 
have contacts with the various agencies and people involved in 
English-Indian language development. 
 
So I think the framework is there — indeed more than the 
framework; there’s a fair amount of work been done. I think as 
soon as this, as the “Rationale and Recommendations for the 
Teaching of Indian Languages in Saskatchewan Schools” is into 
a final report form, my sense is that it would become a public 
document. 
 
So I think substantive headway is there and it’s because the 
issue is the legitimate one. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the different ways of teaching, 
there is teaching of languages as subject matter where you teach 
it, you know, either as Cree language or Dene language for 
maybe, you know, a certain part of the day. 
 
There are other more core-oriented approaches where you use it 
as a language of instruction, you know, right to the areas where 
you have immersion at the younger grade levels. 
 
So you see — and a lot of this has been experienced by let’s 
say, other heritage languages in the province and most 
particularly in the area of French language instruction and 
French language immersion in the province — do you see a 
similar sort of commitment by yourself to move in this 
direction, into the future to not only look at Cree as a language, 
but also as a language of instruction and possibly going into the 
immersion road as the time goes along? Do you see that in the 
same light as you see other heritage languages in the province, 
Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t know as I can maybe go as far 
tonight as the hon. member would like. What I can say, and 
what has been decided to date if you like, is it would be our 
view that Indian languages have a legitimate place in the school 
system. I think that has everything to do with the confidence 
and the self-esteem and the pride of the individual, etc., etc. 
 
Of course the question that begs is, you know, this kind of core 
programming, or immersion programming, or second language 
programming — that kind of thing — that is yet to be decides. 
And of course is part and parcel why we have the report that’s 
being put together and I suspect there, you know, it may well be 
something that one would want a feedback on as well. But the 
commitment is there, if you like, as far as the legitimacy of 
Indian languages in the school system. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Is the report that you talk about then going to 
cover the different modes that I raised in regards to, you know, 
the teaching of the language, the core approach and also the 
immersion approach? Are these also going to be covered in the 
report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In so far as that it’s in a draft state yet, 
I think it to some greater or lesser degree covers the kinds of 
dimensions that you raise. And unless there was some 
substantial change between draft and report, the final report 
stage, I would think it would address some of these questions, 
yes. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When you’re in a developmental stage, as I see, 
you know, talking about the report that’s going to be coming 
up, there’s also the next phase where you’ll be looking ahead as 
to looking at mechanisms to make sure that there is not only a 
teacher involvement but parental involvement, as well as 
various other involvement processes. So you see yourselves 
making a commitment to provide resources for meetings and 
also for conferences in the future in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the answer I would give 
relative to parental involvement is no different than what I had 
talked about this afternoon. I feel very strongly that parents — 
Indian, northern, southern, eastern, western, you name it, 
wherever in the province — ought to be involved, and quite 
frankly, obviously most parents do want to be involved, and it 
would be no different on this than on any other issue. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — My question . . . I recognize already, you know, 
you made a commitment in regards to the issue of parental 
involvement. My question was more in regards to a 
commitment on the mechanism of action such as, you know, 
supporting the idea of a meeting and supporting even the idea of 
a conference in that area. And because conferences become 
very important during developmental phases of bringing people 
together and so on, do you foresee a commitment in the area of 
getting a conference in the future for Indian languages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The suggestion that you make about 
maybe somewhere down the road convening a conference or 
something like that, just at first blush when I hear it, strikes me 
as a suggestion that might have some . . . a suggestion that 
might have some . . . If I could just get 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1599 
 

by the hon. member from Regina Centre there. It’s a suggestion 
that, I think, has some merit and I’d be prepared to give that 
consideration in the future. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I guess the reason why I asked that particular 
question was that this year there was an Indian languages 
conference with a request for funding from the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indians language program which does have an 
effect, you know, on the provincial schools in the sense that a 
lot of their resources that are developed through there are 
reutilized, you know, by us in the department. 
 
There is substantive amounts of work. You mentioned, you 
know, the Alberta group, but there’s already been substantive 
amounts of work done in dictionaries and in lesson plans and so 
on at the La Ronge Cree language program, and that in fact we 
already have resources there that can be brought together in a 
conference location. 
 
And what I was looking for, you know, was precisely the 
mechanism to bring these people together for that commitment. 
But I think I can gather from your comment that you do 
support, you know, the idea of bringing the people together in 
the future to make sure that this is indeed not only one that 
looks good on paper, but it in fact is and can be carried through 
on an implementation phase which actually involves people at 
the parental level and also at the teacher end of the scale. So I’ll 
take your previous answer as commitment on that. So if you 
don’t say otherwise, I will proceed to the next level of 
questioning. 
 
The other aspect that’s very important for a lot of teachers is the 
issue of drop-outs. It’s a really strong issue, and part of it can be 
addressed by a bit of curriculum change and that needed 
curriculum change for it and the change in programming. Part 
of it can be addressed by instructional practice and instructional 
methodology at the school level. And part of it can be addressed 
also by looking at a more intensive type university training 
program in counselling, in direct reference to educational 
counselling at the school level, which looks a the aspect not 
only of regular counselling in general. Because what we are 
starting to find out is that although we have regular counselling 
in some of the Northern Lights northern schools, it does not 
seem . . . while it does have certain positive effect to certain 
groups of students, in general the drop-out rate is still high. 
 
In many cases what it seems to be missing in the approach is 
not only the fact that there is not a deliberate lack of 
consideration for the environment surrounding the child, but it 
is too individual-oriented in regards to the academic and career 
counselling aspect of it. And one of the new trends in 
counselling is to consider both the socio-cultural variables 
involved in counselling and the existing counselling programs. 
While some of the individual teachers attempt to try and tackle 
that problem, you still require a larger scale developmental 
approach to it, such as in the case of a teacher training program. 
 
We mentioned NORTEP (northern teacher education program) 
teacher education. You know that’s already well established in 
dealing with a lot of the regular core 

curriculum items. But one of the aspects that I see is a 
possibility of shifting, you know, a counselling program. We 
know we had a teacher aid training program before we shifted 
to a teacher training program of a general nature, with 
specializations in a couple of areas. Now we’re seeing the need 
for greater specialization in other areas such as counselling. 
 
Do you foresee yourself making a commitment in that area to 
see that type of idea where you have counselling, not only of 
the general career and academic oriented counselling studies — 
a requirement in a school — but also the socio-cultural aspects 
of counselling to be integrated in along with your career and 
academic counselling aspects? Do you see that as an important 
development? And, if so, what is your commitment in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — This day, as to relates to this whole 
question of counselling, the Northern Lights school board and 
the Northlands Career College have a joint program under way 
to train counsellors, and the funding — just by way of 
background, as I understand at least — for the Northern Lights 
side is the educational development fund, and our education 
outreach fund is using their . . . There’s some money from that 
fund being used on the Northlands Career College side. 
 
And as I’m advised, in fact, in this program, the dimension that 
you talked about, the recognition of the socio-cultural 
dimension is recognized or is inherent in that programming.  
 
(1930) 
 
So I guess not only do we agree with that as being at least part 
of this but indeed in an indirect sense we would be prepared to 
fund it, i.e., through the EDF on the one hand — albeit that’s 
the school board’s call — and as well the education outreach 
fund we’ve allocated to some money for that through the 
Northlands Career College. 
 
I think what I hear and what I’m advised is that I think there’s 
some significant sort of headway being made there. You know, 
have we got lots, you know, is there lots of . . . is it a big task? 
Yes, maybe it is. But I think what I hear is encouraging, and I 
presume you would see it the same way. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Could you get me then a bit more detail on the 
program in regards to how it is accredited? Is it accredited 
through a technical institute? Is it accredited through the 
university? And if so, what levels of accreditation does it have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s a two-year program. The second 
year of which would be 60 per cent accredited by University of 
Regina and the other 40 per cent would be, the accreditation 
would be because it’s delivered by the Northlands Career 
College. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — While I do agree with you that’s important in 
terms of a developmental context, you know, of moving 
something from really nothing in the area of training to 
something of a development, it does present a bit of a problem 
in terms of accreditation. 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1600 
 

If the course is only 60 per cent acceptable, you know, to the 
university level, and that it would be hoped that it would be 100 
per cent accreditable to the university level, because although 
there would be still that 40 per cent input in terms of training by 
the student, they would not be accredited if they went back to a 
full educational counselling program at the university level. 
And that, in fact, while a lot of that would not go all to waste, 
that it would be still important to try and figure out not only a 
strong, solid two-year university program, but that in the long 
run any accreditation system in education requires basically 
four years university, and that there should be a move to a 
four-year educational program, university accredited. 
 
What is your position in that regard to getting a more four-year 
program of university accredited training on counselling in 
northern Saskatchewan? Do you see the existing program as 
only a developmental phase to move into this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The context I would put this in would 
be . . . We would like to see this counselling and the training of 
the counsellors and the individuals themselves who undertake 
this get a good solid foundation underneath them, that is to say 
two years. That doesn’t mean to say, of course, that some 
individuals or all of the individuals, if they so wish, couldn’t 
carry on and do a year or two more, or whatever, and lead up to 
a degree. But we feel strongly enough about it that we are 
prepared to put some money in, whether it be through the 
education outreach fund or elsewhere, to at least provide that 
solid foundation I think one can establish over the first two 
years. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I think the experience of training throughout 
the province is that while two years may have been a foundation 
for people working in the technical institute level, the school 
system, the elementary and high school system, really does not 
recognize to a great extent, you know, two-year training 
programs. They only do it in special situations and a special 
circumstance situation that the regular route of accreditation is 
now, you know, at the four-year level. 
 
 All I’m asking the minister is whether or not he is committed to 
the idea of moving more towards a four-year training program 
as time progresses because that’s where the real situation of 
where accreditation lies because a person with less than the 
proper accreditations and the proper credentials are looked 
down upon in a natural work situation. And these types of 
situations that we’re involved in, therefore, are looked upon 
more as a developmental step rather than as a final step and as a 
final model. I would like to hear the minister, you know, speak 
in more precise terms of what he feels about a four-year 
program which is a proper level of accreditation at elementary 
and high school levels. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yeah, I would see, you know, a full 
accreditation, if you like, of degree status or that kind of 
accreditation, I would see that as ultimately a goal. As I said 
earlier, we want to be fairly proactive in this to the point where 
we’re prepared to be . . . help fund it and get it on that solid 
foundation. But obviously, I think from the 

individual’s standpoint and for what it can mean for the native 
community, it would make good sense to, as it does in any 
training situation, have the full credentials, if you like. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay, in the area of . . . I’d like to direct a 
couple of questions in the area of curriculum, curriculum and 
career development. Of course with the Directions and with 
core curriculum, there was a way to deal with curriculum 
development especially with the Indian-Metis people and 
especially in regards to the North on an approach where we 
intervene into the regular process of curriculum development so 
Indian-Metis curriculum goes in at core curriculum levels and 
not only as a specialized subject of instruction. And there’s the 
old approach where we looked at curriculum development for 
Indian-Metis people only as, you know, a native studies class, 
very important in and of itself, and also Indian languages and so 
on. 
 
But there needs to be a recognition, and it was recognized, you 
know, with the former minister’s approval of the IMCAC 
(Indian and Metis curriculum advisory committee) report, that 
there was a more of an integrated approach to the core 
curriculum development, but at the same time to combine the 
specialized approach. 
 
I would like to hear from you now as a minister and in looking 
back at the IMCAC report, whether or not your commitment is 
both at the specialized and core curriculum development on 
both Indian and Metis people and on northern education as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the short answer, I think, would 
be yes. Your question is: are we following up on the 
recommendations out of Directions, the five-year action plan? 
And I think I talked a little bit this afternoon about what had 
been done there relative to curriculum development, teams 
being established, and a community education branch. And 
work is proceeding in social studies, language arts, health, 
native studies, arts education, science, and teacher in-service; 
and we have a number of Indian and Metis people have been 
named to several committees as this process continues and a 
number of developers working on curriculum development. 
 
So, I mean, I guess it’s a degree thing as to whether we are or 
not, but certainly it’s . . . the action plan is in place and we’re 
acting on it. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay, so I take it that there is a commitment 
there for not only a specialized approach but also for the 
involvement of Indian and Metis people, and also people from 
the North in regards to the core curriculum development. And I 
take that to mean, not only in terms of production, but also at 
any advisory committee level or any other developmental 
committee level, that the minister may time to time look upon. 
So I take that to mean that.  
 
The other aspect that probably a lot of people have raised is the 
level of funding, the degree of materials. There’s been quite a 
proliferation of knowledge in general on society in general, 
whether it’s in science or whether it’s 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1601 
 

in the social sciences areas and so on. And when you look at the 
special situation especially in the North, you also recognize 
there’s been developments in mining and developments in 
forestry and developments in wild rice. There’s been 
developments in new methods of trapping; there’s been new 
developments in this and that aspect in the North. And a lot of 
that new development, from time to time, is only brought in a 
bit in adult education and a little bit in elementary education 
and a little bit in the middle years, but really not a thorough 
education approach. 
 
We looked at the early ’70s where we provided much very 
similar to the EDF funding concept, moneys directly to 
teachers, you know, for curriculum project at the school level, 
and that was a good idea in and of itself. But there was no 
method of bringing back all that material on a centralized level 
to be redeveloped and reviewed and recirculated back. The level 
of staff was far too little to be able to do a proper job on a 
central capacity level even within northern Saskatchewan. And 
part of the reason was a limited aspect resources in regards to 
not only the development of materials but the distribution of 
materials, and not only the distribution of materials but the 
implementation of materials and the whole involvement process 
that that takes. 
 
I know it’s a problem, you know, for the province in general, 
but when you look at the real problem: if curriculum in general 
is not applicable to the South, well it’s even more less 
applicable in the North because of the special situations of 
mining and forestry that you don’t necessarily have in the 
South, and that a lot of the developmental work that is required 
to do the nitty-gritty of curriculum materials development 
simply doesn’t have the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Do you foresee in the future a greater trend to tie in that 
EDF-type system at the local class-room level with a more 
centralized and adequate funding system, let’s say, in northern 
Saskatchewan? Do you see that? Because part of it was already 
starting in before, but I noticed you retired the person who had 
been involved in the process, and the person was gone. And I 
heard the position was now up again and this type of thing, but 
everything was up in the air. I’m just wondering: where is that 
type of approach? Is there any consolidated approach that is 
developing in the North now after all this realignment stuff in 
adult education is behind us? What are you doing to see a more 
consolidated effort in elementary and high school curriculum 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t 
know if there’s anything that I disagree with what you said over 
the last few minutes, and specifically as it relates to one of the 
people working in this area, the fact that they took, I think it 
was early retirement, I’m advised that that position is going to 
be refilled, and in fact I think interviews are going on 
tomorrow. So there will be that continuation and that focus. As 
I said earlier, I think we’re totally on the same wavelength on 
this one. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One of the problems that I see though, Mr. 
Minister, is this: there is a commitment in terms of structure, 
there is commitment in terms of paper, but the 

real key thing is the increase in staff. When you look at, let’s 
say, Indian languages, and we look at our 26 schools in the 
North — just in the North alone — and you have one position. 
To me that’s a very small commitment; it’s only a very basic 
start. You need to do a lot more in regards to curriculum. I 
mean, one person alone . . . I’ve been involved in curriculum 
development; I’ve been involved in teacher ed. It’s just simply 
not feasible to be able to do a large-scale expectation on one 
individual here and there. What type of commitment are you 
willing to make to come out with a greater team approach to 
curriculum development than a fragmented, piecemeal approach 
that appears on the surface? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think I maybe left you with the 
wrong impression. We’re going to fill the position that was 
vacated or became vacant because of the early retirement, but as 
well there is resources for one additional new position. I mean, I 
guess a political perspective on that, if I was to put a political 
twist on it, I could say we’re going to double the number we 
had last year. But, in fact, it’s gone from one to two. 
 
I mean, just to reiterate what I said earlier in the day, that we do 
have about six, I think it is, staff working in the community 
schools branch in the northern division. So I think we are 
making some . . . I’m very happy with what I see happening in 
this area, to be honest with you, and I’m not trying to be naive 
and I know there’s lots of ground to cover here. Whether it’s on 
the post-secondary side or the kindergarten to grade 12 side, I 
sense that there’s a definitive direction here, and we keep taking 
it a step at a time, and I think it’ll result in some pretty positive 
results when one surveys it over a decade or so. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In the last statement the minister said he was 
going to get political by doubling the numbers from one to two. 
Well I would like to suggest to the minister that in terms of 
resources — and I mentioned this before, last week — there is 
. . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Could we have order, please. The 
discussion is interesting but I think the member from 
Cumberland has the floor. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay. In regards to the politics, I would like to 
go to the politics of the lack of resources. I would say, when I 
raised the issue last week, there was a 17 per cent increase in 
the mill rate to the taxpayers in northern Saskatchewan — a 17 
per cent increase. I suggested to the minister that even one 
corporation, like Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation, who made $60 million profit this year — $60 
million. 
 
We knew that about . . . In terms of resource development, 
approximately $700 million comes out of northern 
Saskatchewan. When you look at percentages, in terms of real 
commitment, what you are doing is shifting the responsibility of 
government commitment which used to provide about 60 per 
cent of the resources on educational cost and it’s now down to 
about 35 to 40 per cent, depending on the school area that one 
has to refer to. 
 
And so a greater amount of the load on educational costs is now 
being put on to the taxpayers. What that is doing is 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1602 
 

putting pressure between the taxpayers and their municipalities, 
and also the municipalities against the boards. It’s creating 
friction at the local level because of your lack of funding and 
proper funding levels in education. 
 
I would say that where you should get that money from, 
especially in regards to the North . . . The development in the 
North fluctuates in historical terms. Sometimes we make a great 
amount of money. And my predication is, probably the minerals 
phase is probably going to go up for another two years, but it’s 
probably going to go down in about a three-, four-year period 
because of the problems of over-production. 
 
But how does that affect education? It means that we have not 
been able to access part of that $60 million that could be 
reinvested in the children of northern Saskatchewan so that the 
children could speak with their grandparents in Cree; so that the 
children could have proper scientific curriculum; so that the 
children could have good social studies curriculum that relates 
to the North, not only in terms of mining, not only in terms of 
forestry, but all these things. 
 
And this is the point that I raise with the minister: what, in 
terms of politics, what kind of political pressure are you going 
to put with your colleagues to make sure that the children and 
their educational needs come first over the profit margins of the 
resource corporations in northern Saskatchewan? What can the 
minister say about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I, in so far as our financial 
commitment, if you like, to back up the direction, I like to think 
that we’re on pretty solid ground there as well. And the basis 
for saying that is that, you know, we provided money for the 
task force, we are providing substantial dollars to Northern 
Lights to assist them with responding to the Scharf report and 
the Jack Lloyd recommendations and that initiative. 
 
You know, we’ve put extra people in place to do curriculum 
development. I think . . . you know, and whatever the front, I 
see us taking some pretty significant steps, dollars-wise and, 
you know, with human resources. So I think that the 
commitment is there in every way. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Just a point of that last statement. There’s 
where I would beg to disagree, that I think that the level of 
commitment has to be a lot greater, that indeed one position 
here and there simply isn’t going to resolve the issues that we 
raised today. 
 
You know there is issues of parental and teacher involvement 
that require resources. There is resources required for 
curriculum; there is resources required for building playgrounds 
for the children; there is resources for this and that. There are 
resources there, though, and what you need to do is take a bit of 
strength and courage to be able to say yes to the children and to 
be able to say yes, we will take a bit of maybe 1 or 2 per cent 
from the resource base from northern Saskatchewan and shift it 
back for their educational development. And I think we could 
stand here all night long to debate the point, so maybe I will 
pass it on to my fellow member to ask you, 

you know, a few more questions. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I have some questions 
tonight, Mr. Minister, regarding the Prince Albert Rural School 
Division No. 56. And as you may be aware, that school division 
has been quite actively involved in programs and developing 
programs for special needs students. And in a meeting that my 
colleague from Prince Albert and I had with the board a few 
days ago, it was indicated to us that a lack of funding was 
causing problems in terms of the programs, or the inability to 
deliver the type of programming that they were working on and 
being able to bring forth for the kids in that area. 
 
They indicated, Mr. Minister, that they’ve cut staff — six 
regular and three from the special education class — simply 
because they don’t have the money in order to maintain the 
level of funding required to keep those teachers employed. And 
I would like, Mr. Minister, a response from you in terms of 
how, in light of the fact that this particular school division has 
been laying people off and reducing the number of teachers — 
how does that fit in line with any programming and any future 
you may see for children with special needs in that particular 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well Prince Albert rural is one of the 
school boards in the province that, when the equalization 
formula is applied, come out ahead relative to the global budget 
increase. There was 2 per cent increase for operating grants, so 
it was equally distributed just based on 2 per cent more for 
everyone. They would have got exactly that, 2 per cent more. 
 
But when you apply the equalization formula based on the 
number of pupils and the assessment, whether that goes up and 
down, etc., etc., they in fact ended up with a 3 per cent increase 
which represents a $201,000 increase on a $6.5 million budget. 
Of course, the fact that that went up probably indicates that 
their assessment is relatively stable or slightly down. And that’s 
the case; it’s holding in around six-fifty-nine, seventy-six, sixty 
millions of dollars. So there’s a 3 per cent increase there. 
 
I guess your question is, you know, could they use five, could 
they use 10. I mean, I think I’ve talked often about the fact that, 
you know, in education certainly one could always use more 
money. That doesn’t mean to say that one doesn’t spend the 
money prudently, that we don’t examine carefully how we 
spend the money, as I’m sure that board does. But certainly if 
you look across the piece they’re one of those school boards 
that got an increase, if you like, that was larger than that 
budgeted, larger than the 2 per cent that was budgeted globally. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, numbers are 
numbers, but what I see is the fact that the school board, whom 
you yourself admit are managing their finances quite capably, 
and I certainly have no reason to doubt that there’s wasteful 
spending going on in that school board. But the fact is, the 
simple fact is that there are three instructors, three places that 
used to be there to deliver services to the children with special 
needs in that particular school division, that are no longer there. 
 
I guess what I was asking you is: how, in light of the fact 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1603 
 

that this school division has had to decrease their staffing by 
three people in terms of special needs teachers, I would like to 
know how does that set with your goal — if you do have a goal, 
in fact — of helping these special needs children develop? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I hear what the hon. member is 
saying. I think you acknowledge, as well, what I am saying in 
that there has been an increase relative to the operating grants. 
 
I have no doubt that that board — no matter what decisions that 
they have made on how they spend that money and how they 
administer that money — I have no doubt that those children in 
that school division will receive a top-notch education. 
 
The numbers I don’t have here that might be helpful in the 
discussion is whether enrolments have gone up or down as well, 
because that may explain some of what you have raised. But I 
have no doubt that that local board, given their local autonomy, 
will run a first-rate school system in this next year. I know that 
a year ago when we cut the operating grants globally by 1 per 
cent, boards responded in spades. They said, yes, I guess we do 
have to tighten our belts. You just can’t go to the people 
constantly for more money. They tightened their belts and I 
don’t know of a place in Saskatchewan where education quality 
was jeopardized. They responded, they responded in spades. It 
was a very positive attitude. 
 
In fact what I heard a lot of directors saying, because of the 
budget lateness ultimately, was, you know, just give us the 
number, Mr. Minister, and we’ll make it work. And I think that 
they did make it work and I think school boards will make it 
work again this year. So I fear not for quality of education. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may fear not, but 
I want to tell you that there are a lot of school boards and there 
are a lot of parents and there are a lot of teachers who are 
fearing for what’s happening in terms of the educational system 
in this province. 
 
And you talk about funding. And if we want to talk about 
funding maybe we should be talking about the percentages that 
your government is putting into those local school boards and 
what’s been happening to those percentages. In the P.A. rural in 
’86 it was 67.8 per cent; in ’87, 65.1; and in ’88 down to 63.9 
per cent. And you talk about elected officials having problems 
going back to their taxpayers and to the ratepayers for more 
funding. Well that’s exactly what you’re going to be forcing 
this school division into doing. The local tax burden is 
increasing because you’re cutting back on the provincial 
funding, and you know it. 
 
And this school division, this particular one . . . And we were 
talking about special needs children and the fact that there are 
three less educators in that system than there were. And I asked 
you and I still haven’t got an answer out of you as to how you 
figure that the reduction in the number of staff people serving 
these children is going to enhance their educational 
opportunities. And so 

I’m asking you again, Mr. Minister: how do you feel that’s 
going to enhance the opportunities of children with special 
needs in this school division?  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
suggests that I don’t have a sense of the P.A. rural board an 
what’s happening there. I think I made the statement just a few 
moments ago that the P.A. rural board and other boards across 
Saskatchewan continue to deliver high quality education with 
the resources available to them, whether it be locally raised or 
from the provincial government.  
 
And I would just share with the hon. member a story our of the 
P.A. Daily Herald on March 31, ’88. And I share this with him 
because the hon. member said, well I say the quality was 
maintained, but nobody else is — parents and teachers, etc., etc. 
But what did this story in the P.A. Daily Herald say, Mr. 
Chairman? And I’ll read you one of the . . . I’ll read you a 
quotation. In fact I’ll read you a couple. The fourth paragraph in 
the story says: 
 
Over 65 per cent of revenue came from government grants 
which totalled over $7.5 million while close to $3.5 million was 
generated through property taxes paid by rural supporters. 
 
And it further went on to say, and I quote: 
 
The board of education was well aware of the economy in rural 
Saskatchewan and examined every area of the budget in detail 
in an attempt to limit any increases in taxes to the bare 
minimum without affecting the quality of education of our 
students, he said. 
 
And that’s attributed to the board chairman. 
 
So we have the board chairman saying, yes we know it’s the 
farm economy — the rural economy is not booming. And we’ve 
examined our spending. We think we’ve come up with a budget 
that is sound and indeed will not affect the quality of education 
of our students. So I mean you may say one thing but you may 
say it as well for political purposes. 
 
And that was with a minus 1 per cent decrease in the global 
budget last year, and this year there’s a 3 per cent increase to 
that board specifically, so I’m not saying it’s easy for boards, 
but I’m saying to you that they are responding and they 
continue to deliver high quality education with the funding 
that’s available to all of them whether it come from government 
or come from the local tax base. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I hear your quotes 
from that paper and I will have to agree with you that I think 
that board did attempt to come up with a budget that wouldn’t 
affect the quality of education in that school division. And I 
think they’ve done an admirable job given the fact that your 
government has been consistently squeezing that board and 
others. 
 
I’ll quote the figures back to you again. Your percentage of 
revenue is down from 67.8 per cent in 1986 to 63.9 per cent. 
And I think, clearly, you will understand that if 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1604 
 

that trend continues, that there’s going to come a time when that 
board isn’t going to be able to deliver a budget that isn’t going 
to drastically reduce the quality of education in that area. I think 
they know full well that they can’t keep going to the local 
taxpayers for money as you will have them do through 
cut-backs to the funding to their school division. And that’s the 
long and the short of it, Mr. Minister. 
 
You want to talk about where tax dollars should come from, 
and I’ll tell you where they should come from — not from the 
wage earners in the proportion that you’ve been taking them; 
not from the small-business men in the proportion that you’ve 
been taking them from, but you’re going to have to start looking 
at your friends in the oil companies to share some of the 
revenue. You’re going to have to start looking at the Peter 
Pocklington deals, the tens of millions of dollars that you’ve 
given to them and the hundreds of millions you give to 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, is where you’re going to have to start 
reassessing the role your government is playing in terms of 
directing tax dollars in this province. That’s what you have been 
doing since 1982, and I would suggest to you, because of that 
kind of mismanagement and incompetence, you’re putting 
school boards and local governments in a situation where 
they’ve got to go to the local people and pick their pockets, 
because what you’re doing I abrogating your responsibility as a 
government to generate revenue. And that’s why you see 
decreases from 67.8 per cent to 63.9 per cent in that particular 
school division. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, as well, not only has that 
school board had to cut three places in terms of teachers dealing 
with special ed, they’ve also had to cut six regular staff 
members. So what that tells me is that student-teacher ratio is 
going to increase, which means the quality of education is going 
to go down. And I don’t how else you would explain the end 
result of your cut-backs to the school divisions. 
 
And I would like to as well, Mr. Minister. . . I would like you to 
respond to that. I would like you to respond as to why you’ve 
been throwing the tax burden to the local people and to the 
school boards to collect for you, and I would like to ask you 
why you’re not willing to go to your friends in the oil 
companies and ask them to share. I think, Mr. Minister, you 
have a responsibility to the children of this province to answer 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member has raised two 
points. He’s suggested that we’re squeezing the Prince Albert 
rural board, and the second point he says is that we should be 
going to the oil companies for more revenue. 
 
Well relative to the first point, Mr. Chairman, and I’ve made 
this observation on more that one occasion, what would be the 
indices or the measures that one might use to determine whether 
we’re squeezing — to use the hon. member’s terms — 
squeezing the local jurisdiction? Well if we were, I think the 
first sign of it would be the fact that they’ve had to increase 
their mill rates. If they weren’t getting enough money from us, 
the only other option they would have is to go to their local 
taxpayers and raise the mill rates to generate more revenue. 

Well what do we find, Mr. Chairman, if we look over the last 
three or four or five years — and I’ll put the mill rate on the 
basis of the new formula because it changed between ’85 and 
’86 for this board. In ’83 the mill rate was fifty-six and a half, 
or 113 on the old, but fifty-six and a half, to compare apples to 
apples and oranges to oranges. Did they increase it in ’84 
because of this government squeeze, Mr. Chairman? Well I 
doesn’t look like it. It was the same again in ’84. Well what 
about ’85? Did this big, bad, rotten, Tory government in Regina 
put the clamps to them to such a degree that they had to raise 
the mill rate by a horrendous amount, Mr. Chairman? Well 
guess what? We find in 1985 that the mill rate was fifty-six and 
a half for the third year in a row. 
 
Now we did have an increase in ’86. We did have an increase in 
’86, Mr. Chairman. It went up to 61. But guess what happened 
in ’87, Mr. Chairman? The mill rate went down to 59. Now how 
would the hon. member explain how the mill rate went down if 
they were getting squeezed? I wonder if he could explain that to 
us, Mr. Chairman. I’d be intrigued to hear his explanation of 
that one. That . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You spent the reserve, that’s how.  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Oh, oh, so he says it’s reserves. That 
they drew down on the reserves, Mr. Chairman. Well what did 
the P.A. Daily Herald headline say this spring? What was the 
headline based on the school board reporters . . . or the report of 
the school board meeting? And guess what the headline said, 
Mr. Chairman: “Rural board records surplus despite decrease in 
grants.” 
 
Well here we have now ’83, ’84, ’85, they held the line on the 
mill rate — no increase; an increase in ’86; ’87 the mill rate 
went down. Yes, a jump in ’88 again by the looks of it. But 
even through all of that, even last year when the grant was cut 
by 1 per cent across the entire province, “Rural board records 
surplus despite decrease in grants.”  
 
I raise these points, Mr. Chairman, only to show that the hon. 
member’s arguments are, in fact, fatuous and have no fact and 
basis. But I would also want to add, because it may well be that 
some members on the P.A. board are listening, I wouldn’t want 
to suggest for moment that it’s easy for them in their budgeting, 
because it’s not. And I think they have been very cognizant of 
what it’s like in the rural economy by holding the line three 
years and then decreasing it one year. I’m not trying to suggest 
that it’s easy for then and that they haven’t had to make tough 
decisions. But what I’m saying is, as the chairman of the board 
said, we recognize what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan. 
We’re not going to go back to them and ask more dollars unless 
absolutely necessary, but in so doing, we are also going to 
maintain a quality of education. 
 
I take my hat off to them. And so by whatever measure that you 
would want to use to . . . with you inflated rhetoric, it just 
doesn’t add up when you look at the statistics, Mr. Chairman.  
 
(2015) 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1605 
 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, maybe we should be 
dealing with something a little more tangible than the numbers 
that you concoct. Maybe we should be talking about the school 
buses that they haven’t bought this year that they had replaced 
on a regular basis so that wouldn’t all lump up in one time and 
catch the taxpayers all at once, and some planning that they had 
done, some long-term planning in terms of keeping their fleet of 
school buses in a very up to date and in good condition. And 
maybe we should be talking about the fact that they originally 
planned for seven new buses and they’ve cut that back to four. 
 
And yes, I agree with you that that school board should be 
commended because having to deal with a senior government 
like yours that has been so top heavy with graft and corruption 
and deficit budgeting and deferred taxes — as your Premier 
likes to refer to as a deficit — and the fact that they’re going to 
have to be dealing with that some way down the road. I think 
the fact that this government . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Why was the member on his 
feet?  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I distinctly heard the 
hon. member suggest that this government was engaging in 
graft and corruption, and I think that’s — the loud noise that 
speaks the vacant mind, Mr. Chairman — I think that’s 
unparliamentary in this Chamber, and I would ask for your 
direction on that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I find the point of order not 
well taken because a point of unparliamentary language is 
found when it’s directed directly at a person, not a group. 
Order. Order. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I thank you for your ruling, Mr. 
Chairman. But I want to say to the minister that the kinds of 
thing that they’ve cut back on because of your mismanagement 
— and if you don’t like the terminology I used, let me use 
others: mismanagement, patronage, there are a number of other 
adjectives to describe your particular government — but they’re 
cutting back on maintenance to the buildings, to the school. 
That’s how they’re holding the line, Mr. Minister. 
 
Unlike your government, this government feels, this local 
government feels some responsibility for the taxpayers that it 
represents. And I just want to point out to you, Mr. Minister, 
that there is fear in the educational system for what you’ve been 
doing. 
 
And I would like to mention a well — and I was talking about 
high cost funding for special needs children — I think perhaps 
you might agree with me that the rural school division in Prince 
Albert is in rather a unique situation in that in that particular 
area there are five special placement homes in that region of 
Saskatchewan, and they’re all in that division. 
 
And I think you will agree with me as well that there has been 
some freeze on funding for some categories of special ed 
children. But the influx of special needs children in that area is 
creating an extra burden on this government. And I would ask 
and I would like to know, 

Mr. Minister, if you would be willing to reassess your 
government’s position, have another look at the needs, and I 
would indicate to you, special needs of that particular school 
board, and reassess your funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There is one point, I think, that you 
and I can agree on, and that is relative to special education. We 
do see it as a priority. I personally see it as a priority. There’s 
additional moneys, new moneys in this budget for the issue of 
special education. 
 
But getting back to the Prince Albert board and the issue of 
they’ve had to let go some teachers, I think you raised. So I had 
my officials do some research for me and give me some 
numbers relative to the pupil-teacher ratio there. Because if, as 
you have suggested, that they’ve had to let go a number of 
teachers, then is the pupil-teacher ratio way out of whack 
compared to the rest of the province? And what do we find, and 
this is as of September 30, ’87, Prince Albert Rural School 
Division No. 56 — 16.3 is the pupil-teacher ratio there, which 
is ahead of the provincial average which is at 16.4. So I think 
that board there is obviously pretty much on the mark with their 
decision-making relative to the rest of the province. 
 
So if you’re suggesting somehow there’s going to be class-room 
overcrowding there in a very dramatic and major way relative to 
the rest of the province because some board decision, I would 
suggest you’re wrong. I would suggest maybe that relative to 
this board you’re wrong again. 
 
And I also had the department officials provide me with the 
numbers relative to the surpluses or deficits that that school 
board might have to run once again because of the squeezing 
and this mismanagement that you talked about at the provincial 
government level. You know, the first index I suggest that we 
might use to measure whether we’re off loading our 
responsibilities on to any rural board or any board at all, 
including that one, was well did they have to respond by raising 
taxes locally? That is to say, did the mill rate go up? And what 
we found there when we examined that question was that in 
three of the last five or six years they had either . . . or four of 
the last five or six years, they had either stayed the same or 
gone down. 
  
Now the other question that was raised was, well then all they 
did, you said, was if they had kept the mill rate the same or they 
lowered it, they had to dig into their piggy bank. Well what do 
we find there? Is the piggy bank today smaller or larger than it 
was five or six years ago? Well what do we find if we examine 
that question, Mr. Chairman? Now the member is suggesting 
that they had to go into their piggy bank because we weren’t 
giving them enough money. 
 
Well in 1981 they had a surplus of $82,920; in ’82 it went to 
nearly 150. Yes, in ’83 they ran us a deficit of $57,000; in ’84 
they had a surplus of 125,000; in ’85 a surplus of 89,000; in ’86 
a surplus of 292,000, and in ’87 a surplus of 144,000. 
 
So I ask myself, well compared to ’81-82 when this big, bad, 
rotten, Tory government — at least according to the opposite 
member — took over, their surplus then, or their 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1606 
 

piggy bank, had $82,920 in it. As of ’87, in the year 1987, it had 
144,000. That’s — what? — $42,000 more in the piggy bank. 
So what I would conclude from that, Mr. Chairman, is that they 
haven’t necessarily had to raid the piggy bank. 
 
Yes, they’ve had ups and downs, but generally speaking their 
surplus probably, as a percentage of their budget, has stayed 
relatively stable I would argue. It’s increased in absolute terms 
but in relative terms it may not have — but in relative terms it 
certainly has. I think this board is doing a good job, personally. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you can talk again 
about student, pupil-teacher ratio, and your figures may in fact 
be correct, but as I indicated to you I think you should be 
looking at the Prince Albert rural school division in perhaps a 
different light than you would at a lot of other school divisions 
across this province simply because of the high proportion of 
special needs children in that particular division. And I didn’t 
hear you address that. 
 
And in terms of funding I believe you know full well that your 
government’s share has dropped substantially, not only in that 
particular division but in others throughout this province, and I 
really feel you’re doing a disservice. 
 
I asked you in my last question if you would be willing to have 
another look at the Prince Albert rural school division because 
of its special — and I would suggest probably disproportionate 
number of special ed children, and I didn’t hear an answer. So 
I’ll take my place and I’ll wait for your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the two questions 
relative to the hon. member who said he didn’t hear me address 
the special education question. I said at the outset, in my last 
response, that we view that as a priority. I view it not only as a 
departmental and a government priority, I view it as a personal 
priority. There are some additional funds in this budget to that 
end albeit probably not as much even as I would like to see, but 
it’s a bit of a fresh injection. 
 
Secondly, relative to the funding question. Yes, next year as we 
go through budget deliberations everything will be reviewed 
again. But I think you have to remember when you make the 
sweeping statement about shares dropping, etc., etc., unless the 
story I read was an inaccurate one — which could well be — I 
don’t necessarily trust, unlike the NDP research office I don’t 
necessarily trust everything I read in the newspaper. But you 
have to remember, you know, that if the school board’s share 
goes down it’s based on the equalization formula and it just 
means your assessment went up or your pupil numbers went 
down. 
 
So you can’t have it both ways, because the hon. member the 
other night read into the record the numbers of school boards 
where the provincial grant share went up as opposed to down. 
And it was substantially more went up as opposed to down, so 
you can’t have it both ways on that one. If you’re a richer 
community in terms of your assessment base then you can 
expect to get less from the government. If you’re a community 
that has very little and by way of assessment base you can 
expect to get a larger 

share. 
 
And yes, I would suggest to you that Prince Albert rural 
compared to many school boards across the province with a — I 
think their assessment was around $60 million, is probably 
quite a bit richer than, for example, Northern Lights may be. 
Okay? And I think to be fair, as you would want to be, and to 
give to those based on their ability to raise cash locally, the 
formula reflects that. And unless I hear some major, major 
outcry from the school trustees association to change that 
formula it will remain as is. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
have in my hand some correspondence that refers to the 
Departments of Education and Health considering an extensive 
restructure of the medical laboratory, medical radiological 
technologists’ and certified combined technologists’ programs. 
And I’m wondering if the minister can confirm for us that it is 
the intention of his department and the Department of Health to 
change to the existing training program for laboratory and 
radiological technicians in such a way that there will be a 
one-year moratorium on entrance to the program when this is 
implemented, and that hospitals in Moose Jaw and Prince 
Albert will be dropped from the practicum end of the program, 
because I understand that’s what the recommendation is. So I’d 
like to hear from the minister whether, indeed, these changes 
are being anticipated or planned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To respond simply and directly: no 
moratorium; program is being reviewed; there will be an intake 
of students this September. 
 
Ms. Simard: — So, Mr. Minister, what review is being 
undertaken? Can you tell me who is doing the review and the 
extent of the review? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There is a review team that’s doing 
the review — professionals from health, education, universities, 
the hospitals. How long would the review take? I don’t know as 
I can say without handcuffing the committee; I suppose 90 
days, 120 days, something like that. 
 
Of what I understand of this I think it’s a positive step to be 
reviewing this, and the model I would see almost, at least — 
and I’m not trying to impose my view on the committee, but it 
sounds to me like this is candidate for a situation where you 
may have some common programming for all the professions 
and then have some separate tracks at the end as opposed to all 
being on a separate track from day one. And I think there’s 
some basis for that kind of model, at least in my mind, if you 
look at the dental health sciences, for example. So I, you know, 
that and of course the other overriding goal would be meeting 
the employer requirements. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of merit in reviewing this one, and it may 
even be long overdue. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you talk about the need for 
review. Are you aware that this program, the radiologist 
technology course, was reviewed by the Canadian 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1607 
 

Medical Association on March 7 or 10? And at about the same 
time that the Department of Health and your department was 
announcing that there were severe problems with the program, 
the Canadian Medical Association was giving it its stamp of 
approval and, in effect, stating that it was an excellent program. 
Are you aware of that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t argue with the point that you 
would make nor, I think, the point that the Canadian association 
made in terms of the technical value of the program. The issue 
was one of the organization and arrangement of it, of the 
material, or the pedagogical, if you like, side of it. And that’s 
what this would be addressing. If you like I can give you the 
entire rationale for the proposed curriculum redevelopment. It 
doesn’t fly in the face of . . . Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. 
 
A rejuvenation of curriculum in three programs. Increasing 
student retention — this was a particularly important one 
because of the, as I said earlier, the pedagogical . . . disarray is 
probably a bit too strong a word, but we had a 50 per cent 
attrition rate in these areas. And it seems to me, from your 
standpoint as a critic I would have said, Mr. Minister, aren’t 
you going to do something about a program that has a 50 per 
cent attrition rate? And the answer is, yes we are. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now he’s asking and answering the 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well that’s the kinds of question that 
seem to me are relevant. And so that’s the rationale, or one of 
the rationale for the curriculum redevelopment. 
 
Others would include increasing accessibility to certified 
combined technician training to rural resident candidates with 
transferability to credits towards further upgrading as a 
registered technologist, who I talked about earlier. There’s 
some cost savings and probably, most importantly, improved 
employment opportunity for former graduates relative to 
upgrading and that kind of thing. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the attrition rate, I 
have been advised that this is very common in the first term in 
these programs right across Canada, the 50 per cent attrition 
rate, and that this isn’t a cause of the particular program; that 
this is what happens in these programs across Canada with 
respect to the attrition rate; that the so-called blending of 
practical work and class-room work isn’t going to prevent the 
attrition rate in the manner that you’re suggesting; and that that 
is in effect a blue herring, if you like. This is what I’ve been 
advised and I would like your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I disagree. It 
seems to me that I have a responsibility, or departmental 
officials, the institute, has responsibility in the face of a 50 per 
cent attrition rate to determine what the problem is and to 
review this entire professional area relative to the curriculum to 
get to the bottom of it. And that’s exactly what they’re going to 
do. It may well be that it’s satisfactory for everybody else in the 
country to go along with the 50 percent attrition rate; it’s not 
satisfactory for this government, nor for its 

post-secondary education institutions. I’m happy that they’re 
doing something about it. And I guess that’s where the hon. 
member and I will have to agree to disagree. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the letter of Mr. Babiuk indicates 
perhaps the real reason for the restructuring of this program, 
and that is that as a consequence of the proposed changes the 
students could lose the status of employees within the meaning 
of The Trade Union Act. And therefore there would be a saving 
to the government of some $2 million in that their wages would 
not be paid for in the manner in which it is occurring at this 
point. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that that is probably the real 
reason for your restructuring a program which has been highly 
successful in Canadian standards and which has been approved 
by the Canadian Medical Association, not the attrition and the 
restructuring of an obsolete program or rejuvenation of that 
program as you indicate, when you know full well this program 
has been approved and very recently given very high marks by 
the CMA (Canadian Medical Association). Could you please 
comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think I already did 
comment. I said we don’t disagree with the analysis in so far as 
what the CMA analysis covers. The technical part of this or the 
technical dimension is one issue; but the pedagogical dimension 
is quite another. And as a result of that, or at least because of 
part of that dimension, we have a situation where we have a 50 
per cent attrition rate. I don’t think that’s acceptable. I’d like to 
see us see if we can’t do something about it. To that end, we 
have a review committee of professionals, equally . . . And I 
think some of those professionals are probably constituent 
members of the Canadian Medical Association, for all I know. 
And so why would I argue with the professionals? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Is it true, Mr. Minister, that The Trade Union 
Act will no longer apply to these students? Is that true? Is that 
going to be the end result? Can you tell us one way or another? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t have a report from a review 
committee to know. In fact, I don’t quite frankly understand 
where the member’s coming from relative to trade unions and 
whatever. I’m going to be getting, I suspect, or the institute will 
be having a report relative to this, and take some action based 
on whatever recommendations come out of it. It’s a little tough 
for me to sort of preguess or prejudge or predetermine what 
might be in that report. I gave you my thinking on sort of what I 
think maybe would make sense, based on what I’ve seen 
happen in some other areas of the health sciences. And I also 
prefaced that remark by saying that I didn’t want to handcuff or 
bias the committee, but I thought there was some sense in what 
I heard there and what I’ve seen in some of the other health 
sciences in so far as what might make some sense here. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, quoting from an official of your 
government, as a consequence of the proposed changes, 
students could lose the status of employees within the meaning 
of The Trade Union Act. That, I am advised, amounts to 
approximately a $2 million saving for the government. Is that a 
possible consequence or was 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1608 
 

this official misinformed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well if the official said it could, I 
don’t know as I would disagree with that. But I don’t know 
because we don’t have anything to act on yet. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Obviously, Mr. Minister, that is the end result 
of this restructuring and that’s the underlying purpose. And I’m 
suggesting to you to consider it very carefully because what 
you’re proposing to do is to fiddle around with a program that 
has been very successful in Canadian standards. And you can 
give us your rhetoric about 50 per cent attrition. If we can 
improve the attrition rate, great. I am advised that this is 
something that occurs naturally in these programs. And 
therefore to suggest that you can improve the attrition rate by 
fiddling around with an excellent program, you better be very 
sure, Mr. Minister, that you are going to improve that attrition 
rate before you start meddling around with a successful 
program. And you better be sure that your objectives are 
above-board, Mr. Minister, and that you advise the public of 
this province the real reasons for your playing with a very good 
program. 
 
Now what is going to happen . . . because part of this proposal 
as I understand it is to move the practicum part out of the 
Moose Jaw and Prince Albert hospitals. What is going to 
happen to these hospitals with respect to the need for workers in 
this area if the practicum part is being removed from these 
hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My hesitation in answering is that I 
would be starting to comment . . . when I start to comment on 
practicums and roles of hospitals and the Health department, on 
an area that is probably outside of my jurisdiction, as well, 
perhaps, as outside of my understanding. 
 
Secondly, the point you raised may well be one that’s covered 
by the review. I don’t know as I can say much more than that, 
except that you may well want to pursue that with the Health 
ministry. I’m starting to get into territory that is outside of 
where we come from in Education, which is more the 
pedagogical sort of dimension. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I will be pursuing it with 
the Health minister, but I also think that since your department 
isn’t involved, you should be fully cognizant of all the facts. It’s 
not an excuse to the public of Saskatchewan to say, I don’t 
know anything about it, it’s the Health minister’s job, when 
your officials are making recommendations and making 
decisions with respect to this problem. So I suggest that you do 
inform yourself on these matters so that you can talk 
intelligently about it with the Department of Health. 
 
Now I would like to bring to your attention, Mr. Minister, if you 
will quit chattering and listen to what I have to say, I would like 
to bring to your attention the fact that the hospitals who will be 
losing these workers on the practicum end are concerned. There 
is concern. There’s also concern that if they’re not practising in 
that hospital, they will have to be retrained because hospitals 
tend to train them according to their own procedures that they 
use in the hospital. 

(2045) 
 
So this restructuring of this education program, Mr. Minister, is 
going to cause problems for he hospitals in Saskatchewan as 
well as problems for the workers and students themselves 
inasmuch as you will intend to decertify them, and that it’ll also 
cause problems inasmuch as we have a program here, Mr. 
Minister, where the students are doing amongst the best in 
Canada. The final exams of the Saskatchewan students rank 
amongst the best, if not the best, in Canada. And you’re 
proposing to change this program for who knows what reason. 
The attrition rate reason is not an adequate reason. It is 
something to strive for a better reduced attrition rate, but it’s not 
an adequate reason because I believe you’re not going to be 
able to demonstrate that there is an improvement in this because 
I’ve been advised that this happens in this particular kind of 
program. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I want to bring those problems to your 
attention and I want to suggest that when your committee 
comes in with its recommendation that you consider the 
comments we made here tonight, because they are comments 
that have come from members of the medical profession and 
members who are very concerned about your activity in 
undermining this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I’m just going to 
comment briefly on this as I think I’ve said all that I can say of 
a technical nature in response to the questions. 
 
This is another example, I think, where the NDP still haven’t 
got it around their heads, if you like, that the institute 
programming is now determined and managed and administered 
and run by a new board of governors or a board of directors for 
the Saskatchewan . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Provisional board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, it’s not provisional. There is a 
board of directors for the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Sciences and Technology. There’ll be an announcement on that 
very shortly. 
 
And, you know, the questions that they raise, relative to how a 
program should be structured, with me, you know, they would 
never think to raise relative to a university. They haven’t 
figured out yet that the institute is no longer a part of the 
Department of Education. 
 
And I say this sincerely for the hon. member’s information 
because that is a significant change that we made to 
post-secondary education in this province last year in this very 
House with two Acts: The Regional Colleges Act and An Act 
for the formation of the Saskatchewan Institution of Applied 
Science and Technology. 
 
Now why would the hon. member keep asking me to interfere 
in their autonomy? Yes, over the last year there’s been an 
interim governing council with some departmental people and 
some outside people, but that is part of the past. The world is 
changing and so must we. 
 
If I took all of our advice and this government took all of our 
advice from the NDP, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we’d  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1609 
 

never do anything. Every change that we propose, they’re 
against them all. They’re against them all. They’re against them 
all! 
 
You see, Mr. Deputy Chairman, why I raise this is this party 
used to be known as a progressive party. The NDP were always 
known as a progressive kind of a small “p” party. Now they are 
an establishment party — don’t change anything, you know, we 
want the department to continue to run the institutes; don’t let 
us have a board of directors there, but last year they were 
arguing we should have. 
 
These have become, on the Saskatchewan horizon, on the 
Saskatchewan landscape, the change resisters. And that member 
from Saskatoon Lakeview is a prime example — whatever you 
do, don’t change anything. 
 
I can’t believe this. The world is changing and so must we. And 
I’ve said before and I say it again in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chairman, we’re going to bring the NDP Party — 
those little band of socialists over there — we are going to bring 
them into the 21st century whether they want to come or not. It 
may well be that they’ll come in kicking and screaming, but 
we’re going to bring them into the 21st century whether they 
like it or not, Mr. Chairman, and I know they’ll enjoy the ride 
once they get a chance to see how good it is. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the correspondence I have 
talking about restructuring this program and outlining in detail 
how it’s going to be changed comes from the Department of 
Health and starts out with the words: 
 

The departments of Education and Health are considering 
an extensive restructuring of the medical laboratory 
program (so forth). 

 
So you’ve got your foot right in it, Mr. Minister. You’re dealing 
with it, Mr. Minister, and to try to hide behind various cloaks of 
secrecy is just ridiculous. This letter was written, Mr. Minister, 
without any consultation with the people, with the people 
involved in the present program. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you advise me whether this new 
committee that has been restructured will be consulting or have 
on the committee people from the hospitals that are involved, 
people from the program, who sit on the program? Can you 
assure for me that these people are on this committee, or if not 
on the committee, have been consulted, because they weren’t 
consulted before that proposal was made from the departments 
of Health ad Education? And I know that there was some 
concern about that, and so I’m glad that you struck a committee 
as a result of that concern, but I want to be assured by you that 
these people are represented on that committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question, 
Mr. Minister, relates to a document called Poverty Profile 1988, 
a report by the National Council on Welfare, April of 1988, and 
it deals with the large number of people who now live in 
poverty in the province of Saskatchewan, and also reflected in 
the large number of students who live in families that try to 
exist below the 

poverty line. And I want to relate it to the students who are 
attending school in much of the inner city of Saskatoon and 
Regina particularly, but it’s not related only to those areas. But 
in this regard, Mr. Minister, you will know that 25.7 per cent of 
the students in the province of Saskatchewan live below the 
poverty line with all that that implies. You will also know that 
in many cases the extreme of this situation is that many students 
are forced to go to school without proper nutrition and in fact 
go to school hungry. 
 
I’m wondering what the policy of the government is in that 
regard. If a school board wants to sponsor a lunch program or a 
hot meal program or some food for children in the school, what 
is the policy of the government, your Conservative government, 
when it comes to dealing with that if there was a request made 
by a school board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there have 
been some preliminary discussions between Social Services and 
Regina school board officials about ways to improve the 
situation using existing services, as I say, things like procedures 
to identify hungry children in schools and refer them to social 
workers. The nutrition component of the community schools 
programs involves providing students with daily snacks and 
nutrition education. And by way of education, or by way of 
background, Saskatchewan Education provides special support 
for 16 community schools in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 
Albert. Many of these schools, eight to be exact, run a nutrition 
program for students and in ’86-87 approximately $200,000 
was allocated to community schools for nutrition programs. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What is the process that a school board or 
the people who are concerned about getting a program going in 
a school, what would be the process that would take place? 
Would the apply to the department for funding? Would it be put 
forward in the budget when it was being prepared? What is the 
process that would have to take place?  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t speak at this point in time what 
process might be forthcoming as a result of the preliminary 
discussions I talked about between Social Services and school 
board officials an ourselves. So I can’t comment on what future 
processes might be, but currently if you’re one of the 16 
community schools, well that’s an established program; if 
you’re not, than other than that, it would be sort of how you 
allocate your operating funds. If they so chose to do something 
in that area or something more in that area, it would be out of 
the general operating budget. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I understood from your first answer 
that there was special funding from the department for 
nutritional programs. I guess what I’m asking you is: if another 
school wanted to start such a program, how would they go 
about accessing money, not from the board, but how would they 
get extra money from the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s as I said, the 16 community 
schools in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert — that’s 
special funding, if you like, a separate program. Okay? If you’re 
one of the several other however many hundreds 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1610 
 

of schools in Saskatchewan in any given school board area, then 
they would use dollars out of their regular budget. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So then there isn’t a meaningful program 
where a school who wanted to serve up such a lunch program or 
breakfast program could tomorrow start one up with funding 
coming from the Department of Education. Is that what you’re 
telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well yes, but I also said that I 
couldn’t comment on . . . I mean, we talk about tomorrow. I 
can’t talk about tomorrow two weeks or three weeks or six 
months down the road, because at this point in time, I don’t 
know what will become of these discussions that are ongoing 
and set up as a result of this joint review process. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, we know that the welfare 
reform that has taken place, or so-called welfare reform that 
was started under the previous minister, Mr. Dirks and is 
continuing on under the present Minister of Social Services, has 
led in part to the problems that we’re now seeing of hungry 
children going to school. And, of course, I don’t hold you 
responsible nor am I trying to do the estimates of Social 
Services here, but I think there is a distinct connection between 
the problem and the cut-backs in welfare programs. And I think 
you have admitted this now too, that you’re having to go the 
Minister of Social Services to see whether or not we can get 
some sort of a program that will try to re-establish the social net 
that has been ripped apart by the Minister of Social Services. 
 
And it seems to me that this community that you’re now 
working with, that is talking about food programs I the schools, 
may want to look at the possibility of suggesting to the Minister 
of Social Services that proper funding and proper welfare 
payments be made to those people who are in need, so that the 
family can be kept intact and that the school not take over the 
role of the parents, and that is providing food for the children. It 
just seems to me that we’re going in the wrong direction. Here 
we have a Minister of Social Services who continues to cut 
back on the food allowance or doesn’t increase the food 
allowance in order that families can feed their children, and the 
Department of Education is now being called on to provide 
lunches and food programs in the school. 
 
And I wonder if you could outline for me the structure of this 
committee that is now dealing with this disastrous problem that 
we’re seeing in the inner core of the cities, and that is poverty; 
and then directly related to it, hungry children going to school. 
 
There are many people in the province who simply can’t believe 
that a province where we have a surplus of food . . . Every kind 
of food imaginable, we have a surplus of in this province. And 
yet we have a government that is so heartless that we have 25 
per cent of the children in this province living below the 
poverty line and many of them going to school hungry. 
 
And I want to know about this committee that you have struck 
to deal with the Minister of Social Services. Who is on that 
committee? What is the mandate? And is one of 

the suggestions that you reject the welfare reform program of 
the previous minister, Mr. Dirks, and the present minister, the 
member for Melville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to your last question, the 
answer would clearly be no. Rejecting welfare reform that’s 
seen by every rational, reasonable person who’s prepared to 
give it an honest look as a very sensible policy, a very positive 
one for individuals . . . I know that the socialist approach is to 
try and keep people subservient to the state. That is not our 
approach. I have talked about that before. 
 
(2100) 
 
I recall well the day that Par Industries, with the contract 
relative to clearing the brush north of Prince Albert . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You were in this legislature 
pooh-poohing it in typical socialist fashion, and yet I watched 
the television that same night, albeit it’s not my portfolio, the 
very positive commentary of the individuals who for the first 
time maybe in their lives were able to have some on-the-job 
training, a chance for some gainful employment. They were 
feeling good about themselves, and you continue to pooh-pooh 
it. And that’s your right; and it doesn’t surprise me because I 
understand, you know, the ideological position that you come 
from and the fact that you have these ideological blinkers on. 
 
So, you know, to mix this up with welfare reform and that the 
committee is going to instruct the Minister of Social Services to 
ban that course, that’s, you know, that’s political nonsense that 
you’re raising here. And you know it; and I know it; and I 
suspect the people — if anybody’s watching tonight — would 
also know that. 
 
So that’s not even reasonable to suggest that that would be part 
of the committee’s mandate. It’s simply Social Services, along 
with the school board officials, ourselves, to have some 
discussions on this whole question. I have to admit, as recently 
as this week, school trustees have raised this issue with me in a 
sense that they, too, have the same feelings as you expressed in 
the earlier part of your statement, which maybe had some sense 
to it — that it, you know, it doesn’t seem to make sense in 
today’s society where we have all this food, that we would have 
hungry children. The fact of the matter is we do. The issue 
becomes one of, where does the responsibility lie? There is 
some school boards that would . . . There is some trepidation, I 
would honestly have to say, amongst school boards, relative to 
the whole responsibility question. And it’s not as though they 
are hard-hearted about this either. They are as compassionate as 
anyone, but they do have some trepidation. I say that sincerely. 
They do raise that with me. 
 
And having said all of that, just to make sure the record is 
correct for anyone watching, you know, the other point that’s 
relevant in all of this, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is that . . . And I 
don’t pretend to have the exact numbers because we’re getting 
into examination of Social Services estimates, but as I recall it I 
think Saskatchewan has the . . . What is it, the second highest 
rates in the country? So if you’re asking me if we’re committed 
to helping those who do need it, the answer is yes. 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1611 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I was asking you who was on the 
committee and what the mandate of the committee was. You 
conveniently avoided answering that question, but I think its 
fair to say that there are many people not only in the New 
Democratic Party caucus and in the New Democratic Party but 
about 77 per cent of the people in Elphinstone agree with us, 
when we talk about the disaster that you people have caused in 
the lives of families in the inner core of the city. 
 
And I think it’s difficult to believe a minister who would stand 
up and have us believe that there’s no connection between 
cut-backs in welfare in the core of urban cities and the fact that 
we have hungry children going to school and that that’s 
becoming a problem. Now you can make fun of it all you want, 
Mr. Minister, but I’ll tell you: if you’ve been out canvassing in 
the Elphinstone constituency, and I think you were, you would 
not be laughing today and talking about the issue in such a 
flippant manner and in a jocular way talk about the issue as if it 
didn’t exist. But I want to say to you that it’s very clear to the 
people — who are wiser than you, sir — that the welfare reform 
issue has everything to do with hungry children in the schools; 
it has everything to do with it. 
 
The simple fact is, is that there’s families in the inner core of 
cities who can’t afford to feed their children. I only try to make 
the point that it seems to me that rather than continue to cut 
back in that area and make families dependent on the school 
board to provide food for their children, that we look at a better 
way. The better way — it’s not a perfect way — would be to 
allow food increases in the welfare departments so that school 
boards didn’t have to become part of the welfare system. That’s 
the point I’m making. Because I think when you take that kind 
of independence away from families where they’re able to 
provide for their . . . food for their children, you also destroy the 
family. 
 
And I’m saying to you, quite seriously, that you as the Minister 
of Education, rather than going to the treasury board for money 
for hot food programs in the school, should be assisting the 
Minister of Social Services because that’s where many of this 
25 per cent of the children who live below the poverty line fall 
into, fall into the welfare system; that we wouldn’t be gutting 
the welfare program and moving that money over to the 
Department of Education. Because it seems to me a 
wrong-headed move. And that’s why school boards are reticent 
and hesitant to become involved in much the same way that 
many people are reticent to become involved in food banks; 
because many of us would rather not that there be food banks in 
this province. 
 
And we’ve gone over this before, but the fastest growing 
industry in this province at the present time is the demand for 
food in the schools and the food banks. In the ’30s they were 
called soup lines and soup kitchens. And you people have a lot 
to do with creating them. All I’m asking is, what is the mandate 
of the committee; what are the proposals that you’re putting 
forward; and can you give us a report on when you expect a 
report from that committee to be delivered to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The Health, Social Services, 
Education minister, we’re involved in the ministerial 

level. There’s three ADMs at the committee level, at the 
officials’ level that are involved in it. As well, as I said, there 
has been discussion with school board officials. I take what you 
have said under consideration and will have to see what comes 
of these discussions. Relative to the mandate, probably fairly 
wide ranging, and I suppose the, you know, children at risk, I 
suppose, would probably encompass virtually all of the issues 
that they might, at one time or another, look at. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could as 
well outline your own personal view of the situation. Are you in 
favour of expanding the food program in the schools at this 
time? Is that going to be the recommendation? What are the 
proposals that you, as minister in charge of the areas, are going 
to be taking to that committee for approval, or 
recommendations that you’ll be taking there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’m not going to espouse a 
personal view. Obviously, I’ll have my input at the ministerial 
level. 
 
I think what our policy is has been relatively clear in many of 
these areas, at least in terms of the fact that we want to address 
some of these issues to a greater degree. I could think 
specifically like: when we talk about children at risk, talk about 
the whole question of drug and alcohol abuse amongst our 
young people, our young children, just to mention but one 
category where I think it’s safe to say we have probably been, 
our government has been showing a leadership role across 
Canada on. And that’s only but one area, as I mentioned, in 
terms of this entire category of children at risk. 
 
And in so far as what may come of these discussions, we’ll 
have to wait until that time. And any announcements will be 
made in due course, if you like, and I’ll give you my feelings 
relative to the government position at that time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, I was wondering on 
the time line, too. You say, in due course, but can you give us 
any indication when we can expect some decision coming out 
of this committee as it would relate to poverty and children 
going to school hungry. Is there any time line that you have set 
for your department to come forward with some 
recommendations? As we approach now next year’s budget and 
budget development, which usually takes place in the fall of the 
year, have you got some time lines when you’ll be coming 
forward with a policy that would help deal with the issue of 
poverty and hunger in the schools? Because as you will know, 
as Minister of Education, that it’s very, very difficult to teach 
children, to keep their attention and to get the most of children, 
if they come to school and they are facing hunger as the first 
item on their agenda. 
 
And I say again that it’s very much a new phenomenon in 
Saskatchewan. It’s not one that we have seen since the 1930s. I 
might add, the last time we had a Conservative government in 
Ottawa and Saskatchewan back in 1929 to 1935, the last time 
we had a right-wing government in Ottawa and a right-wing 
government in Saskatchewan, we had similar circumstances. 
There are many people who wonder if there isn’t more than a 
passing coincidence that every time that happens in this 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1612 
 

province, we have the same kind of situations in our schools 
with children going hungry. 
 
And I’m not suggesting that’s the only reason, but I think some 
of the wrong-minded things that you people do when it comes 
to cutting taxes for corporations . . . And we saw it again in this 
budget, where we saw corporate taxes cut by 2 per cent and the 
flat tax for individuals going up by 25 per cent, going from 1.5 
per cent to 2 per cent. And some of these people who are below 
the poverty line, believe it or not, are expected to pay that 
increase in the flat tax while corporations have a reduction. 
 
And I say as well, other things that impact on food in the home 
in the inner city is the drug plan and the changes and the 
elimination of what was a world-class drug plan in this 
province. People who are below the poverty line are making 
decisions on whether to buy very much needed antibiotics or 
drugs for their children to put food on the table. 
 
And I say to you, can you tell me what kind of time lines have 
you set for this committee to report? Will something be in place 
to deal with this severe issue before the next budget is put 
together some time in September or October? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well two comments I would make 
here relative to some time lines. A best guess, or at least it 
seems to me what would make sense would be to have 
something in place for the new school year, so that would take 
you to the end of the summer. And the second point is, yes, you 
have raised the whole question of hungry children but, you 
know, the issue is larger than that, as I suggested earlier. I mean 
there’s the whole, the social phenomenon of the double income, 
no kids, that kind of thing; both parents working, nobody at 
home when the children come home, that social phenomenon as 
well, and what are the implications of that. There’s a myriad of 
issues that we’re examining that are something more than just 
poverty because it’s hard to suggest that, you know, double 
income parents might . . . that the issue there might be poverty. 
So we’re looking at something more than just the narrow focus 
that you’re suggesting. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, I 
listened with, I may say, growing concern to the discussion — 
if one might be so generous as to describe it that — between 
you and the member from Regina Elphinstone. Mr. Member, I 
listened with annoyance mixed, perhaps, with some amusement, 
to your expression of concern about school lunch programs, and 
somehow or other attributing to trustees the concern that if you 
fed the children, they were going to, in some fashion or other, 
get to enjoy their poverty and hunger and they’d never want to 
change. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s nothing new or startling about school 
lunch programs. Not more than a few weeks ago, perhaps a 
little longer than that, I was discussing with someone who had 
grown up in Georgia . . . That was Ron Lancaster, the former 
Roughrider — grew up in Georgia. He got breakfast when he 
got to school, for two reasons: (1) a long bus ride; and (2) a 
concern that some of the children might not be well fed when 
they got there. Mr. 

Minister . . . And this in the heart of cracker barrel country in 
Georgia. 
 
Mr. Minister, American cities have had school lunch programs 
for decades, there’s nothing new or startling about it. It does not 
rot the social fabric of society. It doesn’t cause children to love 
the hunger and poverty in which they live. It doesn’t do a whole 
lot of harm. 
 
(2115) 
 
I’ll tell you what it does do, Mr. Minister. School lunch 
programs allow children to learn. You could ask any teacher 
how much you can teach a child who’s hungry. Very, very 
little; you cannot learn on a hungry stomach. Mr. Minister, the 
problem may not be a very visible one. I doubt, Mr. Minister, if 
it’s going to elect us or defeat you people, but it’s nevertheless a 
serious problem in education. There are a large number — my 
colleague used the figure of 25 per cent — a large number of 
children who arrive at school hungry. They can’t learn and I 
suspect very, very few of those children ever make it through 
high school. I expect a whole lot of them don’t make it to high 
school. It is a serious problem. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if we could set aside this myth that 
somehow or other if you feed children that’s going to destroy 
the moral fabric of society. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me see if I can characterize your progress in 
the following fashion. You’re hurtling towards a solution, I 
think, as follows: the discussion began in the last calendar year. 
I think that’s accurate; they didn’t start after January 1. Mr. 
Minister, you have had a lot of time to discuss it, ample time to 
include something within this year’s budget. And I gather from 
what you say, there’s nothing in this year’s budget which 
specifically covers the program. 
 
You will say that well we’ll rob from some other fund, we’ll get 
it from somewhere else. You might, but if I were a hungry child 
or a trustee trying to deal with hungry children I wouldn’t be 
very encouraged at a government which has had knowledge of 
the problem for some months and has done nothing about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would tell us when the 
discussions began. What has kept you from arriving in a more 
timely fashion to such a solution? I gather it’s not an expensive 
program in relative terms. I gather it’s at least . . . What is being 
proposed by the trustees is relatively cheap. Mr. Minister, 
would you tell us when it began; what your commitment to it is 
— you think it’s a good ideal or a bad idea; who sits on the 
committee; and I really would like some more definite idea of 
when you think there might be some announcements. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, I have the uncomfortable feeling that this 
program is going to come to fruition after the next general 
election when you people are defeated. 
 
I get the uncomfortable feeling, Mr. Minister, that you agree 
with the Minister of Human Resources in his attacks on the 
poor and those on welfare. I get the feeling that that is some sort 
of a moral falling and all you 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1613 
 

really have to do to solve the problem of hungry children is to 
make their life a little more difficult and they’ll realize the error 
of their ways. But to state it, Mr. Minister, is to refute it.  
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you tell us when the discussions 
began, why you been foot-dragging as long as you have, and 
when do you think you’ll bring this problem to a conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Point number one is we’re not 
foot-dragging. As I said earlier, we’ve got three ministers 
involved, school boards involved, officials involved, and that 
discussion has been — or at least that structure — has been in 
place for some several weeks now. 
 
Secondly, as I told your colleague and seat mate, a best guess at 
least perhaps some recommendations would be — or at least a 
sensible time in my mind — would be have something in place 
for the next school year. 
 
And I guess I would just wonder if the hon. member has really 
touched base with school trustees on this issue, who, yes, are 
concerned about hungry children just as you and I might be, but 
also have these questions in the back of their mind about, you 
know, the school’s first function is: (a) teaching our children 
and, you know, society keeps off-loading its responsibilities on 
to it, and where does it start and where does it stop. 
 
And they have legitimate concerns there. And I don’t know 
whether you’re speaking for some that I’m not aware of, but I 
can you tell as recently as this week they recognized the issue in 
its fullest dimension — probably, with all respect to you, maybe 
even better than you. And they want us to be very cautious here, 
and whatever one might do as one must carefully . . . do it 
carefully. And I suppose on that point I could see us having 
some fairly extensive co-operation, consultation, and 
collaboration on this issue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I listened to your colleague. I 
will use his proper title in defence of his office, if not the 
current incumbent, the Minister of Human Resources. 
 
Mr. Minister, I listened to him running at welfare recipients — 
the people he’s supposed to be speaking on behalf of. On every 
conceivable occasion, to listen to the member from Melville, 
one would think that if you gave the people on social assistance 
any more help, it wouldn’t go to pay for lunches for children, it 
would go to pay for cigarettes or alcohol. And I know precisely 
how the member from Melville would respond to any 
suggestion that you give the parents more assistance so they can 
feed their children. He would have you believe that every single 
one of them would rather pound it down a rat hole then use it to 
assist children. 
 
Mr. Minister, even if you accept those . . . Even if those 
ludicrous views were yours, it seems to me that this problem 
escapes all of those sins. This solution had lunches provided in 
schools where presumably it can’t be misused by all these 
errant and immoral parents. There’s no possibility of it being 
misused or spent for something else. By common agreement, 
you cannot teach children 

who are hungry, and those children who come to school hungry 
in large numbers are not learning anything, are likely to be 
drop-outs, are likely to present a very serious cost to society in 
future years. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if we could get beyond the concern. 
I’m sure you could find some trustees who are as conservative 
as you are. I’m quite sure that that’s possible. But I believe, Mr. 
Minister, the bulk of the trustees in urban school districts want 
to do something about this; I’m not so convinced you do. I’m 
not so convinced you don’t share the views of your colleague 
from Melville, that poverty represents some sort of a moral 
failing and is not to be encouraged by any sort of compassionate 
approach. I think that’s a reasonable — it’s not reasonable, but 
it’s a fair summation of the member from Melville’s views. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d admit that — that there’s no 
danger in providing lunch to children; it’s not going to be 
misused; it isn’t going to go to buy cigarettes or alcohol or 
televisions or whatever else the member from Melville thinks 
they’re wasting it on. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d admit that there is hunger; and 
if you deny there is hunger, I have a suggestion to you. I made 
an offer to the member from Rosemont — that was in a less 
happy era when the member from Rosemont had a different 
identity — the former minister of Social Services. I offered to 
take him on a tour of my riding. If you don’t believe hunger 
exists in large measure in Regina, how would you like to come 
for a tour? I’ll show you people . . . I don’t think you’ll come 
back here and deny hunger exists; it most certainly does. If you 
don’t believe it exists, if you want to see it, let me know. I can 
give you a tour that will leave you speechless, I’m quite sure. 
I’m certain that we can. 
 
Will you admit hunger exists? Will you admit children can’t 
learn when they’re hungry? Will you admit that there are no 
dangers of such a program being abused? Will you therefore 
admit that we’ve got to get on with the job and do something 
about it and quit procrastinating? Quite frankly, if there are 
trustees involved who want to see the government move 
cautiously, well they’re not going to be disappointed with this 
government. It there’s any merit in procrastination, you will 
satisfy any conceivable yearning that anyone might have in that 
regard. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you admit those three things? 
There is hunger in the city of Regina; a large percentage of 
those hungry people are children; they cannot learn when 
they’re hungry; if they’re going to learn they got to be fed; and 
will you admit that you could do that at a relatively modest cost 
— relative to the size of your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the argument is not 
whether there are hungry children. I have already said . . . we 
acknowledge that there are children at risk for a number of 
reasons. The issue is then what does one do about it? What do 
we do about it? Your suggestion is that somehow the school, 
who most trustees see as a place for teaching, are they to pick 
up all of this and what society would off-load onto them? That, 
too, is a legitimate 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1614 
 

question. I have already said at the ministerial level we have 
Social Services, Health and Education prepared to look at this 
large question of children at risk. I don’t know as I can say 
much more without being repetitive. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Children are going hungry in Regina. Mr. 
Minister, I honestly believe . . . I agree with the member from 
Lakeview. I honestly say if you’d bring yourself to say it, you’d 
do something about it. These are not children at risk — no risk 
of a broken leg, no risk of an injury, no risk of abuse, there isn’t 
any risk at all. They are hungry. The risk is 100 per cent if you 
want to put it that way. If you just say, Mr. Minister, there are 
hungry children in the city of Regina and I can feed them, I 
think you’d do it. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the oldest injunction given to any ruler is 
to feed thy people. If you won’t follow the injunction — if you 
won’t follow the biblical injunction to feed thy people, will you 
at least feed thy children? 
 
I really do not understand, Mr. Minister, why you would in any 
way want to associate yourself with the member from Melville, 
who I suggest, the name of the member from Melville will long 
be associated with a bizarre mixture of buffoonery and cruelty 
when it comes to dealing with people. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if you think 
it’s out of order — if you think it’s out of order, call it. If you 
don’t, sit and listen, Mr. Minister. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to admit that there are hungry children; 
admit that you can do something about it at an affordable cost, 
and then tell us why you think great caution is needed in 
dealing with the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I said the last time I was on my feet, 
we don’t disagree or argue that here aren’t — I would use the 
word “children at risk” to cover a large category — hungry 
children, neglected children, abused children, children that 
suffer from drug abuse and alcohol abuse. I think all of those 
exist out there. Some of them maybe have certain demographic 
characteristics. Some of them certainly, when you look at drug 
and alcohol abuse, have absolutely no demographic — 
consistent demographic indices when you look at those. 
 
We agree there’s an area here that needs examining. It is being 
examined. But I also would ask you again, and I would ask the 
member from Regina Lakeview, who seems to be quite 
knowledgeable on the subject, at least in her mind, how much 
discussion you have had with school trustees on this very 
question? Because it’s not nearly — it’s not nearly as simplistic 
as you would suggest. They have some legitimate questions 
about what is the role of the school and are we merely going to 
have society off-load all of its responsibilities on to the school? 
Is that what we’re going to do? 
 
And the hon. member raised the question of abuse. Well what 
are you going to do? Are you going to follow those children 
home to see what their mom and dad make . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The hon. member, I’m talking about the point 
that was raised here relative to the poor. 

You see, the hon. members think it’s quite simple, and yet the 
trustees themselves don’t see this as simplistic as you do. And I 
would ask you: have you talked to trustees, including the school 
trustees’ association, to get their view on this? Because it’s not 
nearly as simplistic as you would suggest, not nearly as 
simplistic. And I will encourage you to do that. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the answer is, I have talked 
to trustees, I’ve talked to teachers, I’ve talked to a goodly 
number of parents, and unlike, I think, the member opposite, 
I’ve talked to some poor people as well. And I think that puts 
me, at least in that latter comment, one step ahead of you. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s no problem that can’t be made so big that 
nobody could solve it. You want to drag in abused children, 
children who are subject to alcohol abuse and drug addiction. 
Mr. Minister, there is no simple solution to abused children. 
There is no simple solution to drug abuse, to alcohol abuse. But, 
Mr. Minister, there’s a very simple solution to hungry children: 
feed them in school — feed them in school. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I am not for a moment suggesting that it is 
a role of the school to deal with abused children. I don’t know 
how on earth they’d do that. It is not the role of the school to 
deal with drug abuse and alcohol abuse among children — I 
have no idea how they’d do that. But, Mr. Minister, I know 
precisely how you deal with hungry children. As I say, it was 
done in the state of Georgia two to three decades ago; it has 
been done in most American cities for many, many years; it’s 
very simple: take some food into the school cafeteria and feed 
them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s all you do? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, amazingly it works. The kids aren’t 
hungry and they have some enthusiasm for mathematics and 
literature. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you if you’ll stop dragging in red 
herrings of drug abuse and alcoholism and child abuse and 
sexual abuse and all the other things you mentioned. Nobody is 
asking the school to deal with that — they can’t — nor can 
society, but that comment is quite beside the way. 
 
The schools . . . not the schools, the Department of Education 
can deal with child hunger. They have done it in jurisdictions 
which I don’t regard as anywhere near as innovative in social 
terms as this one for a very long period of time. It doesn’t cost 
very much. Mr. Minister, I ask you to deal with the problem of 
child hunger, not children at risk. These children are not at risk 
of being hungry — the risk is 100 per cent — they are hungry, 
and you can deal with it. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, feed thy people — if not the people, at 
least the children. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1615 
 

amount of money that you say you have in the food program at 
the present time. Can you give me that number again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The community services program, I 
think that’s was it’s called, is $200,000. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, recently there was a sod 
turning for a power plant at Estevan, the Shand power project. I 
think the opening ceremony cost $250,000 for the opening. No, 
correct me if I’m wrong, correct me if I’m wrong. Give us the 
papers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you table the 
documents of how much that sod turning cost. 
 
But I want to say to you that in the constituency of Elphinstone 
there aren’t 25 per cent of the children hungry, there would be 
over 50 per cent in that constituency that go to bed every night 
hungry and go to school hungry. And I say to you that the sod 
turning at the Estevan power plant, Shand, cost more money 
than all the food programs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to you that that is indictment of this government that 
we’re not going to let you forget. It is bloody criminal that you 
would allow that kind of spending of money on self-promotion 
and political promotion — political promotion in Estevan, in 
the Premier’s riding; spend more money on a sod turning than 
we have for a lunch program for all the children in the province. 
That’s what I say to you. 
 
Now all it would take is one one-hundredth of the amount that 
was spent the other day in terms of contracts that were given for 
the power project down there — one one-hundredth to put 
forward a program that would put a lunch program into the 
schools where they’re needed in this province. 
 
To put it another way, the advertising that this government 
does, a million dollars, one-tenth of the advertising . . . I’m not 
asking you to take away all of the advertising. Take one-tenth 
of the advertising and put it into food for children and you’d 
solve the problem. You don’t have to have a committee set up 
of the Minister of Social Services, because I’ll tell you if you 
have that bird involved, you’re never going to get anything 
done because he’ll attack the families; he’ll attack the children; 
he’ll say they don’t need any more money. They don’t need 
food because they can grow vegetables in their backyard. 
 
Now if you could imagine something so ridiculous as having 
apartment dwellers on welfare trying to grow a garden in 
Regina Elphinstone, I mean, the people in Elphinstone were 
laughing at that minister quite openly. They were laughing at 
him. And I’ll tell you, he reflected on the Premier because they 
were laughing at the Premier as well for having a minister who 
would make such an absurd statement. 
 
They would know, and you should know that the lots . . . for 
example, most lots in the Elphinstone riding are 25 foot lots — 
that’s the frontage. The houses basically cover the lot. The 
people out there were laughing. In a strange way they were 
laughing because it hurt to cry, but they 

were laughing at that minister that would say to the people in 
that constituency that they should grow gardens to solve their 
problem of not having any income. Because if they didn’t 
laugh, they would cry. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that this problem of hungry 
children . . . 50 per cent of the children in the Elphinstone riding 
go to school hungry, and you could solve it tomorrow. It’s not 
an issue of whether there’s money in this province or not — 
there is money. We found that out the other day when you had 
the opening of the . . . sod turning of the Shand project where 
you spent more money than we are spending in a year on a food 
program for children. And I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, that 
it’s your responsibility to stand up and fight for that kind of 
money in your department and put that program in place. We 
have found that you can’t depend on the Minister of Social 
Services to do it so we’re asking you, and the reason we’re 
asking you is because I believe you have more integrity and I 
believe more because I know your background. I know where 
you come from, and I know the kind of things that your family 
believe in. And I just say to you that we’re asking that because 
we know that you have the wherewithal, if you believe it, to get 
that kind of money and get that program in place. And if you 
do, we would be the first to stand up and agree with you and 
thank you for doing it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, the 
hon. member for Saskatoon Centre asks if his colleague has 
been guilty of some indiscretion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — From Regina Centre. There was 
certainly a goodly amount of newspaper reporting about that 
relative to the new member for Regina Elphinstone. If the hon. 
member’s statement is indeed true, in a country that is as rich as 
we are, that 50 per cent of the children in Elphinstone are going 
to school hungry, then there’s something far deeper here than I 
am aware of. I would wonder about that statement quite frankly. 
 
Relative to sod turning and costs, I have no information for you 
there because that’s not an area that I have responsibility for, 
and quite frankly don’t know what the numbers are, but I doubt 
that it’s anywhere what you have suggested. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would ask you then, Mr. Minister, if 
you think it’s reasonable that you would spend more on a sod 
turning for the Shand project than you would spend on a lunch 
program for all the children in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that 
was about 3,000 people turned out and that the cost of the sod 
turning was something less than $10,000. I guess you were a 
little bit out on that one — $240,000 out. If you want to set the 
record straight on the factual standpoint relative to that, that 
would be the numbers. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would challenge the minister to 
table the bills from the Shand opening, because the reports that 
came out that were around, and that no one refuted at the time, 
were in excess of 200,000. 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1616 
 

And I say to you that if the member from Souris-Cannington 
wants to table them, we have documents of his spending records 
as he’s flown around the world in the last six years, and we 
could compare the lunch program to those spendings as well, if 
we want to have someone run out and get those documents. 
 
And I say to you that there’s no question, we have the money to 
put the program in place. I don’t think there’s any question that 
we have the money to put the program in place. It’s the question 
of whether or not the minister has the will and the integrity to 
do it. And that’s what we are asking you to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Yesterday when I was discussing with you 
the case of funding of the universities, we had talked briefly 
about the amounts that the university students were paying and 
comparing that the amount that they had been paying 
percentage-wise in years previous. And if I just review some of 
the remarks, one of the things that we got to discussing was 
how much money you’d put into the university, and you’d 
established that, yes, the provincial grants had kept up with 
inflation or, yes, the provincial grants had kept up with increase 
in the number of students. 
 
But when we put together the situation, we really had both of 
those happening at the same time, that there was inflation, and 
also there was also a tremendous increase in student, or the 
number of credit hours that the universities were funding. Then 
we took all that into consideration. 
 
Calculations that I had done showed me that the average 
payment or funding per student had decreased by 23 per cent 
since your government took place. And I believe the Premier 
acknowledged that, that if you did a calculation on that basis, 
that would be true. 
 
Now what has happened then to make up the shortfall is that the 
amount that the students had to pay in tuition has gone up. It’s 
gone up so that the amount the students have been paying, 
which used to be in the vicinity of 11 per cent around 1979, is 
now in the vicinity of around 18 per cent of the total revenue of 
the universities. 
 
Now what is this doing to the full-time students who are taking 
the programs? The full-time students that are taking the 
programs now have to borrow up to $6,000 a year, up to $6,000 
a year before they get some type of bursary, or in this case we 
call it a forgiveness of loan. 
 
That means that my daughter or anybody else’s daughter or son 
that goes to the university now and is borrowing money will 
end up with an unprecedented debt — $6,000 a year, possibly 
more; $6,000 a years, possibly more — and the worry that I 
have here, Mr. Minister, is that we’ve never had students, I 
don’t think, except for possibly for some of those in the medical 
profession or dentistry, some of six-year courses, that would 
end up with that kind of a debt. And we’re now getting into that 
kind of situation. We’ve never had that, students that are being 
faced with that kind of a debt when they’re finished. 

I asked you some questions with respect to how many people 
are taking loans, and you gave me the numbers. And I want to 
ask you now some questions related to the numbers of students 
who took loans and who got bursaries. And could you supply 
me with the numbers of how many students in each of the last 
three years had loans forgiven. 
 
Now in the last, I guess, two years previous it would be 
bursaries, they would have been called bursaries, and right now 
they would be called forgive loans, but I’m looking at it the 
same way. So for 1987-88 how many of the 17,600 that you 
told me that got loans actually had anything forgiven for 
1986-87 of the 17,000, and also for the year previous to that. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member covered a fair 
amount of ground in that question. And relative to the fact that 
as one takes on a . . . undertakes a post-secondary education 
where, unlike the K to 12 education system, it is not free. The 
student and/or the student’s family are expected to contribute 
something. And 30 or 40 years ago the student was responsible, 
or ended up paying for about 25 per cent on the cost of his 
education. Today that number at universities is down around 15 
per cent, and at technical institutes it’s down around 4 per cent. 
 
So there’s been a significant easing, if you like, in a relative 
sense to the student, and maybe that’s so as it should be. 
Although, quite frankly, I can’t understand why the taxpayers 
would on the one hand think it’s acceptable to pick up 96 per 
cent of the cost if you go to a technical institute but only 85 if 
you go to university, and that’s something that we’ve been 
turning our head to some degree in conjunction with the boards 
at all those institutions. 
 
The average debt load, and this is I think will be of interest for 
all members of the Assembly. A regular student graduating this 
spring after four years of post-secondary education, on average, 
will owe approximately $13,000 in federal and provincial loans. 
And so I ask you, and all members of the Legislative Assembly 
. . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — After a four-year program the student, 
perhaps my child, will owe $13,000. Now I ask you . . . yes, 
13,000 is a substantive sum of money, but is that an 
unreasonable investment for that young person to make in a 
career that’s going to have tremendous returns, not only to him 
as an individual but as well to society. 
 
Yes, 13,000 is a substantive number but, when you think about 
it, not an unreasonable investment for a student to make in his 
future. Certainly, if one was to undertake farming, even at 
today’s low land prices, you certainly couldn’t make an 
investment of $13,000 and think that that was going to 
somehow set you up in farming. Now certainly there will be 
people, perhaps individuals in the health sciences where that 
number might be larger, some would be lower, but it’s worth 
keeping that number in mind because we hear a lot of numbers. 
  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1617 
 

And I might add that the Canadian ministers of education 
council, the task force, or the officials committee, or the 
sub-committee that we have working on this, also came to the 
conclusion, at least in a preliminary fashion, that although we 
hear a great deal about student debt — and I wouldn’t want to 
minimize it as a issue — but they came to the conclusion, as 
well, that student debt load in a relative sense, you know, hasn’t 
necessarily been kept in proper proportion. Or another way of 
putting it, the headlines are sometimes twice the magnitude of 
the issue. But our numbers are $13,000, and I think that’s 
significant and that all members would be interested in knowing 
that. 
 
Another point that we haven’t raised in the Assembly that’s 
worth noting is that our government has consistently been very 
committed to scholarship and scholarships. And if you look at 
the history of funding there at the two universities, in ’81-82 
there was 1.8 millions of dollars for university scholarships, in 
’88-89 that number has risen to over 6 million. And that’s a 
substantial form of assistance via the scholarship route to 
students as well — from 1.8 million seven years ago, to now 
over 6 millions of dollars. I think that’s worth noting as well. 
 
And in fact when I was up speaking to the grad students’ 
association after last year’s budget, I suppose it almost came as 
a pleasant surprise to myself when the person introducing me to 
the group had very kind things to say about the scholarship 
track record relative to funding. And I thanked him for it and 
they are very appreciative of it. 
 
The points that I have made here before about the university 
funding: over the past six years it’s increased 36.4 per cent. Our 
tuition fees are not out of line with the rest of the province . . 
the rest of the country, rather. 
 
And to answer the question about bursaries and forgivable 
loans, I would offer this to the hon. member: since ’81-82, the 
average free assistance through Saskatchewan student bursaries, 
forgivable loans, is projected to increase 60 per cent from 
approximately $1,000 to $1,600. The 4,000 students projected 
to be assisted will be approximately the same number as 
assisted in ’81-82, which was 4,420. 
 
Having said that, the special incentive bursaries, forgivable 
loans, since the first year of the program in ’83-84 to ’87-88, 
free assistance to disadvantaged students through special 
incentive bursaries, forgivable loans, is projected to increase 
over six times — that is from half a million to three and a half 
million. The number of students will increase over seven times 
from approximately 230 to 1,600; seven times and six times 
respectively, Mr. Chairman. Free assistance under this program 
is anticipated to be yet another 25 per cent higher in ’87-88 than 
in ’86-87. 
 
So I’m proud of our record on student assistance. I’m proud of 
the new initiatives that have been pioneered by my colleagues 
and previous advanced ministers of Education, and I’m also 
proud of where Saskatchewan stacks up across the rest of the 
country in student aid 

because it speaks directly to the question of accessibility. And 
the numbers, are there. There are more and more young people 
having access to post-secondary education. There are more and 
more young people receiving some form of assistance, and 
certainly when it comes to those who are most needy this has 
been a very successful program. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:55 p.m. 


