


















































May 24, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 24, 1988 
  

1495 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to give notice that on 
Thursday next I will move: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognizes 
Senate reform as an important vehicle for strengthening the 
impact of western Canada at the centre of the national 
decision making in the Parliament of Canada; 
 
And that this Assembly endorses the principles underlying 
the Triple E concept for reforming the Senate as an 
appropriate basis upon which to build a national consensus 
for a Parliament of Canada which is more legitimate, more 
representative, and more effective. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce a number of people sitting in your gallery. 
We have today with us a delegation from Cumberland House. We 
have Mayor Lennard Morin, Deputy Mayor Cyril Roy, 
Councillor Paul Settee, and also we are graced with the presence 
of Pierre Settee, the Chief of the Cumberland House Indian Band. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen are in Regina today putting the 
final touches on an agreement which will set in motion a 
mechanism to resolve a long-standing issue of concern to the 
people of the Cumberland House area. 
 
I would hope, gentlemen, that you find the proceedings 
interesting this afternoon, and I would also hope that our 
agreement this afternoon will prove successful for you and the 
people you represent. 
 
I would ask all members to please welcome the gentlemen from 
Cumberland House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
today to introduce to you, and through you to the rest of the 
members, 11 students from Bushell Park Elementary School at 
CFB (Canadian Forces Base) in Moose Jaw — or outside of 
Moose Jaw. They are seated in your gallery, and today they have 
their teacher, Carol McDonald with them, besides chaperons 
Mrs. Day, Mrs. Reinhart and Mrs. Haverstock. 
 
It’s very special, Mr. Speaker, to have an institution like CFB in 
one’s constituency. It is so much different, I suppose, than what 
we normally find in Saskatchewan because this is the number one 
training base for the entire Canadian Armed Forces in Canada, 
and as such they do many unique things out there, including the 
Saskatchewan air show which we are all so proud of.

My wife and I were out last Friday to pilot graduation, and as 
always it was a very special occasion. And I’d like to commend 
these students and the people at CFB for the very necessary and 
good job which they do in training people for the defence of our 
sovereignty and our international obligations. 
 
So I would ask all members in the legislature to join me in giving 
them the usual welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure today to 
introduce 14 students, grade 3 students, from the Cowessess 
Education Centre in Grenfell. They are seated in the north gallery 
here, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied by 
their teacher Mrs. Lois Delorme, and chaperon Mrs. Myra 
Delorme. 
 
I will be meeting you a little later. I guess we’re meeting out on 
the lawn, which is a very correct place to be meeting on a nice 
afternoon like this, so enjoy your treats. We’ll have pictures, and 
I hope you enjoy what takes place here today. 
 
I want all members to join with me to welcome these young 
students to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Price Fixing by Oil Companies 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Mr.Minister, 
there’s a deeply disturbing article in the weekend Star-Phoenix 
which charges that oil companies operating in this province are 
price fixing. The story quotes officials of your department as 
saying that Saskatchewan oil companies collect profits higher 
than the national average. It also says your department 
investigated such allegations two and a half years ago. 
 
In light of this most recent allegation, Mr. Minister. Have you 
opened your investigation into gasoline price fixing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the 
hon. member that our department is checking on the current 
allegations. However, I would point out that when it comes to the 
matter of price fixing, and as it relates to the gas prices, that this 
is under the jurisdiction of the federal government, and I assume 
that this type of information will be forwarded to them. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, the mandate of your office is to protect 
consumers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Mr. Solomon: — It’s our view that consumers are not being 
adequately protected if your department is not   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1496 
 

willing to investigate charges of price gouging against them. 
 
Is it true, Mr. Minister, that the profit margin for non-leaded 
gasoline is highly inflated; and are you prepared to call a public 
inquiry to investigate all of these allegations of price gouging by 
oil companies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the 
member opposite that the concern of the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs is to protect consumers. And 
that we are doing on an ongoing basis. 
 
With regard to the allegation that he’s making, that we are not 
doing anything, we certainly are investigating it. Any allegations 
of this nature, of course, would fall under the Combines 
Investigations Act. That, of course, is under the jurisdiction of 
the federal government. 
 
We are checking on the prices as they exist right now. I think we 
are very fortunate in Saskatchewan that our gas prices, I believe, 
at the present time are the lowest in Canada, and we’re certainly 
very, very appreciative of that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the same 
minister, Mr. Minister, your government is notorious for giving 
breaks to the large oil companies. Just this year you gave them 
another royalty tax holiday. It’s become government policy to let 
these companies run roughshod over the provincial treasury in 
your government. 
 
Is it now becoming government policy to also let them run 
roughshod over the consumer; and if not, why not set up a public 
inquiry so that these charges can be heard in a free and open 
forum? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
member’s question, I would certainly say that there’s no doubt 
about it that there has been some assistance given to oil 
companies over the past six years; but at least, Mr. Speaker, I 
think we can be very proud of the fact that at least we still have 
the oil companies operating in Saskatchewan. I think with the 
previous administration they had chased most of them out. 
 
We certainly are aware of the situation. We know that gas prices 
in some parts of the province certainly are higher than in other 
parts. Traditionally they’ve been higher here . . . or in Saskatoon 
than they were in other parts, and I certainly have a concern about 
that. We haven’t had the good fortune of having some of the gas 
price wars in Saskatchewan that they have in other parts of the 
country. 
 
But I can assure the member opposite that we are investigating 
this situation, and we will be ensuring that if there are price 
fixing, or suspicion of that, that it’s the federal government that 
will be following up on that and dealing with it.

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
Saskatchewan continues to have the highest inflation rate in 
Canada — 5.8 per cent in Saskatoon and 5.4 per cent in Regina. 
One of the major contributing factors to this is the high cost of 
gasoline. On top of that, taxpayers of this province have 
subsidized the oil companies to the tune of lost royalties to over 
$2 billion. 
 
Don’t you think the Saskatchewan consumers deserve a public 
inquiry which would tell them if they are paying too much for 
their gasoline now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any 
doubt but what the member opposite has the same information 
that I have in my hands, and there’s no indication here that it’s 
higher gasoline prices that are responsible for an increase in the 
consumer price index. As a matter of fact, it states in here that 
declines in air fares, gasoline prices, and household furniture, and 
equipment costs exerted considerable downward movement. So 
I would think that that’s just the opposite to what the member is 
saying. 
 

Suggestions for Drought Relief 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, and 
it has to do with the drought on the prairies this spring, which is 
afflicting large portions of the southern and western 
Saskatchewan, and which is especially troubling right now to 
livestock producers. 
 
At the western premiers’ meeting last week, Mr. Premier, you 
and your colleagues called for urgent federal action to help deal 
with this near crisis situation. But in response to that, it appeared 
that the federal Minister of Agriculture implied that he had not, 
to date, received any detailed suggestions from the western 
provinces as to what the Government of Canada should do. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you tell us today what detailed suggestions the 
Government of Saskatchewan has put forward to the federal 
government for drought relief measures; when were those 
proposals put forward to the federal government; and what will 
be the total expected cost of those measures, both provincially 
and federally? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have advised the federal 
government of the drought conditions in south-western 
Saskatchewan, and certainly the Alberta people have advised 
them of the threat to livestock in southern Alberta, and an 
estimate of what it will cost per head or per ranch and farm to 
provide some relief either to move cattle or move water or move 
feed. I am going to Ottawa tomorrow and will be meeting 
Thursday with the Minister of Agriculture, the federal minister, 
to go over some of the numbers. I believe Minister Wise has 
called a meeting of all the western ministers of Agriculture for 
Calgary at the first of the week, so we’ll be providing him first 
hand with the information. 
 
With respect to the total cost, I don’t have the total cost, but we’ll 
take him what we estimate it will be for the province of 
Saskatchewan; Alberta will do the same; Manitoba will do the 
same, and we’ll lay all that   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1497 
 

information before him and then be prepared to co-operate. I’ve 
said at the outset that: (1) our program will be retroactive so that 
people want to deal with moving feed or water or cattle now that 
we’re going to be there to help them; and secondly, that we are 
prepared to co-operate with the federal government in a joint 
program. The feds know that, so we will discuss all the figures 
with them as early as Thursday afternoon. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I gather from the Premier’s 
answer that the federal minister was correct in suggesting that no 
detailed game plan has yet been proposed. I take it, from what 
the Premier has said, those proposals are just now going forward. 
That does seem a bit late, Mr. Premier. But I wonder today if you 
could give us your assurance that any federal money that will be 
forthcoming in drought relief will be in addition to provincial 
commitments and will not be used just to subsidize or offset the 
cost to the provincial treasury in Saskatchewan. I hope you will 
assure us that the Saskatchewan government will allow federal 
money to flow through directly to farmers and ranchers and go 
directly into their hands. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Premier, I wonder if you could assure us that 
the Saskatchewan government will argue very strongly that any 
federal contribution to drought aid should be new money, and 
should not just be recirculated out of the federal soil conservation 
fund at a time when soil conservation is more important, not less 
important, in a very dry season. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — On that latter point, Mr. Speaker, I would 
point out to the hon. member that the four western premiers asked 
for new money, and particularly when they were dealing with the 
question of drought and soil erosion, because in some cases it’s 
been drought and dry weather and wind that has caused soil 
erosion; in some cases the Swan River area of Manitoba it’s been 
water; and the ditches are full of top soil, and something should 
be done there. 
 
And we asked for additional maintenance and early 
announcement of deficiency payments. At the same time we 
wanted top up on crop insurance in the event we look at not only 
difficulties for the livestock sector but obviously for the grain 
sector in south-western Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
So the combination of four or five programs — some will be 
topped up because of existing programs, some with respect to 
drought should be new money, and we are prepared to co-operate 
on all of them and work with the federal government in coming 
up with the money to be directed, as I have said here, in a 
retroactive fashion, and that’s been out there for some time, as 
our information and meeting with the livestock industry have 
pointed out, and we’ve had several meetings with them. 
 
And that information has been shared with the federal 
government for weeks and weeks. They know that we’re on top 
of it. They were happy to see the rain in the eastern part of the 
province, and hope for some in the south-west. And it will be 
going to farmers and not to truckers or not to people who will be 
moving feed. 

Canadian Unity and Free Trade 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 
Premier, and I want to welcome him back from the trip that he 
took to British Columbia on a 32-metre yacht, along with the 
white Lincolns that waited to take him here and there. 
 
I want to ask the Premier: in light of a report . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Recognize the member 
for . . . Order, order, order. Would the member pleased be seated, 
and I would like the members to please be quiet, and coaching 
from their seat is not necessary. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, I welcome 
the Premier back from his taxpayers-paid trip to British 
Columbia on the 32-metre yacht, equipped with three bars and 
hot tub. 
 
I want to ask you: in light of a story, Canadian Press story in the 
Star-Phoenix last week, which indicated that the four western 
premiers said Thursday, “They are willing to risk Canadian unity 
in their fight to get a free trade agreement ratified,” and the quote 
from Getty, “We are prepared to have disunity if it’s over free 
trade,” I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, if you agree with that 
statement coming from your amigo from Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would inform the hon. 
member that the boat that we were on was of no cost to the 
taxpayer whatsoever. And he doesn’t believe it, but I’ll just tell 
him it’s the fact. So it is no cost at all; so you can throw it out, if 
you will. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the whole decision on trade and the 
implementing legislation, we’re being reviewed now and I would 
be prepared to look at it; and hopefully, we can get southern 
Ontario to not hold up an opportunity for the rest of Canada for 
the sake of a handful of farmers — a hundred or two —  that have 
been offered pretty extensive compensation. 
 
And rather than deny us the opportunity to have market access, 
as your own research pointed out in 1974, for potash and oil and 
gas and pulp and paper and livestock industry worth $375 million 
a year to Saskatchewan, we would hope that Ontario would 
co-operate and not just play politics, frankly, because we know 
that the Liberals across the country haven’t frankly made up their 
mind whether they support it or not. 
 
Obviously, Premier Bourassa supports free trade. Premier 
McKenna supports free trade. Donald Macdonald supports it; 
Issy Asper supports it. And then we find out that the Premier of 
Ontario doesn’t. I think that if they make up their mind, the 
country would be a little bit safer in its dealings internationally. 
 

Drought Relief for Farmers  
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the minister. In light of 
the fact that, as you were floating around in English Bay   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1498 
 

on this yacht you also were saying that you were discussing the 
drought, the drought is Saskatchewan, and in light of the fact that 
we have today a press release from George Sinner, the governor 
of North Dakota, declaring drought emergency proclamations for 
the state, in light of the very serious drought that has occurred in 
western Canada, as well as in the western United States, can you 
tell us when you will have an agreement with the federal 
government? 
 
You’re telling us when you’re having more meetings. But for the 
farmers and ranchers in Saskatchewan, can you tell us when there 
will be an agreement whereby federal and provincial money will 
be put out to farmers to keep them on their farms and ranches? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. 
member did give up on free trade rather quickly, and then he 
moved to the question that’s already been asked. So the 
combination of the two don’t make much of a question period for 
the hon. member. 
 
I just say, as I said to the hon. member, that I am meeting with 
the minister federally on Thursday. He’s called a meeting for the 
first of the week with all the western premiers. 
 
And I would point out to the hon. member, whether he realizes it 
or not, that the east side of the province received a great deal of 
moisture, certainly the south-east. And Estevan, we’ve received 
anywhere from tow to three to four inches of rain recently — now 
whether that went into North Dakota or not, but it borders on 
North Dakota. 
 
This province of Saskatchewan is a lot different than North 
Dakota. And if he hasn’t frankly figured that out . . . And 
Montana, frankly, is very dry, in the south-west part of . . . south 
— west of here. But obviously, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
hasn’t figured that out. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Now, Mr. Premier, obviously some 
time between getting out of your white Lincoln and walking to 
the yacht and sitting in your hot tub by one of the bars, sipping 
on your Shirley Temple, somebody acknowledged the fact that 
there was a drought in western Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, my question is this: who was in charge for 
Saskatchewan of negotiating with the federal government any 
package of putting forward any ideas on the drought assistance 
that will come to our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Agriculture will be meeting with the federal Minister of 
Agriculture on Thursday, so we will be going over the details 
then. And then there’s a subsequent meeting with all the 
ministers, at least western provincial ministers and the federal 
ministers in Calgary, to discuss the alternatives. 
 
So the combination of provincial ministers and the 

federal minister will be reviewing in detail the options and the 
alternatives. And we are in constant conversation with the 
cattlemen and the livestock people, the stock growers, and others, 
to receive their best advice on what we should be doing and how 
it should be implemented. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the situation has 
been ongoing now in Saskatchewan for a month or longer, in fact 
it goes back a couple of years in some places. You are now still 
in the process of wandering through this consultative mechanism 
that you have with the federal government. We still have no 
ideas. My question to you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister of 
Agriculture, is: why have you waited so long? Why haven’t we 
seen something sooner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been our experience that 
when we are negotiating with the federal government that we do 
so in a joint basis and that we provide them with the kind of 
information that we think is appropriate. Therefore we can 
receive federal funds in a forthright fashion, as opposed to just 
the alternative where the people of Saskatchewan and the 
taxpayers cannot handle the entire cost.  
 
It’s impossible. And I don’t think the Saskatchewan taxpayer 
wants to look at the entire cost. The joint venture between us and 
the federal government is more appropriate. It may be a regional 
disaster and considered as such; and as a result, federal taxpayers 
can contribute to the province of Saskatchewan, and I think we 
can all feel fairly positive about that. 

 
Pending Legislation on Free Trade 

 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier, 
who wants to talk about free trade today. The Canadian Press 
story about the impending legislation in the House, which has 
now been tabled but which we haven’t yet seen, says, and I quote: 
 

The legislation will go further and provide a general residual 
power Ottawa could invoke after free trade is in effect. That 
could be used to block provincial legislation that violated 
other terms of the agreement in resources, services, or 
investment. 

 
Now my question, Mr. Premier is: what’s going on here? Why 
would it be necessary for the federal government to take this kind 
of a general, residual power? Is this . . . we’ve never understood 
why the federal government wants — the power to override 
provincial legislation in the fields of resources, particularly, but 
also services and investment?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation has been 
tabled, as I understand it, in parliament this afternoon, and my 
advice was that they — that is the federal legislation — focus 
specifically on the wine   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1499 
 

industry because of the irritant in southern Ontario. We advised 
the federal government to be as careful as possible in dealing 
with this local irritant when they come to omnibus trade 
legislation. And it’s my advice that they have been very selective 
in the way that they have allocated the legislation towards that 
particular problem. So I will say . . . I’m going to get a full 
briefing on it later today, and will be prepared to address 
questions. 
 
I thought all of today would be on Public Accounts. We’ve been 
waiting six months for all these questions and nothing come up, 
and I had all this preparation and it’s zero but . . . I was all 
prepared for Public Accounts, and it just didn’t show up, but I’ll 
be prepared on the legislation tomorrow, and I’ll get a little bit of 
information so that I can respond specifically and will have to go 
through it in some detail. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
you’ll get your chance on Public Accounts tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Mr. Mitchell: — We . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s having a little 
trouble getting off his question. Order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I trust members of the House heard that you’ll 
get your chance tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, and 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Premier, can I ask you a question in rather general terms? 
Assuming that the legislation is as the Canadian Press said that it 
probably would be, said it would be, that it could be used to block 
provincial legislation, then I want to know what would be the 
position of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
I mean, we in this province and in Alberta and Quebec have been 
zealous over the years in protecting provincial rights and in 
fighting hard to protect those rights and acquire other rights we 
may have. And assuming that this federal legislation does pose a 
threat of incursion into provincial jurisdiction, what will be the 
position of this government? Will you be prepared to stand up for 
Saskatchewan, or will we just see more saluting of the flag so far 
as this Mulroney-Reagan trade deal is concerned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
an Act of parliament does not change the constitution of Canada, 
and an Act of this legislature does not change the constitution of 
Canada. Under our constitution, we have control of resources, 
and a federal Act of parliament cannot change that. That’s just 
very, very clear as a result of anything that we’ve seen in the past. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to our own defence of 
resources, we have the capacity to control the production of 
potash and uranium, gas and oil, and all the resources under the 
constitution. And we have, under all 

the arrangements with respect to GATT, the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade, and we’ve had several treaties over the last 
40 years. 
 
You can rest assured that this government and the province of 
Saskatchewan will defend Saskatchewan’s control over 
resources as long as we’re sitting anywhere here and defending 
the people with respect to resource control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 

Resource Management 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, this is a very serious matter that has been 
raised in the article by the Canadian Press story, one which I 
think should be of concern to all of us, particularly here in 
Saskatchewan where in the ’70s we waged a long, hard battle — 
I might add, joined by the province of Alberta — to protect 
certain rights the provinces had over their resources, rights over 
management, development and revenues. Even Pierre Trudeau, 
Mr. Premier, couldn’t take them away, with all of his 
stubbornness and his fighting, but now you’re proposing to let 
Brian Mulroney take those powers away with your blessing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I ask you, Mr. Premier, when are you 
going to take a stand? Will you do it today — do what’s right — 
and will you inform the federal government . . . if this newspaper 
article is correct, and if those powers that the provinces have 
gained after a long, hard fight are in that legislation, will you say 
that you are doing to withdraw your support from that deal which 
is bad for Saskatchewan?  
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just pointed out to the hon. 
member, under our constitution the province is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It has nothing to do with the constitution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It has everything to do with the constitution 
— everything. And now listen. Under our constitution, the 
province has control of the resources, and no federal Act of 
parliament can unilaterally change the constitution. 
 
Now when it comes to interprovincial and export trade, that’s 
clearly in federal jurisdiction, and they are saying . . . they are 
saying that if a province is trading internationally and does not 
comply, there’s two alternatives: one, you can have compliance 
legislation; or secondly, you’re going to bear the brunt of the 
consequences as a result of a GATT (General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade) hearing, a general agreement on tariff ruling 
or a free trade ruling. 
 
Now in the case of Ontario wine, they’re guilty before GATT. 
They have not played fair. Our trading partners have said, 
Ontario wine, you’re not playing by the rules. They’ve admitted 
that they’re guilty. And now they say they don’t want to 
participate in the free trade deal   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1500 
 

because they don’t want to play by the rules. What we’re saying 
is, it would be an awful lot better off for the rest of Canada if 
Ontario would just play ball with the rest of the world and 
particularly with respect to a free trade agreement. So we have 
asked them to participate. 
 
But I will clearly say again, if we can trade more freely 
world-wide, we’re for that. Obviously you’re not. Your research 
said that you were, and you were in favour of it when you were 
in power, because I’ve quoted your legislation, or your research 
here; it said you should have freer trade with United States and 
freer trade with the rest of the world. 
 
Now we know what the constitution says. We can defend, and 
will defend Saskatchewan’s control over resources, but we get a 
little annoyed at the Premier of Ontario saying we can’t have a 
free trade agreement because he doesn’t want to participate on 
wine, and he won’t even do it multilaterally at GATT. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Ban on Open Fires in Saskatchewan 
  

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, all members of the Assembly will be aware of the 
horrendous forest fire situation facing the province at this time 
due to the combination of conditions, weather and the dry 
atmosphere. Now, Mr. Speaker, to put it in context, the five-year 
average at this date is 114 forest fires. At this time last year there 
were 189 forest fires. Today, Mr. Speaker, there are 243 forest 
fires already being seen in the province. In fact, last year we spent 
in excess of $33 million just containing those forest fires. 
 
The largest and worst fire to date, so far this year, Mr. Speaker, 
has been in the Buffalo Narrows area and it has consumed some 
14,000 acres of timber. Now I believe that our fire-fighters — we 
have 503 of them in the field, together with 19 helicopters, 13 
tankers, and 8 bulldozers — are doing a good job in containing 
fire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that we can’t stand by any longer and watch 
the situation unfolding as it is without a ban being placed on open 
fires for the foreseeable future in the province. So later this day, 
Mr. Speaker, in order to protect our resource as best we can, I 
shall be signing a ministerial order placing an immediate ban on 
all open fires in the province, and continuing until such times as 
conditions should improve. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join in 
with the minister about the statement that he has just made on 
banning open fires in northern Saskatchewan. I just returned from 
Buffalo Narrows, and I want to indicate to the House that it is an 
explosive situation in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As you will proceed north from Big River, you’ll find that there’s 
very little leaves on the trees, the grass has not turned green due 
to lack of rain, and our rivers and our lakes are very low and the 
muskegs are completely dry. 
 
And I think Mr. Speaker, that it is an explosive situation and I 
think that to take this action to ban all open fires is a 

wise one, because we could end up losing the whole North if this 
continues. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Drought Conditions in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 
pursuant to rule 39 of this Assembly to seek leave to move a 
motion on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity, If I may, Mr. 
Speaker, I will just take a few moments to indicate the nature of 
the motion which I propose. 
 
The issue, Mr. Speaker, is drought — the crisis conditions facing 
farmers and communities in Saskatchewan because of the 
alarming drought that is now upon us. I know that all members 
of the Assembly would agree, Mr. Speaker, that this is indeed a 
grave and pressing issue. I submit that it is also urgent. 
 
The drought is now upon is in full force. Farmers and 
communities are suffering an action is needed, Mr. Speaker, right 
now. So accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move a motion 
along the following lines: 
 

That this Assembly calls on the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Canada to implement immediately 
programs to assist farmers and communities faced with 
crisis conditions caused by widespread drought, and further 
to develop major long-term initiatives to reduce the impact 
of drought on Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Leave is not granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 1 — Implications of Canada-U.S. Free Trade 
Agreement 

 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll begin my remarks by . . . 
while the House is settling down after question period. I’ll begin 
my remarks by reading the motion that is on the order paper and 
that is to be debated this afternoon. And I quote: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada its strong opposition to the recently signed 
Mulroney-Reagan trade deal; and further, that this 
Assembly maintains that this agreement goes far beyond the 
normal terms of commercial trade deal and requires Canada 
to give up control of important economic and social 
decisions. 

 
That is moved by me and seconded by my colleague, the member 
from Regina North West. 
 
Now it is well, Mr. Speaker, to begin a discussion of that 
resolution . . .  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1501 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The member for Saskatoon 
Fairview is attempting to make his remarks and obviously he’s 
receiving competition from both sides of the House, as a matter 
of fact, and therefore I ask the Hon. Members to allow the 
member to continue. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It will probably take 
the House some time to settle down after the excitement of 
question period, so I’ll fill that time by talking about the run-up 
to the negotiations that led to the document that I have in my 
hand, the so-called free trade agreement. 
 
When you have that discussion, Mr. Speaker, when you talk 
about the events that led up to the negotiations, you are talking 
for the most part about Canada’s experience with the 
countervailing duty that the Americans have been using in the 
1980s to protect their producers in certain situations. 
 
Now that law, that countervailing duty law that the Americans 
have, is part of their trade laws, part of the Canadian trade laws 
too. To Canada’s credit, we haven’t used that very often in the 
past. We’ve been prepared to take our chances in the open market 
and to compete with products coming into Canada no matter what 
the circumstances. 
 
We’ve used the tariff over the years, but as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last 40-odd years we’ve been gradually 
chipping away at that tariff, sometimes dramatically reducing it, 
sometimes reducing it in gradual stages. But none the less, the 
progress over the last 40 years has been steadily towards a tariff 
reduction and eventual tariff elimination. 
 
The United States though, in the 1980s found it necessary, or 
found it advisable to use its trade laws more aggressively. And 
we found that particularly to be the case with the countervailing 
duty. And we saw in the 1980s, countervailing actions taken 
against a number of products.  
 
So far as Saskatchewan is concerned, probably the one that hurt 
the most and the deepest was the countervailing duty on pork, on 
hogs. That countervailing duty went into effect some two or three 
years ago now, and it remains in effect to this date, Mr. Speaker. 
This so-called free trade agreement did nothing to do away with 
the countervail on hogs, or with any of the countervails that are 
being faced by Canadian producers now. 
 
The Americans did that on a number of other articles as well, a 
number of other imports. The House will know the story of the 
softwood lumber exports from Canada to the United States. They 
will know that the United States attempted to impose a 
countervailing duty on softwood lumber on the basis that they 
did not agree that Canadian governments were charging a 
sufficiently high stumpage fee. 
 
Now you would think that the level of stumpage fee, which a 
sovereign country like Canada places upon its forest resources, 
would be the business of that country. But apparently it’s more 
than that. Apparently it’s also the business of the nation to whom 
the lumber is being 

exported, because in the softwood lumber case, the American 
producers complained that they had to pay a higher stumpage fee 
than the Canadian producers, therefore the trade was unfair; the 
Canadian producers enjoyed a trade advantage, therefore there 
ought to be a countervail. 
 
Now to no one’s surprise, that application failed the first time it 
came up. That application failed, and no countervailing duty was 
imposed. But the American producers turned out to be a 
tenacious group of customers because they tried it again, and 
there was no new grounds for their application. 
 
The grounds for the application was the same ground. They were 
complaining about the fact that Canadian stumpage fees are 
relatively low, that Canadian governments had elected not to 
charge as high a stumpage fee as the governments in the United 
States. 
 
Now one would normally expect — I’m sure any right thinking 
person would suspect that the outcome of such application would 
be the same as it was in the first case. But something went wrong. 
Some element entered into the thinking of the federal 
government, and the panic button was literally pushed. The panic 
button was pushed. 
 
Suddenly those forces in the United States around the forest 
industry, the American producers and their lobbyists, were able 
to convince the Canadian government that the threat of a 
countervail this time was real. And we pushed the panic button 
and we had a bunch of hurry-up negotiations, as a result of which 
the sovereign nation of Canada, incredibly, decide to place a tax 
upon its own lumber being exported into the United States. And 
the consideration for us placing a tax on it was so that the 
Americans would not place a countervailing duty on the lumber. 
 
That must rank as one of the most incredible deals in trade 
history. I just challenge anybody to show me a more incredible 
chapter in the history of our dealings with the United States on 
trade matters. 
 
But in any event, we did that. And the case helped set the climate 
of concern in this country for effects of the countervailing . . . of 
the U.S. power to impose countervailing duties upon our trading 
future. 
 
(1445) 
 
And as a result, our Prime Minister, our federal government, 
decided that they would enter into comprehensive trade 
negotiations with the United States for the express purpose, Mr. 
Speaker, of ensuring that that sort of thing didn’t happen again, 
that Canadian trade wouldn’t be subject to that sort of 
harassment, and that our producers would be able to produce 
their goods in Canada and export them to the United States, and 
invest in their plants and invest in their distribution systems and 
their marketing system without being blind-sided somewhere 
down the road by countervail duty. 
 
That was the purpose for entering into these negotiations. We 
called it by different names, but the one that we called   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1502 
 

it by the most often was better access to the American market. 
 
So we entered into these comprehensive trade negotiations. We 
hired Simon Reisman to head up the negotiation team and away 
we went. And it went on in a sort of high . . . in a very high profile 
way, both in Canadian cities and in American cities through the 
better part of two years. And finally they produced this document 
that I have in my hand. 
 
And the really startling part about this document — there are 
many startling parts of it, Mr. Speaker, but the one that startles 
you the most is that Canada didn’t achieve its objective. Canada 
didn’t achieve any part of its objective. It is impossible for 
anyone to read this agreement and come to the conclusion that 
Canada has any better access to the American market than we 
had before this agreement was negotiated. The situation is 
exactly the same. 
 
The American trade laws are word for word the same. Not only 
that, but this document explicitly recognizes that the Americans 
have the right, have the right to change those trade laws. They 
can change them in any way they want. As a matter of fact, 
they’re trying to do that right now, Mr. Speaker, with the trade 
Bill that’s being passed by Congress in the United States and has 
today been vetoed by the President. 
 
That Bill will be voted on later today or tomorrow in the Senate 
and the House to see whether the President’s veto will be 
overruled. But the point is, Mr. Speaker, that this agreement 
expressly allows the Americans to toughen up their trade laws to 
whatever extent they consider appropriate, and they have 
toughened them up. 
 
Our access to the American market as a result of that Bill, if and 
when it’s passed, will be less than our access was two years ago 
or yesterday. And this agreement does nothing to protect 
Canada’s interests in that regard. 
 
The notion of a countervail, Mr. Speaker, depends upon the 
finding of a subsidy. And Canada’s sort of fall back position from 
gaining an exemption from the American trade laws was at least 
to have the Americans define in the agreement what they would 
allow and what they wouldn’t allow; what subsidies would be 
countervailable and what would not be countervailable. And that 
was a position which we apparently took to the bargaining table. 
 
We took a lot of other things to the bargaining table too, and so 
did the Americans. The Americans came to the bargaining table 
with big ambitious ideas about new rules for investment, about a 
new regime for handling energy, or the trade of energy between 
our two countries, and they brought with is a tired old idea that 
they’d peddled around most of the world and been refused 
invariably in every country that it was presented to. That was an 
offer for the . . . an agreement for the free trade and services. 
 
Well the Americans came with this agenda of theirs. And we 
came with a very modest agenda. But one of them was to settle 
this question of subsidies once and for all so that the American 
trade laws could be brought under some 

kind of control. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again we’ve failed. Again we’ve failed to 
improve our access one bit because we got nothing in this 
agreement respecting the subsidies which the Americans will or 
will not allow. We have nothing in this agreement respecting the 
subsidies which will attract a countervail. And that was our fall 
back position from the original position of complete exemption 
from the American trade law. 
 
What we got, Mr. Speaker, what we got was an agreement to 
keep on working on the problem. And so Canada and the United 
States have constituted a working group that will continue over 
the next five to seven years to discuss the question of subsidy and 
try and answer the question that I’ve just posed: what subsidies 
will be allowed and what won’t?  
 
But we’ve done that, Mr. Speaker, having played all of our chips. 
All of our bargaining chips have been played. We’ve given the 
Americans pretty much what they wanted in investment. We’ve 
given the Americans more than they ever dreamed they would 
ever get in the field of energy. We’ve given them the first 
agreement in the history of the human race on the free trade in 
services. And we’ve given them other very substantial thing in 
this agreement. I might mention we’ve also given them 
substantial concessions with respect to many aspects of 
agriculture. 
 
And what did we get in return? Well I’m going to be arguing this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that we didn’t get anything in return — 
nothing worth the price, nothing worth the price at all. And now 
we’re going to go on in these negotiations over the next five to 
seven years to try and solve the fundamental original question of 
subsidy, without having any chips left to play, without having 
any leverage at all. 
 
Now the Americans have fired the first shot in that war, or at least 
in that negotiation. The Americans have come forward with a 
definition of subsidy which apparently is just as tough as it could 
possibly be. The result of that would be that we in Canada will 
not be able to continue doing many of the things that we have 
taken for granted over years and years — many, many things. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give us an example. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’ll give you lots of examples. Just settle down, 
sonny boy. I’m making the speech here, not you, you’ll get your 
turn later. 
 
My point is simply that we stand no chance at all of coming out 
of those negotiations with respect to subsidy with any agreement 
worthy of the name. And the end result, Mr. Speaker, will likely 
be that our access to the American market is going to be worse 
five years from now than it was yesterday. And that’s disgraceful, 
considering that’s the very reason why we went into these 
negotiations in the first place. 
 
Now the House seems to have returned so some kind of order, 
and I will now begin to discuss some of the particular details of 
this agreement which I and my party   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1503 
 

find to be so outrageous, so contrary to the vital interests of 
Canada. And again and again, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be 
asking the question: why would we agree to this? Why would any 
sovereign country agree to the things that are in this agreement? 
 
And I’ll start with the field of investment. I’ve referred to that in 
previous debate in this House, but I want to come back to it again 
because it’s a very, very important matter. The question of 
foreign investment in Canada raises directly the question of the 
ownership of the Canadian economy. That has been a matter of 
public debate and public controversy for at least 25 years. 
 
It was brought to our attention during the Pearson years when 
Walter Gordon was the minister of Finance, and really brought 
to our attention the mounting problem that he saw in Canada, 
which was ownership of our economy by non-Canadians. 
Naturally, living next door to the United States, which is a 
country of enormous wealth, most of that foreign ownership 
tends to be American. 
 
Now we’ve done quite a number of things over the last 25 years 
to monitor and, in some situations, control the level of investment 
by non-Canadians in Canada. We’ve done it principally through 
a review agency set up by the federal government. That’s taken 
different forms over the years, Mr. Speaker, and it’s followed 
different policies over the years. Sometimes it’s a relaxed agency 
that allows foreign investments without much debate, without 
much controversy. Other times it’s tough, and turns down, and 
has turned down many proposals for investment in Canada by 
non-Canadians. 
 
It has established the practice over the years of attaching 
conditions, which is to say the agency will say, yes, we will 
permit that particular foreign take-over but only on certain 
conditions and here they are. And the Canadians became world 
famous at setting conditions that were in favour of Canadian 
businesses, and Canadian workers. 
 
Now that item, the item of public policy, that public policy issue 
finds itself in chapter 16 of the trade deal. That chapter was 
negotiated in the light of the fact that since 1984, when the 
Conservatives were elected as the government of this country, 
there have been more than 2,200 — 2,200 purchases of Canadian 
businesses by American investors. They have been allowed by 
the present reviewing agency, which is called Investment 
Canada, that replaced the foreign investment review agency that 
existed prior to 1984, so that the present mode of the federal 
reviewing agency has been quite liberal. They allow foreign 
investment with practically . . . with very little resistance, shall 
we say, Mr. Speaker, very little resistance. 
 
Now we find that the rules respecting foreign investment are to 
be changed very dramatically as regards American investors. 
Now the limit is . . . the limit above which there must be review 
is $5 million. If an American investor is purchasing a Canadian 
business where the selling price exceeds $5 million, it must be 
reviewed. 
 
Under this agreement, Mr. Speaker, that is to be changed, 

that is to be changed in very short order over a period of four or 
five years, at which time the limit, the threshold for review, will 
have increased from $5 million to $150 million. 
 
Now the result of it will be that any American can come up into 
Canada and purchase any business that sells for less than $150 
million without any agency having any right to review it or to 
attach conditions to it regardless of what sector it’s in, with the 
exception of the energy sector, which I’ll deal with . . . my 
colleague’s doing to deal with later. But for the rest of the 
economy regardless of what sector it’s in, the American investor 
is going to be able to come up to Canada, purchase the business 
without Canada having any opportunity whatever to review the 
deal — no opportunity to say no, and no opportunity to say yes, 
but with the following conditions. 
 
Now why would we do this, Mr. Speaker? Why would we do 
this? I mean, is it the public policy of this country that our 
economy, our businesses should be owned by non-Canadians? 
Does anyone dare get up and suggest that that is the policy? And 
yet that’s what we’re inviting. 
 
We’re stripping ourselves, we’re stripping ourselves of the 
sovereign right to say not, or to say okay, but on the following 
conditions. There isn’t another country in the industrialized 
world that doesn’t have that power. Every country in the 
industrialized world, including the United States, has 
mechanisms in place which perform that role — I qualify that 
because the United States has the mechanism but hasn’t used it 
under President Reagan, but has used it many, many times under 
other presidents, and no doubt will again. And their mechanism 
isn’t going away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why would we do that? And I searched and searched and 
searched for an answer, and I have one to offer, but it’s the last 
one I expected to find. It occurred to me only recently, Mr. 
Speaker. It is simply this: this represents the policy of the federal 
Conservative Party; this represents the policy of the federal 
Conservative Party. They have never said it is our policy that the 
economy of this country may become owned by foreigners — 
they’ve never put it in those terms — but what they have said is: 
we welcome investment; investment creates jobs. 
 
We’re not talking about that, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking here 
about take-overs. That’s what the $150 million applies to. A 
chapter also says Americans can come up here and invest in 
anything they like without any review. That’s another subject that 
could consume the whole afternoon to talk about. 
 
But the outrageous thing is that with respect to existing 
businesses, where they’re not going to create one job, where all 
that’s happening is the change in ownership, a change in the right 
of who gets the profit, who gets the dividends, who gets the 
benefits from the business — that’s what we’re talking about, and 
the right to control that situation is being stripped away from us. 
 
(1500) 
 
That’s ridiculous. That is not in the best interest of   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1504 
 

Canada. And the part about it, Mr. Speaker, that really grabs you 
is that this policy position of the federal Conservative Party is not 
simply going into a new piece of legislation, a new piece of 
legislation passed by parliament, which after the next election 
might be amended by a government which has a different policy 
on the issue. 
 
That’s not what we’re talking about here. We’re talking here 
about including those provisions, which you would normally 
expect to see in legislation, in a trade agreement of all places — 
in a trade agreement. That’s chapter 16, sort of an added-on 
chapter to a trade agreement.  
 
And by doing that, Mr. Speaker, they changed the whole nature 
of the provision. That provision, as part of this agreement, is no 
longer subject to amendment by a new parliament. Now longer 
is it subject to amendment by a new government in Ottawa who 
might have a different policy on the ownership of the Canadian 
economy. 
 
Parliament just can’t simply pass new law and render chapter 16 
meaningless. The only way in which chapter 16 can be changed 
is if the United States will sit down with Canada and agree that it 
will be amended. Well good luck! Good luck to the government 
that tries to negotiate an amendment to this investment provision. 
I mean, this is what the Americans have wanted for years and 
years and years. This is a provision that is probably beyond their 
wildest dreams, and they’re not going to agree to its amendments 
. . . to its amendment. 
 
The only way that Canada can get out of the provisions of chapter 
16 is to abrogate the entire agreement. That’s the only way out. I 
will deal with the consequences of that later in my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. But that’s how serious this is. It’s far more serious, far 
more serious than a mere Act of parliament, than the mere law of 
the land, because that can be amended and changed; this cannot.. 
 
The agriculture provisions are of particular interest to the 
province of Saskatchewan, and they are complex, Mr. Speaker. 
It is to the agriculture provisions that supporters of the agreement 
go when they try and find something in this agreement that is of 
benefit to Saskatchewan. And I’ll concede those right up front, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is an elimination of tariffs, and in agriculture trade you will 
find tariffs with respect to beef, live and processed beef — there’s 
a 1 or 2 cent tariff, depending on whether it’s alive or dead, going 
both ways, and that goes away. So in the present market, that’s 
of some advantage to Canada. In another market, it may be of 
advantage to the United States. Time will tell just how that works 
out, but for now there is an advantage there. 
 
There is also a small advantage with respect to some cuts of pork 
which now attract a very small tariff — I think 1 cent a pound — 
that goes away. Now that’s some benefit isn’t it, Mr. Speaker? 
And yet . . . I mean, I say that ironically, of course; it’s a very 
minimal kind of benefit, but that’s about all. 
 
There is a provision in here where both countries agree that they 
won’t put on any quotas on meat goods. Now that’s important for 
the beef producers because there is 

normally an import quota put up by the United States and by 
Canada for the total amount of the beef that they’ll take from 
other countries. Now we have never traded up to our quota with 
the United States, but we might some day. So it’s important, I 
suppose, that they can’t put any quotas on there. 
 
It is very, very interesting indeed to inquire why that quota 
prohibition does not apply to pork. It applies to beef, Mr. 
Speaker, it applies to beef, it applies to . . . let me just quote the 
definition: 
 

It applies to meat goods and that means the meat of cattle 
including veal. It applies to goats (That’ll be of a lot of 
interest to Saskatchewan) and it applies to sheep, except 
lambs (which of course is the real market for sheep; I mean, 
that’s what people like to eat, is the lamb not the mutton, 
but . . .) it applies to sheep, except lambs, whether fresh, 
chilled or frozen, but it doesn’t apply to hogs. 

 
Now why wouldn’t it apply to hogs? I mean, if we’re talking 
about a free trade agreement and we’re talking about both 
countries undertaking that there won’t be any import quotas, why 
not that undertaking with respect to pork and pork products? But 
no, that protection is not there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get on to the thing I was just going to talk 
about, let me also say that there is provision in here for the two 
countries to continue talking about reducing border hassles, 
about dealing with such things as animal health and veterinary 
drugs and feeds and that sort of thing, to try and get away from 
situations where border trade is hassled because of some 
hormone that Canadian cattle may have taken or may have the 
opportunity to take, or things that we have experienced in the 
past. 
 
And the whole industry was pleased that these sort of discussions 
are going to be going on. The agreement provides, in article 708, 
for the establishment of working groups which will tackle some 
of these problems, and the industry hopes that that has a good 
result. 
 
But that’s about all you can say, Mr. Speaker. Literally that’s 
about all you can say that is a definite plus for Canadians under 
the agriculture section of the free trade agreement. 
 
On the down side, Mr. Speaker, there are considerable 
disadvantages to this chapter. And probably the most significant 
is that the agreement provides for the circumstances in which our 
domestic market can be satisfied, or can have access to American 
wheat, oats, and barley. 
 
Now here is Canada, a major, major world producer of those 
grains, shipping to countries across the world, having from the 
very beginning satisfied its own requirements internally, now 
opens up those same markets to American competition. And that 
competition bypasses the Canadian Wheat Board entirely, Mr. 
Speaker. Not just a matter of our flour mills contracting with an 
American supplier to supply wheat, oats and barley directly to 
the flour mill.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1505 
 

Now people looked at that and they saw immediately that it just 
blew holes in the idea of a Canadian domestic price program 
which we’ve had in this country for some time. We in western 
Canada have profited from that program buy large amounts of 
money over the years. It has meant that Canadians have had to 
pay more for their flour, and hence for their baked goods, than 
would have been the case if there was no such program. Not a lot 
of money, but it’s some money. That’s going out the window. 
And the time at which it was to go out the window under this 
agreement is when the level of government support for wheat, 
oats, and barley, any of those grains, became about the same in 
the two countries. And they have elaborate provisions here for 
calculating how those government support programs are to be 
evaluated so you would know when the level of support was 
about the same. 
 
Our government, for reasons that have been explained as far as I 
am aware, decided not to wait until the level of support for the 
two grains was the same before scrapping the domestic price 
program. 
 
And so it was that on Christmas Eve of this year in an 
announcement which came over the air waves at 3 o’clock in the 
afternoon on Christmas Eve, prime media time, just when all of 
Canada is waiting on the edge of its chair to be told what is the 
most recent pronouncement from the federal government, we’re 
told the domestic pricing program for wheat is gone, scrapped. 
 
And all of a sudden Canadian wheat producers who were selling 
into our domestic market at a price of over $7 a bushel suddenly 
find themselves without that program, and therefore selling into 
the Canadian market at the world price, which at Christmas Eve 
was about $2.60 a bushel, something like that. 
 
Well that represented an immediate loss to Canadian agriculture 
of $280 million a year. That’s a lot of money. Some people have 
drawn to my attention the fact that Ontario wheat producers were 
increasingly selling more wheat to the flour mills, and therefore 
eastern Canada was benefitting more and more from that 
program as time went on. Therefore, the argument seemed to go, 
we in western Canada shouldn’t get too excited about it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the last year of that program, 85 per cent of 
that domestic market was in fact being supplied by western 
Canadian wheat producers, 15 per cent was being supplied by 
Ontario producers. 
 
So 85 per cent of the $280 million benefit is still a lot of money. 
And where are we going to look for this money? Under the 
program it fell as a sort of levy against all of the consumers of 
flour and flour products. That’s gone. Now that $280 million 
apparently is going be made up by the federal government. The 
Premier in this House has told us that it would be included in the 
adjustment mechanisms. The Prime Minister has given a similar 
answer. But they haven’t said, are they just going to pay this year, 
or are they going to pay it next year also, or are they going to pay 
it for five years or 10 years, or how long is that going to go on, 
that adjustment assistance? So far as I’m aware, they have not yet 
given an undertaking to Canadian 

agriculture as to how long that benefit will continue to be paid. 
Now that’s an important, important question, Mr. Speaker, and 
the agriculture industry in this country is waiting anxiously for 
the federal government to give the undertaking so that they will 
know just how much they’ve given up as a result of article 705 
of this free trade agreement. 
 
Now article 706 is really an odd one, and it deals with poultry 
and eggs. And I’ll — just to save the time of the House — I’ll 
just talk about the egg part of it. 
 
When you first read the agreement you say, well what’s it mean? 
Because it is not apparent to us who don’t produce eggs just what 
it does mean. What it says is that Canada will permit eggs to be 
imported into Canada from the United States. It’s not a new 
thing, that’s been going on for some time . . . well since ever, but 
it’s been controlled over the last few years to a specified level. 
And this agreement says that Canada will permit eggs to be 
imported in any given year and the level, the level of import shall 
be no less than the following percentage of the previous year’s 
Canadian domestic shell production. And then there follows 
percentages: 1.647 per cent for shell eggs, and other percentages 
for frozen or powdered eggs. 
 
And when you look at it, it doesn’t mean anything to you, it 
doesn’t mean anything at all. But, Mr. Speaker, talk to an egg 
producer, talk to an egg producer about the effect of those 
provisions on the egg industry in Saskatchewan. They say that 
the negotiators of this deal simply didn’t understand what they 
were negotiating. They simply took the American industry’s 
numbers and converted them to percentages and put them into 
this agreement. And they say that the result of this agreement will 
be disastrous so far as they egg producers of Saskatchewan are 
concerned — disastrous. They just can’t live under these 
provisions. 
 
Now turning briefly to chicken and turkey, I will just say this, 
Mr. Speaker. These are bizarre provisions, bizarre provisions 
because, while we talk about the amount of the import of chicken 
and turkeys that may be brought into Canada for sale, we very 
kindly allow Americans to ship in here all of the really 
high-priced commodity items, all of the really high-priced cuts 
of chicken and turkey — the kind of stuff that the yuppies would 
cook on their barbecues on a Friday night at $7 a pound or $9 a 
pound. These are very kindly left to the Americans to supply 
while our Canadian industry picks up the dregs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or on their yachts, cruising in the Pacific. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — That’s right. The very sort of thing you might 
expect to be fed on a yacht, sailing out of Vancouver harbour. 
 
In any event, it goes on, Mr. Speaker. But one of the things that 
we’re going to be doing, as the future goes along, is to be faced 
with, I think, with applications for countervailing duties with 
respect to agricultural imports into the United States. And I think 
the Americans have   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1506 
 

given us fair notice that they’re going to be doing that. They’re 
going to be checking the agricultural goods that we are shipping 
into the U.S. for subsidies. And where they can find a subsidy 
with respect to an import that’s doing harm to producers in the 
United States, they’re going to be taking action under the 
American trade laws. 
 
And what we have done in this agreement is to very kindly, very 
nicely identify all of the government’s support programs for 
agriculture as regards wheat, oats, and barley. Very kindly we’ve 
done that, and we’ve done it page after page after page. Not only 
do we identify them as government support programs and 
therefore subsidies, but we actually go on to tell them how to 
figure it out, how to figure out the value of them. 
 
And so we learn that the income foregone adjustment relating to 
Canadian Wheat Board delivery quotas — if anybody can 
understand what that means — is to be resolved, or is to be 
calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
 
(A - B - C) x D - E + F 
 
And on and on it goes — an incredible formula for calculating 
the value of the Canadian Wheat board delivery quota system. 
 
What is that, Mr. Speaker? Identifying that as a government 
support program, and then going the further step of actually 
telling the Americans how to figure out the value. You can just 
see their trade tribunals down there in Washington, or wherever 
they were, just looking at the free trade agreement and saying, oh 
yes, well here’s how you calculate that subsidy, and that subsidy 
therefore is being paid, and there fore we’re entitled to 
countervail against it. 
 
Why would our government set us up in this way? Set us up in 
this way to provide us with the . . . Remember that this is directly 
related to article 706, and all that said was the triggering 
mechanism for when the Americans would be able to sell their 
wheat directly into the Canadian market. Some favour that is for 
us, isn’t it, Mr. Speaker? Some wonderful favour! 
 
And in connection with that wonderful favour, we have 
specifically identified all of these subsidy programs and showed 
the Americans how they should be evaluated. Well that’s 
ridiculous. What responsible Canadian government would 
behave like that in sensitive matters of trade such as those that 
surround agriculture? 
 
So while there are positive aspects — and if the member from 
Weyburn had been here earlier he would have heard me concede 
that there are positive aspects to the agriculture section — on the 
whole that agriculture chapter is not in the best interests of 
Canada. 
 
Now I want to turn next, Mr. Speaker, to the chapter respecting 
services. And here we would be very interested in hearing the 
member from Weyburn tell us what his thoughts are with respect 
to the chapter on services. This chapter providing for free trade 
in services represents, as I said earlier, the first time in the history 
of the human race that two countries have entered into an 

agreement for the free trade in services. 
 
Now the Macdonald commission, which was inclined towards 
free trade and which recommended the negotiation — 
comprehensive trade negotiations to achieve a free trade 
agreement — considered the question of services and whether it 
ought to be included. The Macdonald commission concluded, 
Mr. Speaker, that Canada ought not to attempt to enter into an 
agreement for free trade and services wit the United States. 
 
There are two basic reasons for this, although the reasoning is 
complex. There are two basic reasons. The first is that no country 
in the world has ever done it, so we have no experience to tell us 
what will be the effect of it. 
 
But secondly, and more seriously, there hasn’t even been any 
research done on the impact of such an agreement. Do you 
understand, Mr. Speaker? No one anywhere — no economists, 
no political scientists — no one has actually tried to work out 
what will be the impact of an agreement for the free trade and 
services. And certainly not my friends opposite, and certainly not 
Ottawa. 
 
This idea for free trade in services has been peddled by the 
Americans to every industrialized country in the world. They’ve 
tried it on Japan, they’ve tried it on the south-east Asia countries, 
they’ve tried it on the European Common Market, they’ve tried 
it on Australia, Mexico and Canada. Everybody said no, except 
Canada. And Canada enters into it. We enter into it in the most 
general terms imaginable. 
 
This service sector is a speciality of the United States. The world 
recognizes that. In the provision of services the Americans are 
the world leaders. There are few areas of trade where the 
Americans can say that any more, but in the area of services they 
certainly can. In our trading relationship with the United States 
where Canada enjoys a substantial surplus, in the area of services 
the U.S. has a surplus. And the reasons for that lay in the structure 
of their economy and in the things they do — the giant credit card 
companies that work world-wide, and so on and so forth. 
 
But suffice to say that the Americans are the giants here. And we 
enter into this little chapter which goes four pages, in which — 
in the most general terms imaginable — we open up our economy 
to participation by American firms who want to provide services 
covered by the agreement. 
 
Now those services are just practically everything, Mr. Speaker 
— cover many aspects of agriculture, soil preparation, crop 
planting, cultivating, crop protection, crop harvesting, farm 
management, crop preparation services for market, livestock and 
animal specialty services except veterinary, and so on . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . except veterinary. I know, I know; it 
doesn’t cover lawyers either, and I’m glad about that. 
 
Mining services — practically the whole of the mining industry 
is included, Mr. Speaker; practically all of   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1507 
 

construction; practically all of wholesale trade, vending 
machines, direct selling; practically all of insurance and all of 
real estate; many, many commercial services, such as 
commercial cleaning, advertising and promotion, public 
relations, credit bureau, collection agencies, telephone 
answering, janitorial services, hotel reservations. All sorts of 
professions — engineering, architecture, survey, accounting, 
auditing, agrology, librarian services — not veterinaries and not 
lawyers. Lawyers helped negotiate this agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
and whatever you say about lawyers, they’re not dumb. They 
exempted themself from the agreement. 
 
And most ominously, I think, Mr. Speaker, is this concession — 
health care facilities management services. We have conceded to 
the American providers of health care services the right to come 
up here and run our hospitals, our nursing homes, our medical 
clinics, our dental clinics — anything that fall under the heading: 
health care facilities. 
 
Now what we do in this chapter is to say to these American 
entrepreneurs that they have the same right as any Canadian to 
establish those services, to have access to and use domestic 
distribution systems, establish a commercial presence and invest 
as they may find necessary, subject only to the chapter on 
investment which only applies to purchases of more than $150 
million. 
 
It means literally that the giant firm in the United States, firms 
that provide hospital services, will be able to come up into 
Saskatchewan, for example, will be able to buy hospitals, lease 
hospitals, build hospitals, run hospitals, bring themself under our 
hospitalization plan, certain aspects of our medical care plan, and 
continue to provide those services for ever. 
 
And there will not be anything that we will ever be able to do to 
affect that situation. We will never, ever be able to say: hey, 
something’s wrong here; this is not working as it should. All of 
these nursing homes in Saskatchewan that are now being run or 
leased or owned by an American health care firm is not providing 
a service to our old people, or not providing a good enough 
service, or the service is too expensive. 
 
We won’t be able to say: we want to stop this, or we should do it 
some other way; we should do it through our municipalities, or 
we should do it through co-operatives, or we should do it through 
non-profit companies owned by families of the people living 
there, or anything like that. 
 
We’d deprive our children and our grandchildren for ever of all 
sorts of policy options about what they may want to do or not do 
in order to provide certain kinds of health care services where the 
Americans have established a presence pursuant to this article 14, 
this chapter 14 of the agreement. 
 
Now why would we want to do that? What was wrong with the 
service sector as we saw it in Canada here before this agreement? 
Why did we think it necessary to specifically open it up to the 
American investors in this way and provide them with all sorts 
of protection so far as 

the future is concerned? Why would any country do that, and 
particularly why would they do it when there’s no precedent for 
such an agreement in the world, where country after country had 
turned down the idea. And where the Macdonald commission, 
which the federal government likes to cite as an important . . . 
today in this House the Premier cited Macdonald as an important 
supporter of this agreement, when that commission 
recommended against the inclusion of such a chapter. 
 
Well we’re told — let me just enlarge on the idea of what we’ve 
been told — we have not been told, the people of Saskatchewan 
and the people of Canada have not been told what is in this 
agreement. The people of Canada have not had this agreement 
explained to them. The people of Canada have been subjected to 
a sales job, and the people of Saskatchewan have in particular 
been exposed to a sales job by their governments that they should 
buy this agreement, that they should look on this agreement as 
being a great benefit to them, and they should support it on the 
basis that it has all these benefits in it. 
 
Now we’ve heard the most ludicrous, outrageous statements 
being made by federal ministers and by the provincial ministers 
as to the benefit that ordinary people in this country will enjoy as 
a result of this agreement. We’ve heard estimates as to how much 
money they’re going to save and have in their pocket, and how 
much better off they’re going to be. Well I want to deal with that, 
Mr. Speaker, because it’s important, and because I think that it’s 
just not true, that it misrepresents the effect of this agreement. 
 
Let me start by just going back to the Christmas Eve 
announcement that the domestic wheat price program had been 
scrapped. That meant immediately that the price of wheat as it 
entered the flour mill was being reduced by almost two-thirds. In 
other words . . . well specifically the price was being reduced 
from about $7 a bushel to about $2.60 a bushel. That’s quite a 
dramatic drop at the flour mill for the price of the raw commodity 
wheat. Now in that same announcement, at 3 o’clock on New 
Year’s Eve on the CBC — which is where I heard it — there was, 
in the same newscast, a report of an interview with a senior 
official, a senior executive of one of the major bakeries. And that 
senior official was asked to comment on the fact that the 
domestic wheat price program had been scrapped. And he of 
course welcomed — this is a bakery — he welcomed the 
announcement. He welcomed it, but he said Canadian consumers 
ought not to expect to see any decrease in the price of bread as a 
result of that drop. Now imagine that, Mr. Speaker, the price of 
flour gets cut in about three, and we’re told by the bakeries, the 
same day, the same hour, that that will not result in any decrease 
in the price of bread. 
 
(1530) 
 
And that was happening at the very time when these ministers 
were going around this country telling us how much money we’re 
going to have in our jeans pocket as a result of this agreement. 
And I asked myself: if a saving like that, if a saving like that in 
the price of wheat is not going to result in any drop in the price 
of bread, then how are any of the gradual, phased-in tariff 
reductions in this agreement going to result in any money in my 
jeans? How   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1508 
 

is that going to happen? 
 
Now the next story that I want to relate to you happened some 
weeks later, like two or three weeks later; it couldn’t have been 
longer. I read a report in the Toronto Globe and Mail by a 
reporter who had gone out with this free trade agreement to two 
major department stores and asked: what would be the effect of 
this agreement on prices in the stores? Now the reporter went to 
talk to senior executives of Sears and The Bay, and they were 
asked that question, and they both gave substantially the same 
answer. They said consumers ought not to expect to see any 
decrease in the price of goods in the store. They said the tariff 
coming off under this agreement is simply too small and it’s 
coming off over too long a period of time and you will not notice 
any decrease of prices in the store. 
 
Now that’s the second thing. Now if you take those two things 
together, you can legitimately ask yourself: in what 
circumstances are we going to find price reductions, price 
reductions under this agreement? In what circumstances will we 
find it? 
 
And I must say, Mr. Speaker, after all these months of the 
government trying to sell this agreement like it were some magic 
cure, some magic potion — cure your warts and your harelip and 
your big mouth all at one time; just have a little dose of it and it’ll 
fix you up — at the very time that all that sales job takes place, 
we hear these two little stories: the price of wheat and the Sears 
and Bay people telling us there’d be no decrease of the price in 
the stores. 
 
And then ask yourself this: what has been our experience in this 
country, what has been our experience in this country with 
respect to tariff reduction? Keep in mind that we’ve been 
reducing tariffs steadily under the GATT and the various 
renegotiations or negotiations under the GATT for the last 40 
years. 
 
And some tariff drops have been large and immediate. Some 
have been phased in like these are — phased in. This is phased 
in over a period of 10 years. And who among us can remember 
any circumstance in which those tariff reductions have led to a 
decrease in prices? 
 
Now I’ve raised that challenge all across this province, speaking 
to countless groups, thousands of people. Does anyone remember 
a circumstance in which a tariff reduction has led to a decrease 
in the price of the goods that we ordinary Canadians buy? And 
the fact of the matter is that no one is able to come forward with 
such an example. 
 
And so I conclude, Mr. Speaker, that the argument that this 
agreement is going to be saving us Canadians money that we can 
jingle in our pockets is just hokum. It is not true, and it just won’t 
happen. If this agreement has merits, if this agreement has any 
merit at all, it is certainly not meritorious because it’s going to 
save you and I money, and that you and I are going to have more 
money in our pockets as a result of it. 
 
I come back, Mr. Speaker, to the question that I’ve been asking 
all afternoon, that I’ve been asking for the last four or five months 
around this province.

Why would our country have agreed to these things? Why would 
any sovereign nation have agreed to some of the things that are 
in this agreement? Probably the most outrageous chapter is the 
energy chapter, which my colleague from Regina North West is 
going to address in just a few minutes. 
 
Throughout this agreement we have made enormous concession 
to the Americans. We have satisfied their wish list, Mr. Speaker. 
You take the American wish list as it existed when it went into 
these negotiations — this agreement satisfies substantial portions 
of that list. This is better than the Americans ever thought it could 
be; I think the way the Finance Committee of the Senate has 
handled the matter is eloquent proof of that. 
 
At the start of negotiations, that committee just didn’t want the 
negotiations to start, and only with a lot of arm twisting was the 
President able to convince 11 out of the 21 members that they 
should give the green light for negotiations to start, and 
negotiation started with an 11 to 10 vote from that committee. 
And yet, just last week, that same committee took a long look at 
this agreement and pronounced by a unanimous vote that they 
approved it. They came out warmly supportive of it, and they’re 
obviously going to push for it, and little wonder, little wonder. 
This document does more for them than they ever thought 
possible. 
 
Now why would we do these things? Why would we have the . . . 
why would we include the provisions on energy that we’re going 
to talk about later? Whey would we have these outrageous 
provisions with respect to American take-overs of Canadian 
businesses?  
 
Why would we agree to the first agreement on free trade and 
services in the history of mankind, and right in the teeth of our 
best advice on the point? And why would we have made the 
substantial concessions with respect to agricultural trade, and 
many other aspects of the agreement that I haven’t touched upon, 
respecting government procurement and the banking industry 
and all kinds of other things? Why would we have done it? That 
question haunted me for months — “haunted” is the right word 
because it was so frustrating not being able to find the answer to 
it. 
 
One answer could be that it was poorly negotiated, and I think it 
was poorly negotiated. But that doesn’t explain how come it’s so 
one-sided, how come it is so contrary to Canada’s interests. 
 
The second possibility that I considered was that the Prime 
Minister had so much political capital tied up in the idea of a free 
trade agreement that he just had to deliver something, and this 
was all he could get. And I think to some extent that’s true. But 
that also is not a satisfactory explanation of just why he had to 
give away so much, because clearly the Americans would have 
accepted much less. This goes much further. 
 
An Hon. Member: What did he give away? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: The member asked, what did he give away, and if 
he had been here for my speech, he would have heard. I 
recommend Hansard to him tomorrow.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1509 
 

But why would these things have been done? Then the answer 
occurred to me, Mr. Speaker. It occurred to me on the same day 
that the Deputy Premier told us in Crown Corporations that this 
government intended to sell off Crown corporations in such a 
way that we would never be able to take them back. 
 
Now that remark is for another day, but it gave me the clue; it 
gave me the clue to this agreement. The federal government 
doesn’t think it’s given away anything. Some of my friends 
opposite don’t think we’ve given away anything because they 
agree with this nonsense, Mr. Speaker. They agree that in 1988 
and for ever onwards it is appropriate to open the Canadian 
economy to unlimited — practically unlimited — American 
take-over. 
 
They agree that it is appropriate to practically strip ourselves of 
any meaningful control or jurisdiction or sovereignty over the 
energy industry. They agree that it’s appropriate to deal with 
services in this way and open the service sector of our economy 
to American participation for ever, a service sector which is so 
important because it employs seven out of every 10 Canadians 
— seven out of every 10 Canadians — the real giant employer in 
this country. 
 
They agree with these things, Mr. Speaker. But rather than 
simply incorporate them into the legislation of our country, they 
have decided to add them on to a trade agreement. These chapters 
represent the agenda of the Conservative Party in Canada. And 
they’re not content merely to enact that agenda as a legislative 
program, which is the democratic way, which is the way in which 
government programs normally come into effect in this country, 
but they have rather added them on as chapters in a trade 
agreement. 
 
Now I explained to you earlier, Mr. Speaker, what is the 
significance of that. The significance is that if an NDP 
government is elected federally in the next election, or if a 
Liberal government is elected in the next federal election, that 
new government would not have the power to enact legislation 
that was contrary to this agreement. This agreement is binding 
and can only be amended with the consent of the United States, 
and that’s what we’ve got here, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I framed 
the question in the way I did to the Premier during question 
period today. 
 
That hidden agenda is the fact that these enormously important 
policy issues are being cast in concrete, are being cast in concrete 
through the technique of this agreement. And these important 
issues of public policy are being taken off the public agenda in 
Canada, being removed from debate between us in this House or 
Canadians anywhere as to what the law ought to be or what our 
policy ought to be. Our policy is what’s in this agreement; that’s 
what the Conservatives would lead us to accept, and that we can 
not accept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear!  
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And that’s why members of our party, at all 
levels in this country, right across this country, are so 

diametrically opposed to this agreement. It represents the Tory 
agenda in Canada. It puts it into effect in such a way that it can 
not be changed by our parliaments or by our legislature, and it is 
simply not acceptable. We oppose it and we will continue to do 
so for as long as we can. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Speaker, I move the motion, seconded by the 
member from Regina North West: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada its strong opposition to the recently signed 
Mulroney-Reagan trade deal; and further, that this 
Assembly maintains that this agreement goes far beyond the 
normal terms of commercial trade deal and requires Canada 
to give up control of important economic and social 
decisions. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
second the motion put forward by my colleague, the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview, on the issue of the Mulroney-Reagan 
trade deal as has been read out in this Assembly already. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize what my colleague has said, in 
that no one in Saskatchewan, and in particular in our party, is 
opposed to increased trade between Canada and the United States 
and other countries in the world. Everyone knows that 
Saskatchewan and Canada have to trade to prosper, and that’s not 
the issue; it has never been the issue in this Assembly. 
 
The issue is whether this particular deal meets the needs of our 
province and our country. The issue is not our desire for more 
trade with the U.S. and the world; the issue is this particular 
Mulroney-Reagan secret trade deal. And I maintain that this 
agreement is not satisfactory because it goes well beyond the 
normal terms of a commercial trade deal and requires Canada to 
give up control of important economic and social decisions. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about basically the energy section of 
the trade deal and relate it in some short term to the privatization 
philosophy of the Conservative government in this Assembly, 
and the Conservative government in Ottawa as well. 
 
But I want to commence my remarks with regard to the energy 
deal by talking about the trade deal in general. And I want to 
remind members that a Toronto newspaper, I believe it was The 
Toronto Star, leaked and printed a government document 
confirming that it was the deliberate strategy of the Mulroney 
Conservative government in Ottawa not to inform Canadians of 
the details of the so-called free trade agreement at that time. 
 
And that was very disturbing news from the opposition’s point 
of view, Mr. Speaker, and in particular since it was coming from 
government elected by Canadians for Canadians, we had a 
government of Canadians not   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1510 
 

wanting to share the details of this real historical agreement with 
the people that got it where it was. And it can only mean, in my 
view, the holding back of this detail and information to the people 
of Canada and of Saskatchewan that the more you know about 
the Mulroney-Reagan trade deal, the less you will like it. 
 
And as we hear more and more information coming forward as 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview is travelling about the 
province talking about the issue, and as information is coming 
available to more and more individuals, not only in the political 
realm but normal ordinary Canadians, they are saying that 
perhaps there was a very good reason for the Conservative 
government in Ottawa and this government in Saskatchewan to 
keep the deal secret because the details are absolutely 
astonishing, Mr. Speaker, absolutely astonishing. 
 
And it means, as one reads through the agreement, that Canadians 
like the deal less and less, and it means that we have surrendered, 
in very simple terms without firing a shot, some very significant, 
independent, and sovereign issues that any country in the world 
have really mobilized their forces to defend over the years. And 
we can discuss all the countries around the world that have really 
gone to the barricades so that they had control over their 
resources when other countries wanted them. They went to the 
barricades when they wanted to control the economy in their own 
country, when foreign nations wanted to influence the economy 
and have control over that. 
 
But in Canada with the government that we have, Mr. Speaker, 
we have basically surrendered some very fundamental principles 
of independence and sovereignty to a nation without even 
consultation with the public, let alone storming the barricades 
and mounting a defence and mobilizing the people of this nation 
to stop that from happening. 
 
But this agreement, Mr. Speaker, is far worse than a simple 
agreement to reduce tariffs, as my colleague from Saskatoon 
Fairview has outlined. It deals with far more than tariffs, it deals 
with our sovereign nation. It deal with things like the elimination 
of the two-price wheat system, unfettered U.S. purchasing of the 
Canadian economy, and, of course, American influence on 
whether certain public services can be offered to Canadians by 
Canadian governments. And the issue I want to deal with today, 
Mr. Speaker, us our future ability to use resources, our resources, 
to diversify an to control our economy as we see fit. 
 
The United States wanted the removal of Canadian tariffs, and 
guaranteed access to our energy supplies, and the elimination of 
Canadian government involvement in our economy, so they 
could gain better control and better access to Canadian markets. 
And the U.S. got those objectives as have been outlined earlier. 
 
Canada, on the other hand, wanted the removal of the U.S. trade 
remedy laws to gain better access to the U.S. market. But we, as 
a nation, did not obtain that. The U.S. simply got what they 
wanted and Canada did not. 
 
The deal, in my view, will make the Canadian economy 

more like the U.S. economy and will integrate the two economies 
very quickly. Supporters of the deal say the deal is good because 
they want the U.S. market system in our nation and they believe 
that the U.S. market system allows the rich to get richer. 
Opponents say the deal is bad because they know the U.S. market 
system means more inequality, more poverty, less prosperity for 
ordinary farm families and working families, and fewer and 
weaker social programs, and of course a loss of Canadian 
independence as it relates to resource and resource revenue. In 
short, opponents say the deal is a sell-out of Canada, and New 
Democrats on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, support that 
view very clearly. 
 
The agreement, the part of the agreement that I want to talk about 
today, outlines basically the move toward a continental energy 
policy which simply forces Canada to share our energy and 
resources on a guarantee basis with the United States. The 
implications of the Mulroney-Reagan trade agreement energy 
provisions are massive and wide-ranging. They appear to be 
inconsistent with the provisions of the constitution regarding 
provincial ownership and control of resources. There are 
important ambiguities in grey areas in the agreement that offer 
fertile ground for a U.S. challenge to any provincial laws 
regulating prices, imposing indirect taxes or controlling 
production or even conservation of resources — in short, the 
major provincial controls secured by the resource amendment of 
the mid-’80s.  
 
Premier Don Getty and our own Premier of Saskatchewan 
maintain that their provinces will not lose any control of their 
energy industry under free trade or their right to conserve its 
resources. That may be the case in theory, but there are elements 
in the free trade agreement that could hinder Alberta’s and 
Saskatchewan’s ability to exercise those rights. Moreover, this 
trade deal gives the U.S. almost totally unrestricted access to 
Canadian energy resources. And that includes oil and natural gas, 
coal and hydroelectric power on the same terms and conditions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as Canadians who live here. 
 
Let me briefly list what we have abandoned in this agreement in 
relation to energy before I discuss them in greater detail: number 
one, we have agreed to share our energy with the U.S. even when 
Canadians run short; secondly, we have agreed to abandon the 
potential for new industrial development based on preferential 
energy rates; third, we have agreed to abandon our energy export 
controls and agreed to allow Americans the ability to buy up the 
ownership and control of even more of our resources; fourth, we 
have abandoned our 80-year policy of protecting future Canadian 
requirements through mandatory reserves; five, we have agreed 
not to charge Americans higher prices than Canadians regardless 
of market conditions and regardless of shortages; and sixth, and 
finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have agreed to consult on energy 
regulatory actions in the future with the Americans. 
 
All of this given up in five short pages of the Canada-U.S. Free 
Trade Agreement — five short pages and we’ve given up all of 
those items with respect to resources and energy in our country.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1511 
 

It must be remembered that Canada has been exporting our oil to 
the United States since the beginning of oil production. In 
Saskatchewan this has normally been about 60 per cent of our 
production. Canada as a nation has been exporting approximately 
800,000 barrels of oil per day to the U.S. over the last three years. 
Only four years ago the level of exports was 400,000 barrels a 
day, and that was the highest in our history. So our exports have 
basically doubled in the last three years, from 400,000 barrels a 
day to 800,000 barrels a day. And that should tell you something, 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to security if supply and closeness if 
supply and also price of the product. 
 
But there has never been a time in our history when the United 
States has not been prepared to buy all the oil we were prepared 
to sell them, and that’s the point I want to make now. 
 
The problem, in fact, has been the reverse. We have never been 
able to satisfy their demand. Why would the want to ship oil from 
the Middle East, thousands of miles away, when they can pipe it 
in directly from Saskatchewan and Alberta and Canada, which is 
right on their boundary? Obviously they would prefer to purchase 
all of the oil we could possibly pump out of here, as well as any 
other oil we could guarantee them in the future. 
 
What this U.S.-Canada trade agreement has done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, has assured them that they can continue to have access 
to those supplies at an uninterrupted rate, and in fact can have, 
even more importantly, specific access over a guaranteed period 
of time at a rate that is not diminishing even though there are 
shortages that may arrive at the time. 
 
With Article 904 of this agreement, Canada has agreed not to 
restrict the supply of energy to the United States below the level 
of what they have received over the previous three years. This 
means that the Americans are entitled to continue to receive 
about 800,000 barrels per day from us at the moment, and we are 
powerless to deny them 800,000 barrels a day in the event of 
shortages. If exports increase to maybe double that, 1.6 million 
barrels per day, and 10 years down the road there’s a shortage, 
we have to guarantee them 1.6 million barrels a day of oil. 
 
So I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, and 
Canadians as a whole, to watch the export of oil to the Americans 
over the next short run, because I believe they’re going to 
increase. So when the shortage crunch does arrive, we’re going 
to still have to provide them with a significant amount of oil 
without having to put Canadians first. It’ll be Americans first and 
Canadians second on this deal. 
 
But we have given away our sovereign rights, in essence, to 
control and manage this vital resource. Even in cases of short 
supply or exhaustion of a resource, the U.S. is to be given 
proportional access, which is the average of their consumption 
over the previous three years. Doesn’t this seem to be an 
intolerable situation? Why would we surrender our sovereignty 
in this manner?  
 
Some would argue that we had to give up this control over our 
own resources in order to get access to the American 

market. But again I ask you to think about this. When is the last 
time the Americans didn’t want any of Canada’s oil and natural 
gas? Well there’s no answer to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
they’ve always wanted it in gargantuan appetites that we could 
never satisfy. 
 
But let me give you the American response to a couple of controls 
that a province can legally implement today, prior to this 
agreement, that they won’t after the agreement is confirmed in 
Washington and Ottawa, but which will be challenged under this 
agreement if it goes through and when it goes through. 
 
And here’s the example: one of the western provinces, 
anticipating an improvement in market price, limits current 
production of oil, much the same as the Saskatchewan 
government did with potash. As I’ve pointed out, restrictions on 
quantity are only permitted during clearly defined emergencies 
or where conservation is needed because of resource exhaustion. 
Production controls aimed at ensuring higher future returns are 
disguised restriction on trade rather than conservation. Attempts 
to restrain production to secure higher prices was, of course, the 
very power the provinces sought to entrench throughout the 
energy crisis. 
 
On the other hand, what if a province decides to limit production 
because it foresees a shortage that will hurt provincial 
consumers? Preferential reservations that actually reduce the 
flow of gas and oil to the U.S. clearly, under this agreement, are 
prohibited. Even in those limited cases in which restrictions are 
permitted, shortages must be prorated between domestic and 
export prices. 
 
As well, Canada has agreed that it will not bank supplies at the 
expense of export customers. We can’t even store oil and energy 
as a contingency of future shortages, according to this agreement. 
 
They’ve also guaranteed that any of the so-called surplus tests 
used by federal or provincial regulatory agencies to gauge 
whether proposed exports are a surplus to the requirements of 
Canadians, will never be replied or be applied to restrict flows to 
the U.S. In some the treaty provisions are only too clear, and 
provincial production cuts of this nature are undoubtedly in 
violation. 
 
In the same Article 904, we have also agreed that we will not 
charge the Americans a higher price than what we charge 
ourselves for our resources. In other words, we’ve locked 
Canada, we’ve locked our country, into the world price, no 
matter what that price does or where that price goes. This may 
not seem very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the price of 
oil is around $16 or $17 a barrel. But how will we react when 
OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) regains 
control over international pricing, as they almost certainly will, 
and drives that price up to a new heights? 
 
Do we in western Canada really want to commit ourselves to pay 
these prices, no matter how high they may go? Do we want to 
blind ourselves or bind ourselves — worse yet — to pay these 
prices for a resource which we own and for which we can now 
charge ourselves   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1512 
 

whatever we wish in the public an the national interest? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, cheap, abundant energy has always been 
one of Canada’s most important competitive advantages in 
international trade. When the 1973 oil crisis sent western 
economics into a tail-spin, Canadians learned just how precious 
that energy resources were, as governments took steps to protect 
consumers and industry from the full impact of rising prices. 
 
(1600) 
 
For the past 15 years the debate over energy supply and pricing 
has revolved around the fact that petroleum is a non-renewable 
resource. Once it’s gone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s gone. But with 
the new round of oil shortages expected in the next 10 to 15 years, 
the Conservatives have signed a trade deal that gives the United 
States guaranteed peacetime access to Canadian energy supplies. 
 
The agreement opens the door to a short-term increase in 
Canadian export earnings for oil, gas, coal, uranium, and 
hydroelectric power. But shortly after the deal was announced, a 
senior Canadian investment banker noted that the U.S., and I 
quote: 
 

The U.S. wins twice in the long term — once on access to 
energy supplies and again on the basis that we can no longer 
use cheap energy as an element of national or industrial 
policy. 

 
In a letter to Energy Minister Marcel Masse last fall, the 
Consumers’ Association of Canada asked, and I quote: 
 

How can a government which has the interests of Canadians 
at heart enter into an arrangement with a foreign power 
which would provide that power even greater access than 
Canadians to the diminishing supplies of these essential 
commodities? 

 
I have here from the Toronto Globe and Mail, January 22, 1988, 
an article which reports, and the title is, Mr. Speaker, “Trade deal 
likely to hurt Canada on energy, official says.” And I want to just 
quote from this article, Mr. Speaker, because it’s very important: 
 

The proposed free trade deal would probably force 
Canadians to pay more for oil, natural gas, and electricity 
and make their supplies of these energy resources less 
secure, while giving them very little in return. 

 
And this is from a senior official in Ontario’s Energy ministry. 
The report by Bruce MacOdrum, assistant deputy minister for 
policy and planning, prompted a Liberal MPP on an all-party 
legislature committee studying the trade pact to describe western 
Canadian oil and gas producers as hypocrites: 
 

Producers who support the deal, which would reduce the 
ability of the federal and provincial government to regulate 
energy prices and supplies, are the same hypocrites, the 
same guys that want government to stay out of their business 

when times are good but demand help when market forces 
drive prices down, Rick Ferraro says. 

 
They want to have it both ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I continue and end here. I resent the double standard they’re 
presenting. They’re saying we don’t want the government to 
regulate what they can do with the energy, and on the other hand 
they’re the recipients of tremendous amounts of Canadian 
taxpayers’ incentives and encouragement to find the resources. 
 
So we’re subsidizing the hunt for oil. We’re subsidizing the 
production of oil. We’re subsidizing, according to reports of the 
Star-Phoenix this last weekend, Mr. Speaker, the oil companies 
as well through price gouging of the companies in Saskatchewan. 
And now, through this agreement, we’re doing all of this great 
subsidy from the taxpayers of Canada so we can find more oil 
and produce more oil and pipe more oil out of this country so the 
Americans can have access to our energy at the same price as we 
charge ourselves, yet we’ve been subsidizing the hunt for that oil. 
 
At present, provinces may impose minimum oil and gas prices in 
order to ensure fair returns for diminishing assets. But because 
the trade treaty prohibits minimum import or export prices, 
provincial governments can no longer set minimum prices, even 
though the resource amendment purportedly confirmed this 
power in 1982. As it stands, such price setting is prohibited, and 
Ottawa will have to ensure provincial compliance. Ottawa has 
already stated the it will undertake all necessary measures to 
make the agreement fully binding on the provinces. 
 
And I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a copy of that very 
memorandum and it relates . . . It’s actually from the federal 
Department of Energy. It was released in November, 1987, by 
accident. It was not scheduled to be released. And it’s a series of 
questions and answers made up for . . . I believe it was the cabinet 
in the Conservative caucus in Ottawa. But to emphasize the point 
I’ve just made, one of the questions they ask here and I’ll quote 
from it: 
 

Can provinces continue to price their energy resources 
differentially intra-provincially vs. extra-provincially 
(including exports)? 

 
And the answer here, written in its own memo of the Government 
of Canada, the official answer to this, as given to us by the trade 
negotiating office is:  
 

It is our expectation that the provinces will not take actions 
incompatible with the spirit and intent of the Free Trade 
Agreement.  

 
And I go on. 
 

The fact is that provincial compliance with the price 
discrimination clause will not be written into the agreement. 
However, the provinces are apparently bound by the 
constitution — section 92A — not to price discriminate as 
between intra-   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1513 
 

and inter-provincial sales. The question of provincial 
compliance with the agreement is a very sensitive issue 
which the Prime Minister wants to deal with himself. 

 
End of quote from this memorandum — inadvertently leaked, 
actually inadvertently sent out in the mail to a group of people — 
that outlines very clearly that the provinces will have to comply 
with this agreement and that any prices will be binding, or price 
setting will be binding on the provinces as it is on the country. 
And if the Mulroney government intended to grandfather the 
provincial right to set fair prices, why wasn’t this clearly stated 
in the agreement? It obviously has not been. 
 
The question is not whether free trade changes provincial law, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The issues are the extent of the damage to 
provincial power and whether the impact is automatic or whether 
the federal government will be forced to strike down a provincial 
law that offends the treaty. 
 
Recently federal Energy minister Marcel Masse admitted that the 
market, not the provinces, will be the key to determining price 
and policy in a free trade deal. While he doesn’t believe the deal 
impinges on provincial rights, he admitted that the matter might 
have to be decided by the courts. And he stated, and I quote, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

If you have a disagreement of any kind about the 
constitution, the Supreme Court will decide who is right and 
who is wrong. 

 
Technically, provincial powers to regulate the energy industry 
may remain intact under free trade. What isn’t clear is the extent 
to which the province will be able to exercise those rights, given 
the fact that the market will dictate the price and the numerical 
superiority of the Americans will obviously dictate the market. 
Canadians are concerned with these developments, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The non-discriminatory pricing principle has other negative 
implications as well. For example, this suggests that Canadian 
governments can no longer offer special rebate programs which 
give farmers or small-business people a competitive edge on the 
price of energy. 
 
In addition, the agreement prevents the province from 
deliberately lowering energy prices to promote industrial growth. 
Cheap energy has always been Saskatchewan’s hope for 
economic diversification. Under this agreement that hope would 
be lost, because we would no longer be able to sell our energy to 
ourselves for less than what we charge Americans. 
 
The prohibition against discriminatory or preferential pricing is 
total. It covers even the special circumstances in which 
restrictions on quantity are possible. Regulated prices must be the 
same on both sides of the border in virtually every circumstances. 
I know the members opposite, this Conservative government, 
don’t understand that in northern North America, which is our 
country, Canada, we have sufficiently greater energy 
requirements on a per capita basis with respect to our 

winter. We have to heat our homes, we have to provide more 
energy expenditures into our business sector, in our industrial 
sector. But they don’t understand that, because in most aspects 
of winter they’re down South. They don’t know what’s going on 
down here. 
 
What they have done with this free trade agreement, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is they’ve given that advantage, that one minor 
advantage that we had, which was quite significant in the overall 
economic picture of subsidized energy prices, they’ve given the 
right of future governments to even determine that. 
 
The member from Weyburn keeps talking about wanting to get 
into the debate. He’s anxious to get into this debate. He’s never 
spoken at a public forum on the issue of the Mulroney-Reagan 
trade deal. And if he has, he’s put forward the government, the 
Conservative provincial government’s program on the free trade 
agreement. And of course if you look at it, it’s only about 
one-twentieth the size of this. 
 
And I think it’s prepared by Dome Advertising because nobody 
would want to know the truth. They’d prefer to have smoke and 
mirrors and selling perceptions put out by an advertising firm 
rather than talking to the people that put this together, or listening 
to the politicians who have read the document on what this really 
means in terms of energy and other matters in Canada.  
 
In effect, the federal and provincial government has given up the 
right to establish a Canadian energy plan that would help build 
up the economy and resolve regional economic disparity by 
providing the option of cheaper energy for Canadian consumers 
and industries . . . (inaudible interjection) 
 
The member from Weyburn again is begging to get into the 
debate and I’d gladly sit down if I could have his assurance that 
he’d get up here and say a few words about this agreement; in 
particular, what the position of his government is as it relates to 
energy — how they believe that energy and oil companies are 
such a great instrument of economic policy. 
 
I’m sure he’ll want to get up in this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and talk about how important our resources are, like coal, which 
he sold. The first item of business when they got elected, they did 
away with our coal resources that were required for the operation 
of our power plants in this province. 
 
I’m sure he’ll want to get up and talk about deregulating natural 
gas and selling off natural gas — huge quantities of natural gas 
pools which belong to the people of this province. He sold them 
off to a corporation, Saskoil, which, in their bragging terms, is 
now in the private sector. And he’ll go on and talk about the great 
things this government has done with respect to energy and what 
their policy is with respect to energy. 
 
And their policy I’ve already given, as the member from 
Weyburn is squealing from the seat, and outlining very clearly. 
And what he is squealing about is that what they have done with 
our energy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they’ve given it away to 
not responsible governments,   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1514 
 

who are responsible to all people in this province, they’re given 
it away to the corporate sector. They prefer to have the economy 
of our province controlled by corporations outside of this 
province, and in many areas outside of this country. And of 
course the polls reflect very clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
precisely what people think about those policies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the United States is an energy-hungry 
nation which can’t produce enough energy to meet it’s own 
domestic needs Canada, on the other hand, is a relatively secure 
an friendly source of supply. The American market is there; we 
should be charging the Americans a fair premium price for our 
energy, a price which gives Canadian farmers and small business 
a competitive edge, a competitive advantage. 
 
And we should be developing our energy supplies in such a way 
as to guarantee our national long-term prosperity. It must be 
emphasized that this approach is not — it is not, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — an anti-American approach, but it’s a straightforward 
approach, common sense business practice, and it’s 
pro-Canadian. 
 
Every sovereign nation has the right to decide the price it will 
charge itself for its own resources. If you list the hundreds of 
countries in this world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every one of them 
except Canada, under this agreement, have the ability to control 
the price and control the production of their own resource. But 
we, as an independent nation, no longer will have that right, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have not come out of a war in which we’ve lost that right. 
We have not fought a battle in which lives were lost over the 
issue of sovereignty and independence. What we’ve done is 
we’ve had Conservatives, behind closed doors, making secret 
deals and coming out and announcing the free trade deal as we 
see it today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every sovereign nation has the right to 
decide the price they will charge itself for its own resource. Other 
countries have consciously excluded energy resources from trade 
agreements, recognizing the strategic importance of maintaining 
an independent stance in this area. 
 
There are other areas of concern as well. For instance, there are 
grounds for concern that future Canadian requirements for oil 
and gas will be threatened. It is generally forecast that demand 
for natural gas will outstrip supply within the next 15 years, thus 
undermining Canada’s future energy security. 
 
Oil reserves will also begin declining at an increasing rate by the 
year 2005 — which is only, for the member of Weyburn’s 
information, it’s only 18, 17 years away from now. Of course, for 
him, he’ll be so far away from this building by then, it’ll just be 
a memory in his mind. 
 
But given these circumstances — or what’s left of his mind — 
given these circumstances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wouldn’t it have 
been more prudent for our government to be doubly vigilant to 
ensure that Canada obtained and retained domestic control of this 
vital industry. It seems to me it would have been. Instead, it has 
turned its back on 

our long tradition of ensuring energy supply and security through 
mandatory reserves. 
 
(1615) 
 
Finally, in the area of ownership and control of our energy 
resources, we seem to have taken a step backward. We now have 
a policy that foreign take-overs of financially healthy energy 
companies will not be allowed that’s in existence up till this date. 
 
The federal government argues that this policy remains in place 
under this trade agreement, yet it is not mentioned in the 
agreement itself. On the contrary, a number — and a growing and 
alarming number — of Canadian oil and gas companies are being 
or have been bought in whole or in part by foreign interests in the 
last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker — Husky Oil for one, Dome 
Petroleum, Sulpetro, Bow Valley Industries. And industry 
analysts predict that that trend is nowhere near being over. In fact 
there are even rumours that Petro-Canada, Canada’s largest oil 
company, is next on the sell-off list. 
 
This will put serious pressure on the goal of 50 per cent Canadian 
ownership of the oil and gas industry. As at least three royal 
commissions and task forces, the Gordon, Watkins and Gray 
royal commissions, concluded, the question in not one of being 
for or against foreign investment. The issue is setting sensible 
rules for the game or, one could say, a reasonable Canadian 
presence, especially in sectors which are important for future 
growth and prosperity, such as energy. 
 
The point is that some kind of policy is needed in this area, that 
it does matter whether a lot or most of the commanding positions 
in our industrial energy sectors are held by subsidiaries with 
headquarters elsewhere. We need a significant and competitive 
Canadian presence in the sector, and this position, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I maintain, is not extreme. All of our industrialized 
trading partners go much further, including the U.S. over Robert 
Campeau’s bid for federated stores, hardly a strategic industry. 
 
This abandonment of Canadian responsibility and authority can 
have detrimental consequences for our economy and energy 
future. It must be added, it is not only the Canadian oil and gas 
companies that are put in jeopardy but those hundreds of firms 
that supply and service the major developers and producers in the 
energy sector. 
 
Articles 1401 and 1402 of the services code of the final 
agreement ensure that U.S. companies have the right to be treated 
on the same basis as Canadian companies and the right to 
establish businesses in Canada. Over 150 services are included 
in the annex to the services code, including oil and gas field 
services. With the crucial principles of right of establishment and 
right of national treatments now recognized buy this trade 
agreement, U.S. firms will be able to challenge any Canadian 
practices that tend to inhibit their ability to compete here. 
 
And what did we get in return for this total capitulation? Even 
the Energy department, in its own internal study, concluded that 
Canada’s energy industry will make only   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1515 
 

modest economic gains in the short term under this agreement. 
Furthermore, even after the deal has been in place for 10 years, 
the most important benefits will be intangible and indirect. 
 
Specifically, the Americans agree not to impose any tax, duty or 
charge on the energy they send to us. When was the last time the 
United States ever sent significant amounts of energy to Canada, 
and to which regions? When was the last time this happened, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and under what circumstances? 
 
The Americans also agreed not to introduce or increase any tariff 
on our energy going into the U.S. The only hard prediction in the 
Energy department report is an estimate that the Canadian 
industry could save $26 million annually by the elimination of 
existing U.S. tariffs on crude oil and refined petroleum products. 
There will be an additional saving of $10 million a year because 
U.S. custom user fees will be phased out. As industry analysts 
have commented, that’s basically peanuts in the energy industry. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who seriously fears that the 
Americans would throw up a tariff wall against the Canadian oil, 
the very oil they have coveted for years? In the final analysis, we 
have surrendered control over a key non-renewable resource. 
 
The secret measures of privatization in the Mulroney-Reagan 
trade deal amount to a PC blueprint for surrendering 
Saskatchewan and its people to the ruthless exploitation of 
others. It’s another stage in the Conservative strategy of 
destroying our freedom and our way of life in Saskatchewan . It 
leaves basically few choices for ordinary people. Under 
Conservatives, the choices for ordinary people in Saskatchewan 
is to be sheared like sheep or skinned like rabbits. 
 
Their weapons, the Conservative weapons, in this outrage are 
privatization and free trade, unquestioning support for both 
principles. In one fell swoop they have combined blind 
incompetence in the management of our economy with deliberate 
destructiveness to create a recipe for disaster for ourselves and 
our children. 
 
Viewed separately, privatization and free trade are difficult to 
comprehend relative to their impact on our lives. When 
considered together, as Conservatives already have in consort 
with their corporate allies, privatization and free trade form a 
strategy of blitzkrieg, a frontal assault by Conservatives to 
undermine and transform a free society into a 
corporate-controlled, totalitarian state — I wanted to say that for 
the purpose of the member of Weyburn; he likes that word. 
 
But the stakes, very clearly, are high. Ultimately it means not 
only the destruction of our province as we know it, but a sell-out 
of our country. And I want to just draw these two together, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in summing up, and that is with respect to 
privatization and free trade. 
 
The free trade agreement prevents the creation of new Crowns 
and government economic instruments without U.S. congress 
approval.

The theory that I am putting forward is that the Conservative 
governments, federally and provincially, are in the process of 
privatizing the assets we already own equally. They’re 
privatizing or selling them off at discounted prices to their friends 
for the clear purpose that, hand in hand with the free trade deal 
because of this agreement, future governments cannot get back 
into those areas that existed under the free trade agreement before 
it was signed. 
 
So if the government opposite sell off the assets of the people of 
this province, if they privatize our Crown corporations, they 
privatize the drug plan, they privatize the dental plan, they 
privatize the Saskatchewan Minerals Corporation and 
SaskCOMP and SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation) and our uranium and our gold 
reserves and our natural gas reserves and others — when they’ve 
done that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and future governments elected 
by the people of this province give a mandate to the future 
government to get back into those areas to provide basic services 
at reasonable prices to the people that they’re elected to serve, 
the only way they can get back into that kind of business, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is with the approval of the U.S. Congress. 
That’s what the agreement says. 
 
I’ll read the section of it for you because I know members 
opposite are doubting Thomases, and I want to just clarify for 
them, expose them for what they really are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They’re selling off the assets of the people of this province so 
that we as a government, or future governments, can never ever 
be able to get them back again. 
 
I quote, Mr. Speaker, from a Crown Corporations Committee. 
It’s a verbatim Hansard of February 3, 1988. In questioning, the 
Deputy Premier was asked about what his government’s theory 
on privatization was going to be and what his philosophy was. 
And do you know what the Deputy Premier told us and the people 
of this province with regard to privatization and the assets of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Let me answer that question by reading verbatim from Hansard 
in Crown Corporations. “(The) Hon. Mr. Berntson, (Deputy 
Premier) . . .” 
 
An Hon. Member: — We don’t want anybody using names. You 
know better than that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I apologize for using his name, but I’m reading 
out here. It’s the Deputy Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and he 
said in response to that question: 
 

I think that could happen here as well. We’re going to do 
what we can . . . to make it very difficult for you people to 
take it over again (with reference to Crown corporations) 
when you get back into power, if that ever happens, because 
our desire is to have these things as broadly distributed as 
possible so that it’s very difficult for you folks, if you should 
ever get back into power (to bring back the service of a 
Crown corporation). 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen this free trade   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1516 
 

agreement and very briefly we’ve heard some remarks from my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Fairview. We have heard 
as well, the sham, the give-away of our resources, the 
surrendering of our independence. We have forfeited through this 
agreement and surrendered our right to manage that resource and 
those resources without as much as public consultation. 
 
The government opposite, who would go around expounding 
what a terrific government they are, what a wonderful 
government they are, have sold the people of this country and 
this province down the river with this agreement with respect to 
sovereignty and energy and other matters without so much as 
consulting with them. They’ve done the dirty deed behind closed 
doors, and they’ve come to the public explaining what the dirty 
deed is. It’s a secret deal without the public’s input, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Countries have gone to war to protect their independence, to 
protect their sovereignty and to protect their resources. The 
Conservative government opposite and the Conservative 
government in Ottawa have surrendered these privileges of 
nationhood without so much as public consultation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province will judge 
whether they have been husbanding the resources and the assets 
of our province and our country at the next election. The people 
of Canada and Saskatchewan will judge whether the 
Conservative Party has had the best interests of our country at 
heart when they negotiated this deal, and they will judge very 
clearly from the facts that this government and the Mulroney 
government have not done their job. They’ve given up this nation 
to the corporate interests outside this country without so much as 
public consultation. 
 
As a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would support my colleague’s 
motion on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard a lot 
this afternoon about the free trade agreement. And at the outset, 
Mr. Speaker, did you ever notice how when the NDP or Mel 
Hurtig or Bob White are referring to the free trade agreement, 
they never use the same terminology as everybody else — they 
never call it the free trade agreement? They curl the words. It’s 
more like a snarl around their lips. They call it the 
Mulroney-Reagan trade deal. Did you ever notice that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? They never refer to it as the free trade 
agreement; it’s always the Mulroney-Reagan deal, as if that’s 
some kind of swear word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not so much that they’re pro-Canadian in this debate on the 
free trade agreement; it’s more that they’re anti-American. And 
we’ve seen that in many, many instances with the NDP Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the point is, on this free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker, by 
every technical analysis, it’s a sound commercial deal for this 
country and for this province — by every commercial analysis.

And I hear the Hon. Members opposite groaning and come 
kayaying. But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, why I make that 
judgement is I was at the free trade conference in Saskatoon some 
three months age or so. And what did we hear there from one of 
the economists . . . one of the economists say at that conference? 
He said that they had interviewed — and it may have been the 
Fraser Institute — had interviewed economists across the 
country, at universities and those kinds of places, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They had interviewed, they had done a survey of 
economists across Canada. 
 
Now one could argue that this debate certainly across Canada has 
been characterized by a lot of political rhetoric and a lot of jargon. 
And it doesn’t really surprise me, perhaps, that the public are 
confused. 
 
And so it seems to me that if you’re looking for a technical 
analysis, what better place to get it than from the economists? 
The public would see them as the experts. Economists generally 
aren’t viewed as people who get tied up in rhetoric and jargon 
like politicians are sometimes accused of. So the public would 
generally accept the unbiased opinion, if you like, of an 
economist. 
 
Now when they surveyed these economists across Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, what did they find? They found that 96 out of 100 said 
we should go for this free trade agreement. Now certainly in that 
96 out of 100 economists, some said yes, this isn’t a perfect deal; 
it’s not a deal without some warts; but all things considered, 
Canada should go for it.  
  
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of those 
provinces where the scales weigh heavily in favour of us. So if 
it’s good for Canada, certainly we in Saskatchewan have 
recognized for some good long time that it’s good for us. 
 
You know, when I heard that, that when they surveyed 
economists across Canada, that 96 out of 100 suggested we 
should go for the deal, what amazes me about that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is where does the CBC constantly find that other 4 per 
cent? Even if they were just to randomly select economists to go 
on the radio and on the television for the analysis and 
commentary, just by random selection they would come out, 96 
out of 100 of them would be in favour of the deal. And yet 
somehow they manage to find that 4 per cent. I don’t know how 
they do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
So by every technical analysis, including those of the economists, 
it’s a good deal for Saskatchewan, it’s a good deal for Canada. 
And why is it, Mr. Speaker, that this is a good deal for 
Saskatchewan, a good deal for Canada? 
 
The one reason that has never really come out in all the debate, 
in my mind, to the degree that it should have, is that if Canada 
and the United States, who share the longest undefended border 
in the world, who trade between — there’s more trade between 
our two nations than any other countries in the world — if these 
two countries can’t cut a deal and have some trade peace, if you 
like, how will the United States and Japan ever deal   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1517 
 

with each other on a sensible basis? Or how will the United States 
and the European Economic Community ever deal with each 
other in some kind of rational and sane way? 
 
If these two countries can’t put together a trade deal, Mr. 
Speaker, we will never see those other deals come about. And for 
Canada, those are equally important, Mr. Speaker, because those 
two other big trading blocs, Japan and the European Economic 
Community, and the distortions that their domestic polices are 
causing across the world, are the ones that are wreaking havoc 
on our farm community this very day. 
 
So if we can’t cut a bilateral deal, Mr. Speaker, we will never cut 
a deal multilaterally. GATT will know no success, and it will 
know no success particularly when it comes to agriculture. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that I was particularly pleased to 
hear our Prime Minister, Prime Minister Mulroney, as he’s 
visiting the nations of Europe and continental Europe, dealing 
with Britain and dealing with West Germany on the whole 
question of farm subsidies. I know that our farmers were pleased 
to hear that he was taking that kind of initiative. 
 
So what I say is, Mr. Speaker, this agreement offers us the 
opportunity to set a model for the world when it comes to trade 
peace. Get out of this cross-war that we’re caught in, and get in 
to show the world that we have a vision, as opposed to division, 
when it comes to trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately, what could scuttle the deal at the end of the day is 
the political dimension. As I said earlier, it’s the commercial 
analysis, the technical analysis of the deal, the hard-core 
economic analysis of the deal. By every measure, or by virtually 
every measure, it’s a good deal for Canada, but it’s the political 
challenge that could scuttle the deal ultimately. It’s the doom 
mongers and the naysayers and the change resisters opposite that 
could scuttle the deal. 
 
The anti-free-traders are all lathered up, and the arguments they 
put forth on various occasions, Mr. Speaker, run like this, they 
run like this, Mr. Speaker. They say if we go into this deal with 
the United States that we’ll lose our cultural sovereignty; if we 
get into this Mulroney-Reagan trade deal that we’ll somehow 
lose our cultural sovereignty — we heard this afternoon — and 
that we’ll become, somehow, become in their minds, Mr. 
Speaker, the 51st state of the United States of America. 
 
Well let’s look at this argument because it’s one they use often, 
and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it has little or no basis in fact or 
history. They say, Mr. Speaker, what are these anti-free-traders 
saying as well? They say, well if we get into this agreement we’ll 
somehow lose medicare. We’ll lose our unemployment 
insurance, we’ll lose the right to have our oil patch working or 
not working, that we’ll lose the egg marketing boards. I think we 
heard this afternoon that we’ll lose the Canadian Wheat Board. 
We hear all of those things from the anti-free-traders, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well what is the reality? The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that 

not one of those things is jeopardized by this deal. It’s only the 
NDP who would push that line. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Prove it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well it’s only the NDP, and the hon. 
member from Saskatoon wherever, shouts from her seat, prove 
it, prove it. I say, I say Saskatchewan farmers think this is a good 
deal. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read the treaty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And she says, read the treaty. Well I’ll 
do better than that. Their favourite source of research is the CBC 
and the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix. And what do I see in 
those headlines? “Canada farmers said winners in free trade.” 
“Pool sees free trade as a positive move.” “New chance to expand 
canola production.” “Durum producers longing for access to U.S. 
market.” “Pact could prime flood of investment oil and gas.” 
“Wheat growers endorse free trade.” 
 
This one I like particularly. It’s the Leader-Post, January 21: 
“U.S. farmers don’t see reality for the chaff.” Mr. Speaker, you 
could insert NDP don’t see reality for the chaff, and that article 
would be equally as true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could go on and on and talk about how the uranium industry 
feels about it. I could talk about “Free trade, another step to 
Canada’s independence.” “Free trade seen beneficial to women” 
— another headline. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I, at this time, would move 
that we adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly  

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, 
I would like to raise an issue and later move a motion with regard 
to some rules and procedures of the House, and also inform the 
Assembly with regards to a decision today by cabinet, a decision 
by the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I would 
wish to do is announce today that we have arrived at an all-party 
agreement with regards to how we will deal with salaries of the 
members, with services of the members, and with some rule 
changes proposed for this Assembly. 
 
The Assembly will know that following, or right at the last 
minute of the last legislative session, last November-December, 
we brought in some changes to the legislation that empowered us 
as the Assembly, to refer out the question of salaries, etc., to a 
commission to said, etc. 
 
What I would like to announce today is the following, and   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1518 
 

I will deal with what I would say are four main areas: one is the 
area of salaries to members; two is the question of services to 
respective caucuses or services to our respective members; three, 
the question of members’ benefits; and four, with regard to 
changes of the rules. 
 
This is the first time that, in fact, we have done this as an 
Assembly in the middle of the day in the middle of a session, and 
not at the eleventh hour of the night that we propose to adjourn. 
 
First of all then, let me deal with the question of salaries to 
members. What we have today, pursuant to the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, is appointed the commission to look into the salaries. 
That commission will also review the pensions of the members, 
as well as review anything else done by the Board of Internal 
Economy. In other words, this commission will have the power 
to overlook and look into everything that is in fact paid to elected 
members of this Assembly. 
 
That commission will be made up of the following three people: 
one, Ted Malone, former member of this legislature, now 
Queen’s Bench court judge; Mr. Ted Turner, former president of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; and Mr. George Solomon, 
prominent citizen of the city of Regina. 
 
This particular group will review and ask for papers and ask for 
information or recommendations from anyone that wishes to 
make them. When they come to their decision, they will report 
back through the Speaker to the Board of Internal Economy. I 
can advise the members of the Assembly, and all other people of 
this province, that when that report is then made back, it will 
become public. 
 
The Board of Internal Economy then has the following option. It 
can ratify what that commission recommends or it can modify it. 
And if it modifies it, it can only modify it less — in other words, 
reduce what the recommendation is; it cannot increase the 
recommendation. 
 
So that, I believe, is a step forward, and it’s being done in a very 
open and, I think, proper way of dealing with that question. 
 
Secondly, what we have agreed to, and this comes before, and 
has been dealt with by the Board of Internal Economy. As I said, 
this will deal with two basic areas: one, service to members; and 
two, benefits to members. 
 
With regards to services, first of all we have made some 
recommendations in the Board of Internal Economy to make 
some increases, somewhat modest increases I might say, to the 
respective caucuses, and those increases have taken place and 
have been recommended. If I could perhaps capsulize what they 
would be, always subject to change in membership of each 
representative caucus of this legislature, but about a $50,000 
increase in research money. 
 
To the members of the opposition, a corresponding . . . about the 
same type of increase to the member of the government caucuses. 
And to the independent member from Assiniboia, an increase of 
approximately between 

35 and $38,000, which will allow him, that member, to as well 
hire some people and do some perhaps more research than now 
he is able to do with a measly $5,000 a year that he is granted 
pursuant to the legislative rules. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there is recognition by the Board of 
Internal Economy that the member, the elected member, has and 
is more and more becoming a full-time job. And in that regard, 
what we are proposing to do in the Board of Internal Economy is 
to increase to each member the right of that member to have one 
full-time employee working for that elected member. 
 
And that would be by granting to the member one full-time 
secretary where now we had a part-time secretary to each elected 
member. That secretary can have the option, or the member can 
have the option, of either that secretary working in their riding 
office or working part time in their riding office and part time in 
their legislative office. 
 
There will also be increases with regards to the members’ office 
allowance that will increase about $120 a month. Again, that is 
to cover off the cost of members providing: (a) the rent of their 
office space, the purchase of equipment, etc. 
 
There will be an increase proposed for communication 
allowances, Mr. Speaker, that will be equivalent to the four 
mailings into one’s riding per year. That is increased from three 
that exist now. 
 
There will also be an increase in the area of travel allowance, Mr. 
Speaker, that allows for a member to travel . . . or the travel 
allowance will be calculated from the member’s riding or home 
to Regina, and will allow that member 52 trips a year as opposed 
to 35 trips a year. 
 
There is another important, I think, measure being recommended 
by the Board of Internal Economy, and that covers the situation 
where the House or the session is in progress. And many 
members, those that live some distance away, find it very onerous 
to work in the legislature all day and then simply to travel home 
some 4, 5, 600 miles in some cases. And so what we are doing 
now is providing for those members that live on a sched flight — 
Saskatoon to Regina, Saskatoon to P.A., given a proper situation 
— to be able to take a sched flight and deduct that sched flight 
from one of their 52 trips. 
 
For those not covered by the sched flights, in particular a member 
like the member from Athabasca, the member from Nipawin, the 
member from . . . a variety of areas, over 350 kilometres away 
from Regina, they will be able to use government airplane when 
the session is on to travel to their home on Friday, travel back on 
Monday morning, Mr. Speaker, and I think that is a proper and 
appropriate thing to do. 
 
(1645) 
 
I believe that . . . Oh yes, and the final one, Mr. Speaker, is the 
area of per diems. Per diems will increase from their present rate 
of about $94 to $129 for the time that we are sitting in the 
legislature. That will now be restricted, however, to 70 days. In 
other words, should the session   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1519 
 

run beyond 70 days, per diems will not in fact be paid. 
 
What we are doing, though, and are recommending, is the 
situation that in the past you are paid when the session is on, but 
one is not paid for services when the session is not on. And as 
we, I think, all find now that it’s one thing to be in this Chamber 
when the session is on for that 70 or 80 or 100-odd days that 
we’re here, but we also spend a great deal more time travelling 
back and forth to Regina, going to various meetings or 
conventions both inside and outside the province. And to deal 
with that question, we have recommended in the Board of 
Internal Economy that each member will be allowed to have 24 
days or 24 of those type of meetings a year and be paid 
corresponding to that $129 a day. 
 
Then if we move to the area of members’ benefits, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve dealt with four, or proposing to deal with four areas. One, 
back in the 1960s a rule was brought into this House governing 
members that Canada pension deductions were only taken off 
your cabinet salary, or the salary for extra duties, and was not 
taken off the salary of elected members or their MLA pay. And 
this was come to be known as the Ross Thatcher rule. We have 
recommended that rule be done away with and that CPP (Canada 
Pension Plan) contributions be made by all members on their 
salaries, reflecting that their salary is in fact a salary not different 
than anyone else’s. 
 
Number two, the members will be able to qualify for two services 
available to the public service: one, being the dental program; 
and two, being a program designed for and to cover the situation 
where members or their families suffer from marriage problems, 
from problems with alcohol, problems with drugs. And they will 
be able to have the services of professional counselling to deal 
with their problems just as everyone else will. 
 
And number four, Mr. Speaker, we are proposing to bring in a 
program that adopts the situation used in virtually all legislatures 
of the country now, and that is a severance package. That 
severance package would work the following: at a time of an 
election certain people are defeated, or other people don’t run, in 
which case they go through the difficult decommissioning from 
politics into the real world, or to real life again. And that, very 
often, has been very difficult on many members, and members 
obviously from both sides of the House have experienced that. 
 
The rule we are proposing is the so-called Ontario rule that says 
each member will be entitled to six-months severance on their 
MLA pay, or their total pay as elected member. The first six 
months, if you’ve served six years or less — if you served four 
years then you would still get the six months — up to a maximum 
of 12 months for someone who had served 12 years or more. So 
if you have served eight years you would get eight months 
severance. And that is, I think, a recognition of the situation that 
in fact does exist. 
 
Finally, let me turn to the rule changes that are being proposed 
now, not by the Board of Internal Economy, but again worked 
out by the various members. And if I could give you my layman’s 
version of the rule changes, let me try.

The rule changes, as proposed, will deal with what is called in 
the industry, stacking of votes. Put quite simply. It would be the 
following. 
 
On any debatable motion, with the exception of the throne speech 
and the budget speech debates, when either side calls for a 
standing vote and the bells ring, either the House Leader or the 
chief whip of either side can approach you, Mr. Speaker, or the 
chairman of committees, and ask that vote to be stacked; in which 
case it would not be voted on then, but would be voted on at a 
later time. 
 
The bells would continue to ring until such time as the two whips 
recognize or catch the eye of the Sergeant-at-Arms, and the bells 
would turn off then in the reasonable and ordinary way. And that 
allows the use of the ringing of the bells to draw a person’s point 
before this legislature, still to be used. 
 
If the two House leaders or the two chief whips cannot agree on 
the time, then the Speaker must settle the vote, if it was a Tuesday 
today, set the vote Thursday, immediately following question 
period. This allows, I think, perhaps ability to manage the time 
of members in the House in a more appropriate way. 
 
The proposal is that we would use this system for the balance of 
this session, and it would continue on in the third session of the 
21st legislature, upon the agreement of both sides. 
 
I think that, for the most part, sets out the four changes, Mr. 
Speaker, and before I move the motion, maybe make two or three 
observations with regard to this. 
 
This job in never, ever an easy job for elected members to do. 
And we often, or more often than not, catch the wrath of the 
media — and that matters less to us — but sometimes the wrath 
of the population, as to dealing with our own salaries, and that 
has obviously befuddled many members that have sat in this 
House before. 
 
Let me make the following observation. I think it’s very 
important that we look at the fact that the last major re-look at 
members’ salaries took place following the 1978 election. That’s 
about 10 years ago, and traditionally you see a re-look about 
every 10 years. That’s number one. 
 
Number two, we have been able to accomplish this with the 
agreement of all members of the House, I hope, and I think that’s 
important that we in fact do that. More importantly, I think, is 
that we’re able to do it now as opposed to midnight of the day 
that we adjourn the House for the balance of the summer and to 
come back the next year. 
 
This will be one at it relates to salaries. It will be done in a way 
that is, in effect, an arbitration that we cannot raise but must only 
lower if we so opt to. 
 
I believe it is also important, Mr. Speaker, to — as all members, 
as we know how much we pay and how much, perhaps, that cost 
one for this job. And there’s nobody   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1520 
 

ever became rich sitting in this legislature, and I can assure you 
of that from either side of this Assembly. 
 
And so I think it’s important that we maintain benefits, and I 
would hope the commission maintain salary levels at a way that 
continues and assists in attracting good and competent people to 
this legislature. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion . . . It is a 
long motion, so I would simply move the motion. I should think 
I don’t have to read a three-pager — I stand in your hands if I do, 
and I would undertake to do it — but read a motion or move a 
motion seconded by the member from the Quills, Quill Lakes, 
with regard to the rule changes that are, as I said, dealing with 
the stacking of votes. With that, Mr. Speaker, I so move the 
motion. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Attorney General, 
the minister of Finance has detailed the changes in some 
considerable detail. And I want to indicate that there apparently 
is no real good way or good time to deal with the matters that 
we’re dealing with here today. As has been indicated, we tried it 
late at night and nevertheless had some major problems. 
 
But I can say sincerely here that we spent some considerable time 
and some considerable care in looking at the particular services 
that have been increased. And I want to say that I’m perfectly 
satisfied, and I think it is important that we have appointed a 
commission which can in fact, as the member has indicated, 
review the salaries and can look at all of the benefits of the MLA 
in looking at that, and also in respect to the pension benefits. 
 
I think all members will agree that the people that have been 
appointed to the commission are outstanding in their own 
individual fields and will do justice and care in making their 
recommendations and will be fair, I think, and will also support 
their findings. 
 
I think in respect to the services to members, I don’t apologize 
for increasing some of the services to the MLAs in carrying out 
their duties for caucus research or for increasing to a full-time 
secretary, because after all, the job has for most, almost all 
members, become a full-time job and more is demanded. 
 
I think it only makes sense, in respect to travel allowance, what 
we have done to provide air service to those that are more than 
350 kilometres from the legislature. And I can only think of my 
colleague that sits next to me, the member from Athabasca, who 
indicates that in order to make a trip home it takes eleven and 
one-half hours of pounding the road — one way. And certainly I 
think this will provide a service within a reasonable range, where 
driving to the legislature becomes really a very time consuming, 
and not only that, to some extent a very dangerous undertaking, 
driving that distance by oneself. 
 
I think in respect to per diems, as the member indicated, there’s 
some allowances of some 24 days, I believe, for carrying on 
duties outside of the legislature. This is not unique to the 
legislature in Saskatchewan; it is also found in Alberta where 
they have up to 10 days per month allowed to the members, if 
they are not sitting in the session, to carry on outside duties. And 
certainly we have 

a number of outside duties. 
 
I think in respect to the benefits as has been indicated by the 
Minister of Justice, we have never ever had a severance package. 
And I can vouch, not only for myself but for many of my 
colleagues, the trauma and the dislocation that takes place when 
an election takes place and you’re expecting to be re-elected and 
suddenly find yourself on the street. It’s a very, very difficult 
situation. 
 
And I think in the political field it’s somewhat unique, because 
after all, what you do do is if you’re here for any length of time, 
indeed any time at all, what you start to do is to interfere with the 
development of your own particular private profession or 
occupation that you had previously. And so I think that a 
reasonable severance package which is adopted, based on the 
Ontario, makes some logic. 
 
I can say in respect to the rule changes again, a lot of time has 
been spent on this. We initially started with the rules committee 
and it kind of got watered down or displaced. And we’ve carried 
on with trying to function of the House and we’ve arrived at a 
mutual agreement in respect to the stacking of the votes as was 
explained again by the Minister of Justice. 
 
The essence of it is that it doesn’t tie up, while we’re doing 
estimates, for example, 30 members sitting in the House. They 
can be doing other things. It still provides that there will be a 
quorum in order for the House to operate, and that should be 
understood. 
 
We have also discussed with the House Leader and the Minister 
of Justice, and we are working on a sort of a mutual 
understanding of getting an agenda for . . . in advance for the 
following week’s work, and this has been working to some 
extent. And we realize that if commitment is given on a Friday 
for the next week’s work, that there may be some circumstances 
which may need to vary the agenda. But nevertheless, we are 
working towards that. I think it will lead to a better functioning 
of the House, both from the improvement in respect to the 
stacking of the votes and also in getting in the next week’s 
agenda. 
 
(1700) 
 
So I think what we have done here is sat down, as the minister 
indicated, with all three parties represented. We have discussed 
it, and that recommendations were taken to the Board of Internal 
Economy, and these are the recommendations that have come 
forward. 
 
I don’t think in any detail that they are excessive. I think that the 
public will not be perturbed by members having services which 
allows them to better function in the legislature. 
 
And so I am pleased to move . . . or second the motion of the 
minister and concur with the recommendations that he has set 
forth. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am indeed prepared 
to support the minister in the announcements that he has made 
this afternoon, and I do so for several   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1521 
 

reasons. First of all, because the minister and the Board of 
Internal Economy of this legislature are following what is 
obviously a very open procedure this afternoon — they are doing 
what they are doing in public and on the floor of this Assembly. 
They’re being candid, and that is consistent with the public’s 
right to know, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s all to the good. 
There are no other proper ways to deal with issues like salaries 
and service for elected members. It must be a very public process. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, consistent with the enabling legislation 
adopted in the law of Saskatchewan last year, the matter of 
salaries is being referred to an independent external panel. That 
panel effectively removes from MLAs the sole jurisdiction over 
their level of remuneration. Someone else will rule on what the 
work done here by elected members is worth, and after that 
external panel has ruled, it will the be up to this House to accept 
that ruling or to vary it downward. It cannot go higher. So in 
effect, Mr. Speaker, there’s a cap. 
 
Thirdly, the limited matters over which the Board of Internal 
Economy had retained jurisdiction are for the most part cost 
items relating to the expenses incurred by members in the 
performance of their duties. While I am not yet, Mr. Speaker, a 
veteran member of this institution, like some of those that have 
been around for a long, long time, I’m told that these expense 
matters, as the minister indicated in his remarks, are reviewed 
and adjusted about once every decade. The last major change, 
I’m told, occurred about nine or 10 years ago, and it’s likely, Mr. 
Speaker, that the next change will not occur for another decade 
into the future, and I think that spacing is important to note. 
 
And significantly, and I think this may well be the most important 
part, Mr. Speaker, significantly, everything that has already been 
done by the Board of Internal Economy on MLA expenses and 
services, to which the minister has referred this afternoon, all of 
that is referred to the external panel on MLA remuneration on 
salaries and so forth. So there’s a discipline that’s being imposed 
here, and I believe that that is a very important principle. 
 
In those changes, Mr. Speaker, that specifically relate to me, and 
in my rather peculiar position in this Chamber as a single member 
and as the leader of my party, I see that the Board of Internal 
Economy has, at least in part, adopted some of the advice that 
was offered by the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix in an editorial that 
appeared on December 3, 1986. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as for the changes in the rules that the minister has 
referred to this afternoon, the rules by which this Assembly is to 
operate in the future, I think you will have observed that those 
rule changes are of relatively minor nature. They have to do with 
the timing of votes in this Assembly. They seem eminently 
reasonable to me. And I think they’re worth a try, at least for a 
while, to see if we can thereby improve the efficiency by which 
this House operates. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to.

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


