


















































June 7, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 7, 1988 
 

1891 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure to introduce 
to you and to members of the legislature, 43 grade 6 students 
from St. Mark’s School in Saskatoon. They’re accompanied by 
their teachers Stewart Forrester and Ralph Dauk, and a 
chaperon Mr. Allegretto. I’ll be joining them for pictures and 
refreshments later on, Mr. Speaker, but I’d like the House to 
welcome those students today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure at this time, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you 
and to other members of the legislature, some eight students, 
grade 9 students from the Lake Lenore High School, I’m 
advised, seated in the east gallery. They’re accompanied by Mr. 
Wade Weseen, their teacher, and two other attendants, Mr. Syl 
Jasken and Mr. Frank Collins. 
 
I certainly want to welcome the students to the Assembly. I 
hope they enjoy their visit here and that they have a safe trip 
back home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the rest of the Assembly, a 
group of 13 grade 5 students sitting in the east gallery from the 
St. Louis School in Patuanak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Patuanak is approximately 500 miles from Regina. 
And this group has travelled to Prince Albert last night and into 
Regina today and will be spending the next two days in Regina. 
 
I want to welcome you here, along with their teacher Albert 
Clavelle, chaperons Marcie Dawatsare, Norbert Wolverine, and 
Mike Tcho. I’d like, Mr. Speaker, through you, to ask all 
members to welcome this group of students from Patuanak, and 
we hope that you have a good time in Regina and safe journey 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you, and through you to this Assembly, some 33 young people 
from the constituency of Regina South that are sitting in your 
gallery. They are grades 7 and 8 students from St. Matthew 
School — that’s a school in Whitmore Park in our southern area 
of the city. They are accompanied here today by their teacher 
Mr. Stan Crawford. Now Mr. Crawford happens to be an 
ex-Ram football player and a colleague of — or former 
colleague of — the Minister of Health, a team-mate on a team. 
 
Hopefully they’ll find their visit to this legislature both 
informational and educational. I look forward to meeting  

with them a little bit later. I understand it might be out in the 
shade — maybe we could play football a little bit, or something. 
But we’ll determine how they enjoyed their visit at that time. I 
ask all members to help me welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the member from Quill Lakes in welcoming 
our guests from Lake Lenore, Saskatchewan. I had the 
opportunity as a young fella to live in the community of Lake 
Lenore and to attend the school there. I took most of my 
education in Lake Lenore. 
 
I also want to indicate to you that it is an aggressive community 
and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Good Hopfners are still there. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Great Hopfner family there too, yes. And I’d 
also like to indicate that it is a very sports-minded community. 
I’d like to take this opportunity to wish these students well and 
especially in their examinations that are forthwith, and also 
wish them a great and happy summer. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in the 
Assembly we have a privilege that we can all share. I am 
personally privileged to welcome nine distinguished gentlemen 
who are seated in your gallery. These are very special 
individuals who are the most recent recipients of Canada’s 
highest national honours. 
 
One has been invested to the Order of Canada; three to the 
Order of Military Merit; five have been recognized for their 
extraordinary bravery and courage. 
 
Each of these individuals has performed outstanding service to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to their communities. They 
have shown, by example, that each of us can leave a meaningful 
mark on society if we pursue our goals with diligence and if we 
follow our hearts, whether that goal is community service, or 
dedication to the arts, or commitment to the welfare of our 
nation, our fellow citizens, or indeed an individual in peril. 
 
The significant accomplishments and the selflessness of these 
individuals is a source of pride and satisfaction to each and 
every one of us in Saskatchewan, and indeed in Canada. 
 
Let me just say, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan I wish to extend my congratulations to each of 
the individuals. Your achievements and the honour you bring to 
Saskatchewan touch us all very deeply. The people of your 
communities, your province, and your country thank you 
indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the opportunity to pay tribute 
to these outstanding citizens, and I will leave the honour on 
introducing them to their own members of the legislature here 
in the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1892 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure and honour to join with the Premier 
and the other members of the Assembly in welcoming such a 
distinguished group of special guests to the legislature. This 
year’s list of Saskatchewan people who have received national 
honours, such as the Order of Canada, the Order of Military 
Merit, and declarations for bravery is both long and very 
impressive, as the Premier has pointed out, and the people of 
our province have much of which to be proud. 
 
I’m delighted to congratulate and pay tribute to this group of 
special Saskatchewan leaders on behalf of the official 
opposition. 
 
Today we’re giving special recognition to leaders in the arts, 
sports, and community service, as well as to some individuals 
who have literally risked life and limb to aid others. A great 
prophet once wrote, quote: “You give but little when you give 
of your possessions; it is when you give of yourself that you 
truly give.” So true, Mr. Speaker, and so true of the dedicated, 
brave, and caring individuals that we honour today. 
 
What warms our hearts is that while the individuals we honour 
here have proven themselves to be truly exceptional, in the 
larger sense they are so representative of Saskatchewan people, 
people who care about their families, who care about their 
neighbours and about their communities, people who do not 
hesitate to give of themselves in order to help others. This 
special Saskatchewan spirit makes our province a more caring, 
compassionate, and tolerant society. 
 
The award winners we honour today are exceptional examples 
of what we all describe as the Saskatchewan spirit. To each of 
you I say, thank you. Thank you for all you’ve done, thank you 
for all that you will continue to do in the future, and thank you 
for giving all of us greater heights to which we can aspire. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
honoured indeed to have the opportunity to add some words of 
welcome and commendation in respect of our very 
distinguished guests in the legislature today. As 
Saskatchewanians, we all believe our province is a special place 
with a great many special people among our population. It has 
become one of our Saskatchewan traditions that this legislature 
sets aside a day like this one each year to pay tribute to those 
among us who have recently been singled out for special 
recognition, and who have received one of Canada’s national 
honours. 
 
This year we acknowledge a truly remarkable group, Mr. 
Speaker, a leading figure in Saskatchewan and Canadian 
theatre, three men of distinction in our military, a courageous 
police officer, and four citizens of great personal bravery. I 
doubt if this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, has ever before been 
graced by the presence, simultaneously, of a member of the 
Order of Canada, two members of the Order of Military Merit, 
an officer of the  

Order of Military Merit, a recipient of the Star of Courage, and 
four recipients of the Medal of Bravery. They do us a great 
honour, Mr. Speaker, by being present with us today. 
 
On behalf of myself and my party, I want to welcome them all 
to the Assembly this afternoon. We congratulate them for the 
national honours that have been bestowed upon them, and we 
commend them most especially, Mr. Speaker, for the 
distinguished service and conduct for which they have been 
decorated. All of Saskatchewan is proud indeed to honour these 
very special Saskatchewan people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 
Mr. Kenneth Kramer of Regina, Member of the Order of 
Canada. 
 
Born in Edmonton, Mr. Speaker, Kenneth Kramer trained in 
England in the dramatic arts, specializing in theatre for children. 
He and his late wife, Sue, founded the Globe Theatre school 
company in Regina in 1966. Its success led to the establishment 
of the main stage theatre for adults in 1972. The Globe Theatre 
now serves many communities in Saskatchewan with live 
theatre for children and adults, and has achieved a national 
reputation for excellence. 
 
As artistic director of the Globe, Kenneth Kramer is recognized 
as one of the leading figures in Canadian theatre. He was 
invested as a Member of the Order of Canada by Her 
Excellency the Governor General, in the Senate Chamber in 
Ottawa on May 6, 1988. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kenneth Kramer, Member of the 
Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and to the members of the Assembly, 
Captain Ernest Millward, Member of the Order of Military 
Merit. 
 
Captain Millward has served 33 years in the Canadian forces, 
with postings in Ottawa, Alberta, France, Quebec, Manitoba, 
and Saskatchewan. Beginning as a non-commissioned member, 
he was commissioned from the ranks in 1971. Captain Millward 
is a physical education and recreational officer. 
 
He has made significant contributions as a volunteer in the local 
community wherever he has served in the Canadian Armed 
Forces. He has twice been nominated for citizen of the year in 
Moose Jaw. Captain Millward is considered by his peers to be a 
model citizen and soldier. He was invested as a Member of the 
Order of Military Merit by Her Excellency the Governor 
General, in Ottawa on June 1, 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Captain Ernest Millward, Member of the Order of 
Military Merit. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1893 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my great privilege to 
introduce to you, and through you to members of the House, 
Chief Warrant Officer Garry Orwick, Member of the Order of 
Military Merit. 
 
Garry Orwick has had an outstanding record of service with the 
Canadian forces for 26 years. He joined the Royal Canadian 
Navy in 1962 as a cook. He served seven years at sea on eight 
different ships, and later at two air force bases, a training base, 
and with the Canadian contingent in Vietnam. 
 
He also worked at the 1978 Commonwealth Games in 
Edmonton and has helped the Alberta cadet league. Since 
coming to Canadian Forces Base, Moose Jaw, as base services 
officer in 1983, Chief Warrant Officer Orwick has completely 
rebuilt the catering organization to a level of excellence which 
is unsurpassed in Canada. And I, having dined at the base on a 
number of occasions, can attest to that. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, Chief Warrant Officer Orwick is 
accompanied by his wife, Claudette, with whom I am sure he 
shares the honour. Chief Warrant Officer Orwick was invested 
as a member of the Order of Military Merit by Her Excellency 
the Governor General in Ottawa on June 1, 1988. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Chief Warrant Officer Garry Orwick, 
Member of the Order of Military Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to 
you, and through you to this Assembly, Major Eric Vincent, 
Officer of the Order of Military Merit. Eric Vincent joined the 
communications reserve of the Canadian Forces in Saskatoon in 
1976. He became a captain and commanding officer of 737 
Communication Troop in 1978 and was promoted Major in 
1981. Under his command, 737 Troop became an outstanding 
unit, winning awards for the best reserve unit in 1983 and 1985. 
 
Major Vincent is also a lifelong volunteer in the St. John 
Ambulance. He is an expert marksman and a national hand-gun 
and pentathlon coach. He received a commendation from the 
chief of the defence staff for rescuing a man from a burning car 
in 1978. 
 
In recognition of his distinguished service to the Canadian 
Forces reserves, Major Vincent was invested as an Officer of 
the Order of Military Merit by Her Excellency the Governor 
General on October 29, 1986. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Major Eric Vincent, Officer of the Order of 
Military Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, Chad Ross 
Dunn, Medal of Bravery; Ross Daniel Dunn, Medal of Bravery; 
Constable A. Ross Lewis of the RCMP, Medal  

of Bravery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the morning of August 5, 1986, RCMP 
Constable Ross Lewis and his partner arrived at the scene of a 
fire in Big River to see flames and heavy smoke pouring from a 
shed. A neighbour, who informed them that an elderly man was 
inside, entered the building in an attempt to locate the victim. 
Driven back by the intense heat and thick smoke, he met Ross 
Dunn who, with his son Chad, had arrived in the meantime. 
 
Constable Lewis and Ross Dunn, with Mr. Dunn in the lead, 
held hands and re-entered the shed, but again were forced to 
retreat. Joined by Chad Dunn, they immediately made a third 
attempt and discovered the severely burned and unconscious 
man in a rear corner of the building. Constable Lewis 
immediately applied mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and 
continued to do so while he and the victim were being 
transported to hospital. Unfortunately, the man later died from 
his injuries. 
 
Constable Lewis, Mr. Chad Dunn, and Mr. Ross Dunn, are to 
be invested with the Medal of Bravery by Her Excellency the 
Governor General, in Ottawa on June 10, 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give you Chad Ross Dunn, Medal of Bravery; 
Ross Daniel Dunn, Medal of Bravery; Constable A. Ross Lewis 
of the RCMP, Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A few 
words about the community that the recipients that I’m going to 
introduce are from, Fond du Lac, which is a community on the 
north shore of Lake Athabasca, just 50 miles south of the 
Northwest Territories. They live in an isolated community, and 
I want to thank, through you, Mr. Speaker, the mining 
association of Saskatchewan who were good enough to pay for 
all the expenses to bring the two individuals here. And I would 
specifically like to thank Mr. Ralph Cheesman, of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association, and Mr. Bernard Michel, 
the president of Amok Ltd. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce, 
through you and to the Assembly, Mervin Louis Adam, Star of 
Courage. On September 26, 1986, Mervin Adam performed the 
daring rescue of two children from a burning house on the Fond 
du Lac Indian Reserve. Mr. Adam was helping to build a new 
house when one of his co-workers noticed smoke coming from 
the residence next door. 
 
The men rushed over to investigate. After breaking in the rear 
door, Mr. Adam went inside to see if there were any occupants. 
He found a small boy badly burned near the front door and 
carried him outside to his waiting colleagues. 
 
He re-entered, locating a little girl and her mother, unconscious 
in a back room. He picked the girl up and carried her outside, 
then entered the house a third time, this time to rescue the 
mother. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1894 
 

However, Mr. Speaker, he was overcome by the thick smoke 
and forced back outside. He was able to give instructions to two 
other men who managed to carry on his work and rescue the 
mother. Unfortunately, the little boy succumbed to his injuries, 
but the girl recovered after receiving extensive treatment. 
 
Mr. Adam will be invested with the Star of Courage this 
afternoon by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mervin Louis Adam, Star of Courage. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I now want to introduce to 
you, and through you to the Assembly, Pierre Lidguerre, Medal 
of Bravery. 
 
Pierre Lidguerre and John Pische rescued a woman from a 
burning house on the Fond du Lac Indian Reserve on 
September 26, 1986. Mr. Lidguerre had been helping to build a 
new house when one of his fellow workers spotted smoke 
coming from the residence next door. 
 
The men went to investigate. They succeeded in breaking open 
the rear door of the house, and one man went inside through 
thick black smoke to see if there were any occupants. He 
emerged shortly afterwards carrying a badly burned small boy. 
 
He entered a second time, rescued a little girl, then entered the 
house a third time to rescue the mother. However, Mr. Speaker, 
he was forced out by the overpowering smoke. By this time Mr. 
Pische had arrived on the scene, and he and Mr. Lidguerre 
entered, following the first man’s instructions, lifted her up 
together, carried her outside before wrapping her in some 
drapes sand rushing her to the reserve clinic. 
 
Mr. Lidguerre and Mr. Pische are to be invested with the Medal 
of Bravery this afternoon by His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
Mr. Pische, Mr. Speaker, and his wife, are expecting a child in 
Prince Albert this afternoon and that’s why he’s not here. But I 
present to you, Pierre Lidguerre, Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Assistance for Farmers 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my questions today are 
directed to the Minister of Agriculture, and they of course 
pertain to the . . . how should I describe it, growing crisis of the 
weather and the drought. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday my colleagues on this side of the 
Assembly suggested at least one new program with respect to 
crop insurance or, if you will, a modification of that by way of 
an additional program which would compensate farmers and 
those unfortunate and growing  

situations where the drought prevents seeding and in fact there 
may be some damage to actually being involved in the process 
of seeding. 
 
The minister in charge — I don’t think I misrepresent his words 
— essentially held out little hope for this idea. Yet judging by 
news reports of your speech to the stock growers yesterday in 
Moose Jaw, there seemed to be a contrary position taken by you 
as to this suggestion. 
 
My questions to you, Mr. Minister, is this: will you please 
confirm today, or perhaps better stated, will you clarify today 
your government’s policy on this important issue since the 
deadline for crop insurance is less than two weeks away, and 
since, as I think it is evident to everybody, the effects of the 
drought for wide portions of the province are now sufficiently 
clear to be able to support what I think is a very good 
suggestion coming from this side of the House, and other 
members in the agricultural community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the question of what 
do you do with summer fallow if it isn’t seeded is of specific 
concern not only to people in the very severe drought areas, but 
even in terms of what some farmers will do with their land that 
has the capacity to grow green feed. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that there’s perhaps three things 
to keep in mind. He’s absolutely right with respect to the 
deadline of June 20, and farmers are now in the process of 
deciding whether they will seed summer fallow or not. They 
obviously hope to get rain, and if they get rain they will be 
seeding automatically. 
 
What they have recommended to us, and we are looking at with 
other crop insurance officials, is that perhaps we will extend 
that deadline beyond June 20 to about June 30, or in that 
neighbourhood, because of the very, very dry conditions. 
 
The second thing is that we are exploring the possibility of a 
green feed program where in fact we would encourage people to 
seed, even in July, in the event that they had some rain, two or 
three inches of rain. Or it might come down quickly, and they 
could be planting both summer fallow and stubble to green feed 
so that you could provide it to people who need cattle. 
 
The third is, we are getting some reports — and I’m sure that 
you would be interested in them, and we’ll certainly share them 
with you — about the soil conservation and in fact whether . . . 
what is the best thing to do with summer fallow when it’s dry at 
this point in time. Some farmers are saying to us that they 
would rather just leave it alone, and others are saying, and 
certainly some soil conservation people are saying, best we 
plant it to something, because it is sits one more year without 
anything growing on it, it could be very subject to erosion. 
 
So we are exploring with soil scientists and others the very real 
possibility that we will be encouraging people to seed the 
summer fallow to protect it, because if it sits two years fallow 
with absolutely not touching it, it could be  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1895 
 

very subject to erosion. And I’m sure the hon. member would 
be very interested in what soil scientists and others in various 
places would be telling us would be the best thing to do for that 
part of the land — and it’s not that much; most of the summer 
fallow has been seeded — but that summer fallow that still is 
unseeded, what would be the best thing to do with it throughout 
the summer in the even that it isn’t . . . that we don’t experience 
much rain at all between now and July 1. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to 
the Premier. I would agree with the Premier that it’s important 
that we base our decisions on the best possible facts that are 
available, to make sure that the problem isn’t further 
compounded by government mistake, if I may put it in that 
regard. 
 
But my supplementary question to the Premier is this: does not 
the Premier believe that this already being what? . . . June 7, 
and in the light of this condition which has existed for some 
several weeks this year, and perhaps for three or four years prior 
to this year, that enough of this information is now available so 
that the government can set out with clarity the various options 
which it would pursue, given the developments that might or 
might not take place. For example, why not consider the 
possibility of announcing now, if this is a credible proposition 
that you’re advocating, that the June 20 deadline for crop 
insurance will be extended, given the information that we have 
to date. 
 
The most important thing, Mr. Premier, is: why not provide 
some certainty for the farming community now upon which 
they can base their economic and farming decisions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, there’s any 
disagreement between members on either side of the House 
with respect to providing as much guidance as possible to the 
farmers that are making the decision. The June 20 deadline is 
there. We are prepared to make an announcement in advance of 
the June 20, and as early as in the next few days, with respect to 
the appropriate extension of that. 
 
The question becomes, if you extend that deadline, then what 
do you put along with it to encourage, if you are going to 
encourage people, to take advantage of summer rains that could 
produce various kinds of feed. Then what implications would 
that have for crop insurance? Do you still consider something 
that you would plant to green feed in the summer as summer 
fallow next year with respect to crop insurance, or do you 
consider it as stubble? And it has some pretty significant 
implications with respect to how the farmer farms from then on. 
 
So we are, I can say quite fairly, sincerely, that we are 
discussing, and have this morning discussed, with people in 
crop insurance and other provinces and at the federal level, 
these very questions. We’ll be making an announcement very, 
very soon with respect to the deadline that you’re talking about 
— June 20. 
 
My advise to farmers to date, and this morning is, if it  

hasn’t rained, I would still be waiting for the rain to see it 
because you have to June 20. The deadline may be extended. 
We’ll be making an announcement well in front of June 20 to 
allow them any extended time and new programs that could 
apply to July or August, or in fact throughout the summer. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I will readily acknowledge, Mr. Premier, that these solutions are 
not easy; they’re complicated, as you’ve indicated. But surely 
it’s the obligation — and I don’t mean this in any partisan 
political sense — the obligation of somebody, somebody, and it 
is the government, your government, your ministry as the 
Minister of Agriculture, to start now figuring out how the 
various possible implications of a solution might impact on the 
various aspects of the farming community. 
 
And I guess the purpose of my questioning is that we detect, 
based on the committee of our caucus which has travelled 
certainly great portions of the drought zone in Saskatchewan, a 
growing sense of high anxiety about the uncertainty of 
government programs, both provincial and federal. They are 
really urging some clarity, that there be some firm decisions 
taken. 
 
When can we expect, sir, that you will have sorted out all of 
these various implications and options and have made those 
decision? Because we argue that the time now is here. In fact, to 
be very frank with you, it has long passed. Can you not make 
these statements today, or tomorrow at the very latest? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we’ll make them just as quickly as 
we can, and they very well may be today or tomorrow. we have 
made some statements already. We have modified the crop 
insurance, as you know, for fall seeded crops, and we’ve 
announced payments with respect to drought payment. There 
will soon be announcements on cash to farmers and ranchers. 
 
You will find across western Canada, literally we’ll be looking 
at not tens but hundreds of millions of dollars. It’s a 
comprehensive set of programs on water management, on cash 
to farmers, and on changes to things like crop insurance and 
grain stabilization and others. 
 
I would share with the hon. member, the concern is primarily — 
and we met with the stock growers yesterday, and I spoke to 
them, a lot of them — is about the drought; it isn’t about the 
government programs. They were saying, look, take your time 
to make sure you do it right; don’t just rush into it; make the 
right crop insurance changes; listen very carefully and watch 
each region carefully. And we have said, changes that we’ll 
make in terms of cash and others are retroactive, and the 
changes we’ve made with respect to crop insurance. 
 
We’ve listened to both sides of the House in a very non-partisan 
sense and have asked for the advice of hon. members and I 
appreciate your advice — and others on this topic with respect 
to the management of land and water. And we’ll be making 
announcements, probably on a weekly basis as we go through 
the summer, with respect  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1896 
 

to the conditions and what we can do. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Agriculture, and perhaps . . . It’s a question, but it’s 
in the form of a suggestion, and I put it to the minister in these 
terms. 
 
As the minister will know, I’m advised that with respect to the 
cattle industry there’s been a rather dramatic drop of the price 
for cattle since spring, something in the neighbourhood of 
$1,200 down to $800 in some cases, and even dropping more 
drastically than that. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: will you remove today 
— this is the thrust of the questioning that I direct to you — 
will you remove today the uncertainty which the cattle industry 
is facing, in the light of these economics, by announcing a 
commitment in principle, a commitment in principle to a cash 
payment program, say of at least $80 to $100 per head, in order 
to permit the cattle people to plan next their moves in the face 
of this crisis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have already 
done that. We’ve made that commitment in principle that there 
will be a cash payment, and it will go to producers, and it will 
go to the farmers and ranchers and targeted to those areas of 
need. We have in the past, and we will in the future. 
 
What the stock growers said to us yesterday, and they represent 
certainly the south-west right on in to Alberta, that they want us 
to be careful in designing the appropriate action and the 
appropriate programs. And they were in no big hurry just to see 
money today if it was in the wrong kind of form, and they 
encouraged us, Mr. Speaker, to design the best program that we 
could, a comprehensive program that dealt with water 
management, with cash, and with various kinds of programs, 
like crop insurance, that could be used for some time to come. 
So we have already made that commitment. We have certainly 
delivered in the past, and they know that we will in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Premier, I have . . . Mr. Speaker, first to 
the Premier. 
 
I have one more final question, if I might, on this topic, 
especially in the view of what I thought I heard the Premier say 
about a commitment of $80 to $100, in that neighbourhood, 
cash payment. My question to you is this, Mr. Premier: in view 
of the fact that you’ve made that commitment, may I suggest a 
third proposal to you, one being the crop insurance 
modifications — you’ve spoken to that; the second one, which 
you just spoke to a moment ago; a third one which deals with 
the question of those farmers, those cattlemen, that are forced to 
sell off their herds. 
 
Would you be in favour in principle and communicate this to 
the appropriate authorities federally — implement it 
provincially where possible — that where herds are forced to be 
sold off because of the crisis in farming, the drought crisis, that 
there be an arrangement of, say, a tax  

deferral process of up to three years, where the farmer who sells 
under these circumstances has no obligation to pay, and would 
not pay under the circumstances, unless of course that 
individual does not get back in the cattle business. The rationale 
would be obvious. It would be an immediate assistance now, 
and then of course be an assistance to getting back in when 
times improve, as we almost certainly hope that they will 
improve. 
 
Will you give a commitment of your government to that 
proposal? And finally, would you also make a commitment, 
clear, unequivocal, that these commitments will be retroactive 
to a certain date in order to cover what has taken place up to 
now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that it’s a 
serious enough situation that the hon. member of course would 
not want to be partisan at all about this, and so we won’t be. 
 
I will just say to the hon. member that all the things that you’ve 
jest mentioned so far in question period were suggested by the 
stock growers or already announced by us. So I just raise that 
point, so in case there’s any question with respect to the 
sincerity of the stock growers or the sincerity of the cattlemen, 
they have since suggested that the tax ruling be as you’ve 
pointed out. They mentioned that in Calgary, and I endorse it. 
 
And I’ve already talked to my federal counterparts about that. 
They suggested the crop insurance changes. They suggested to 
us a month ago that the payment should be made directly to 
farmers and ranchers. And they suggested a range. And I said 
that we were committed to making the payment to ranchers and 
farmers. I did not way the level. 
 
And so I just say to my hon. colleague, you’re just a little bit 
late with respect to the suggestions. We have either announced 
them or they’ve been suggested by the stock growers some time 
ago. And I’m glad you’re onside. I would compliment you on 
your homework in listening the stock growers. They provide 
pretty good advice with respect to the livestock industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, with your permission, I have a 
break my word. Something about the Premier’s answer prompts 
me to ask one last question. The Premier says that we’re late in 
pushing these. I really don’t care about that categorization. I 
think all of us agree that what’s important is that there be 
concrete programs set into place to provide relief for our 
farmers and for our livestock people. 
 
My question therefore to the Premier is this, very simply stated: 
where are the specifics of these programs? How much of these 
are going to be shared by the federal and provincial 
governments? What are the terms and the conditions in terms of 
regulations, the forms, if any, which are going to be required? 
Where are these? Will the minister please table them in the 
Legislative Assembly today to assure me that in fact what I’ve 
been advocating  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1897 
 

is in fact late. How about tabling these various documents to 
verify them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, there has already been in 
the neighbourhood of 90 to $100 million announced in terms of 
drought-proofing. And the hon. member asks if there’s anything 
with respect to water management: $75 million from the PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration), another seven and 
a half, and another twelve and a half. 
 
We have met and designed the programs with respect to cost 
sharing on dollars per head to farmers and ranchers across 
western Canada. And in terms of crop insurance, we’ve made 
the modifications in the past, and we’ve announced them, and 
we can continue to announce them throughout the summer. 
 
So I would only say, Mr. Speaker, the public is well aware, and 
the stock growers have said specifically: make sure you do 
them carefully and accurately; there’s no big rush just to 
announce programs for the sake of announcing them; make sure 
you do it right. And that’s certainly the obligation we have 
taken on. 
 
But there will be programs. They will be directed towards 
farmers and ranchers, and there will be the changes as they’ve 
seen in the past, as we’ve already announced in terms of crop 
insurance. Some of them are out there now cutting fall crops 
because we’ve announced it some time ago. That’s exactly what 
they want to see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Collection of Cash Advances to Cattlemen 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question to the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier. When we 
were on tour and talking to cattlemen throughout the drought 
area, Mr. Premier, one of the concerns that they had is in 
respect to the cash advance that you had made to the cattlemen, 
and then subsequently you changed the rules cutting it back to 
70 per cent of the original. At the present time, cattlemen are 
getting notices to make up the difference. I ask you, will you 
consider staying any collection in respect to that modification in 
that program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we listen, as the hon. 
member knows, very, very carefully to the cattlemen and to the 
stock growers, and any suggestions that they have with respect 
to this program, we will be very sensitive to, and we have been 
in the past. So I can only say to the hon. member that requests 
made by the stock growers and the livestock association, are 
certainly listened to on this side of the House, and we will be 
very responsive to suggestions that they may have. 
 

Expected Announcement Re Drought Assistance 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. However late, Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier on this same  

subject. And however late he may say the NDP are with respect 
to this issue, I’m sure he’ll acknowledge that I first raised it 
with him as long ago as last fall when the beginning of this 
program was starting to get evident. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I want to ask for a clarification about a point 
you made in response to an earlier question. Earlier today you 
suggested that there might be some specific announcements in 
relation to drought programming — and I took it you were 
referring to crop insurance in particular — either later today or 
tomorrow. Now do we have your specific assurance — that we 
will have a game plan from you, specifically with respect to the 
crop insurance program, and, if possible, other drought relief 
measures, no later than the end of the day tomorrow? Is that, in 
fact, what you said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say I appreciate 
the fact that it is now acknowledged that the NDP were late. 
And it’s been acknowledged by the Leader of the Liberal Party, 
so we know the priorities in terms or ranking here in the 
legislature, and what’s the real concern is the ranking, not the 
drought itself. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that we have already announced 
changes in crop insurance with respect to fall-seeded crops. So 
winter wheat and rye, people can cut and they can bale and they 
can get it out there, and there will be no penalty with respect to 
crop insurance. 
 
They know the deadlines with respect to seeding, and we are 
about to announce, in the next few hours or the next few days, 
changes that could effect the deadlines that have been suggested 
by farmers. So I’ve said to the Leader of the Opposition, I’ll say 
it to the hon. member: as quickly as we can, I would say within 
the next few hours or the next few days, as best as I can predict 
right now, we will be making subsequent announces in crop 
insurance. 
 
I will say we’ll likely be making announcements throughout the 
summer with respect to modifications that may be necessary 
because of the drought conditions or rain conditions or various 
kinds of other things that have to do with green feed, deadlines. 
All I can say for sure is the things we’ve done in the past, we’re 
quite prepared to do again. New suggestions that farmers and 
ranchers are bringing forward, we’re looking at very seriously. 
 
There will be cash in their pockets to help them, on one hand. 
Secondly, there will be modifications to various kinds of 
programs like crop insurance to get the most feed possible out 
of the blessing of land and resources we have, and in 
consideration of soil conservation, because it’s extremely 
important at this particular time under these conditions. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, if I could pursue the Premier’s 
invitation for suggestions, I would like to ask him if in respect 
to the crop insurance program, if he does intend in those 
announcements within the next few hours to deal with crop 
insurance, will those announcements include a measure similar 
to one taken a couple of years ago, that for those who had 
reduced crop insurance  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1898 
 

coverage because of past claims, the program was modified to 
bring them back up to the 100 per cent level of coverage under 
the crop insurance program. 
 
I wonder if the Premier could confirm that that 100 per cent 
coverage mechanism will be used again this year for those who 
are suffering successive years of losses. And will the Premier be 
including, in his program, assistance for farmers in areas 
outside of the drought area who might have some available 
pasture or feed land that requires fencing in order to make it 
usable for grazing purposes. 
 
Will you be providing that specific service, and where might 
farmers inquire with respect to that service, because phone calls 
are already coming in about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: Mr. Speaker, in regards to the crop insurance 
program, in 1985 when the drought was on, they decided that 
they would put in place a plan that would allow for a 10 per 
cent increase in the amount of crop insurance coverage if the 
second year drought occurred, like two years in a row. 
 
Last year I believe there was paid out almost $10 million by 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. This year we don’t have an 
estimate of what it will be, but as the drought continues to 
expand, it could be a substantial amount of money, in the 20 to 
$30 million extra, above and beyond what would be normally 
paid by crop insurance. 
 
Our best guess right now with crop insurance, if the drought 
continues for the next two to three weeks, could be in excess of 
$500 million in pay-outs by the crop insurance corporation. 
 

Appointment to Task Force on Health 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, today you 
announced your much talked about task force. And I have to 
say that Saskatchewan people, particularly those who have 
suffered from your various health care cut-backs, have nothing 
to be pleased about. 
 
Will you confirm for us today, Mr. Minister, that the task force 
vice-chairman is to be your deputy minister of Health, Mr. 
Walter Podiluk, the same man who was your deputy last year 
when your government was decimating the health care system? 
And, Mr. Minister, why should the people of Saskatchewan 
believe that he won’t compound your cruel and heartless 
policies in the area of health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the 
House and to the hon. member is that the Premier will have a 
ministerial statement immediately following question period 
regarding the make-up of the task force. But I would say to the 
hon. member as it relates to, regardless of what context it might 
come in from that hon. member and any of her colleagues, 
frankly, I will defend the integrity of the gentleman whose 
name she brings to this House in a slur kind of a way. 
 
Mr. Podiluk, who is presently the deputy of the  

Department of Health, and has been the deputy and a public 
servant in other departments of this government, and has served 
the public in other capacities outside of this government in 
terms of the separate school system in Saskatoon, and for a 
good long time has served this province — so what I will say to 
the House, Mr. Speaker, let it suffice it to say that I will, and 
thinking people across Saskatchewan, thinking people across 
Saskatchewan, will recognize the integrity of Walter Podiluk 
wherever he goes in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Podiluk may be a loyal civil 
servant, but he takes orders from that man standing over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And he does what the government tells him to 
do. 
 
Now with respect to the individuals on the task force, I 
understand that the 400 dental technicians who were fired and 
who asked for a voice on this task force are not represented, nor 
are the thousands of people on hospital waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan represented on this task force. Isn’t that correct, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the Premier 
will be announcing the make-up of the task force in just a very 
few moments. I ask the member to be patient. I will say to the 
hon. member though, I’m very, very surprised, frankly — and I 
would say this to the Leader of the Opposition, I think, more so 
than to that member. The Leader of the Opposition, I believe, 
would owe an apology to Mr. Podiluk and an apology to a good 
number of other people who believe very strongly in the 
integrity of that individual — that’s one. 
 
And all I would say again, Mr. Speaker, is that as the Premier 
announces the members of the task force — and he will do that 
in a few moments, as I’ve said, and if the hon. member has 
decided that this will be her attack, that this will be the NDP’s 
contribution to the blueprint for health care in the future, to 
attack the integrity of people who bring, in their own right — 
individuals who bring, in their own right, integrity in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that’s just fine. So be it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I will stand with the members of the task force because I 
believe those members of that task force have served this 
province in several capacities well in the past and, I know, will 
serve this province well in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Appointment of the Saskatchewan Commission on 
Directions in Health Care 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to announce the 
appointment of the Saskatchewan  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1899 
 

Commission on Directions in Health Care, reporting to the 
Premier of the province. This eight-member team will conduct 
hearings throughout our towns or villages and urban centres to 
consult with those who use, and those who operate the health 
care system in our province. They will investigate and 
recommend immediate and, indeed, long-term solutions to a 
variety of health care issues including accessibility, quality, and 
availability of care, improvements in efficiency, and overall 
management of the system for decades to come. 
 
The commission will be chaired by Dr. Bob Murray of 
Saskatoon, a well-known ophthalmologist and former dean of 
the College of Medicine. Mr. Walter Podiluk, presently deputy 
minister of Saskatchewan Health, will assume duties as 
executive director and deputy chairperson. Other members are 
as follows: Morris Anderson of Regina, executive director of 
development and former president of Luther College; Sylvia 
Fedoruk, chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon; Berva Farr, a registered nurse, and executive 
director of the Santa Maria Senior Citizens Home in Regina; 
Maureen Kurtz of Tisdale, and she just stepped out of the 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, because of illness, a former public health 
nurse in the province; Bishop Blaise Morand of Prince Albert; 
and Ernie Moen, a Cabri farmer, well-known for his volunteer 
and community work in health care and other sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a full schedule of hearings will be announced this 
summer. Consultation is expected to begin in the early fall. 
Health care is a top social priority in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Our commitment to high quality service for our 
people remains absolute, Mr. Speaker. We are equally 
committed to responsible management of the delivery system 
by working in partnership with people throughout our province. 
I’m confident we’ll find workable solutions to the variety of 
issues facing us today and well into the next century. 
 
I congratulate the new members of the commission and wish 
them well in their endeavours. Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I must wish the members of 
the new commission well in their endeavours. I can tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, and tell the members of the commission, that 
given the history of this government, wishing them well is the 
least that any member of this House can give them, and the least 
that any person in the province of Saskatchewan can give them, 
because they’re going to need all the best wishes that they are 
going to get in order to do this job, given the abysmal record of 
this government in health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has created the crisis in health 
care — 11,000 people looking to get into hospital beds and they 
can’t because this government’s got money for a power plant 
and not for health care. Four hundred dental technicians and 
families destroyed — families destroyed by this government — 
because they’ve got money for a plant but not for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romanow: — This government has got no money for a 
prescription drug plan, Mr. Speaker, none whatsoever. They’ve 
spent two years, since 1986, dismantling the finest medicare 
and hospitalization program in all of North America. They gave 
it benign neglect from 1982 to 1986, and now they set up a task 
force to say: undo the damage that we wrought on the province 
of Saskatchewan. I say, shame on the Premier and the 
government opposite, and best of luck to this task force because 
they’re going to need it, Mr. Speaker, every sense of it. 
 
The history of this government, Mr. Speaker, is that every time 
they run into a serious political problem, they set up a task 
force. This task force ought to know that this is not the first 
time round that a task force has been set up. What about the 
Elmer Schwartz report? That was set up; it was conducted in 
secret. It did a thorough study, hidden until it was raised in this 
Legislative Assembly, and then discarded. Except this task 
force is now being set up to ask to reconsider those same issues 
all over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this task force compounds a multiplicity of task 
forces. This country has seen task forces from one end to the 
other end. They pile up. The issues of accessibility, the 
questions of the quality of health care, the questions of rural 
versus urban — the studies are there. The members of the task 
force know that themselves that it’s there. This is not new. 
 
I want to know what the budget is going to be for this task 
force. How much are these people going to be paid? Where is 
going to be the independent staff advising the task force? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish the individuals, none of whom I have 
anything against — they are all very competent people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Yes. None of which I have against 
. . . It’s not them that I blame. I blame this government for 
having created the mess. 
 
I caution the task force and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan: don’t be disappointed if all you get is a report 
which, like Schwartz, is going to gather dust as this government 
goes on its merry way of dismantling the health care program of 
Saskatchewan. Over our dead bodies — we’re not going to 
allow that to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might 
suggest a short recess, Mr. Speaker, to room 218 so that we can 
have tea and mingle with the people who were awarded the 
distinguished honours earlier in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my suggestion is, Mr. Speaker, that we have a 5-minute 
bell before we come back in. Could that be arranged? I think 
that’s probably the best way to do it. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 4 p.m. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1900 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 80  An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Education Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 81  An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I’d 
like to ask for leave to introduce some guests that have just 
arrived. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, a group of 47 students from the Dr. Brass 
Elementary School in Yorkton. It’s the grade 4 class and they 
have their teachers with them today: Miss Zandee, Mrs. 
Pearson, Mrs. Abbott, and Mrs. Grunerud. 
 
It’s my pleasure to welcome you children here today, your 
students, and I’ve already had pictures and refreshments with 
the group. I hope you enjoy the Assembly and what carries on 
here and that you have a real good visit in the legislature and in 
Regina. And I would wish you all a very, very happy vacation 
summer after June 30. 
 
I would ask all members to please welcome these students in 
the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to incorporate the Stephen and 
Michelene Worobetz Foundation 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out to the 
House that his Bill received a very favourable reception in our 
second reading debate and in the committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. I think it had a lot to do with the nature of the 
sponsors of the Bill, Dr. and Mrs. Stephen Worobetz, who are 
of course very well known to members of this Assembly and 
very well respected by the  

people of Saskatchewan. And I would certainly want to take 
this opportunity simply to commend this Bill once again to the 
favourable consideration of members in the committee. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Full 

Gospel Bible Institute 
 
Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to incorporate the Stephen and 
Michelene Worobetz Foundation 

 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 1, 
An Act to incorporate the Stephen and Michelene Worobetz 
Foundation, be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Full 

Gospel Bible Institute 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02 — An Act 
to amend An Act to incorporate Full Gospel Bible Institute, be 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 5 — Effects of Changes in Prescription Drug 
Plan 

 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
rising to speak to a motion which I’ll present to you later, but 
the message is to urge the Government of Saskatchewan to 
reverse its decision to ruin the Saskatchewan prescription drug 
plan, thereby immediately increasing the cost of prescription 
drugs and placing an unfair and severe financial burden on 
Saskatchewan residents least able to afford these increases: 
Saskatchewan seniors, the chronically ill, low income and 
single-parent families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I first proposed this resolution which has 
been on the order papers for some time, it was just after the 
government had announced that they were going to bring in a 
task force to study the future of medicare. And I think it’s just 
so clear an example of the way in which this government has 
been governing the province, that they’ve been walking 
backwards into the future. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1901 
 

First of all, they’ve destroyed the prescription drug plan, and 
then they propose a task force to study the future of medicare. 
That is just so ironic, Mr. Speaker. Such an example of how this 
government, which says it’s taking us into the 21st century, is 
going backwards, and it’s going backwards with its eyes closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Now obviously, Mr. Speaker, to anyone with 
any sense of reason and rational judgement, it would make 
sense to keep a drug plan in place until . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — . . . until they’ve done a review of the medicare 
and health services. But not this way — doing it absolutely 
opposite, absolutely backwards. It’s government by chaos, as 
I’ve said many times in this Assembly; that’s what it is. It’s 
unacceptable to those of us on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Smart: — The Saskatchewan prescription drug plan was a 
very good plan. It was an excellent plan. This government 
keeps saying that it wants to preserve and protect health care, 
and yet it’s doing just the opposite, absolutely the opposite. And 
that’s why the people of Saskatchewan can’t trust this 
government opposite. 
 
We can’t trust you and we don’t trust you, and we particularly 
now have very great distrust about this task force that’s coming 
in. The vice-chairman is going to be the person who takes his 
orders directly from the Minister of Health, the same person 
who’s done these destructive changes to the drug plan, 
demolished the drug plan, and now he wants to study it and see 
what he might do for the future of medicare. 
 
And I say, preserve us from any ideas that the Minister of 
Health can funnel through any person concerned with the future 
of medicare and changes in the health care system. He’s already 
demonstrated that he has absolutely no respect for the health 
care system whatsoever. And any task force that he has a person 
on who represents him is doomed to failure because he will be 
controlling what goes into the task force and he will be 
controlling the output. And that is completely unacceptable in 
terms of studying the health care system of this province. 
 
But we can’t expect anything different. We had a prescription 
drug plan which was a program respected and admired across 
North America as the best example of helping people pay the 
expenses of curing illnesses, of relieving pain, and of staying 
healthy. That’s why the drug plan did, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
the Minister of Health has destroyed. And now he brings in a 
task force to see if he’s going in the right direction. Absolutely 
ridiculous. 
 
Now when he brought in these changes to the drug plan and the 
destruction of the drug plan — and I must remember to call it 
the destruction of the drug plan,  

because that is exactly what it is. There’s a semblance of 
something still set up, but it is nothing compared to what it was 
before. And people . . . when they brought in this destruction of 
the drug plan, many, many people objected. People in my 
constituency, seniors, people who were chronically ill, people 
who were on low income — they all protested. All across the 
province they protested. 
 
And what did the government do then? The government said, 
oh, we must have made a little bit of a mistake. So they set up a 
special review panel to help people, supposedly a review panel 
that nobody found out about across the province. The forms in 
which to apply for consideration under the special review panel 
were not easily available to anyone. And there were no written 
guide-lines to the doctors, to the pharmacists, to the patients, as 
to who should apply, as to what conditions might be considered 
by the review panel, and what drugs might be considered. 
 
So they first of all destroyed the drug plan; then they had this 
tremendous protest, 10,000 people marching in Regina. They 
said, oh dear, we must do something. They bring in a special 
review panel. They forget to tell people how they can apply to 
it. They don’t make the forms available. And then they go 
ahead and say, well now we better do something else to speed it 
up, so they bring in priority envelopes that people could get, if 
they were lucky enough to get in touch with a sympathetic 
MLA who could take their case forward to the government. Or 
if they happened to find their way through to these sorts of 
things, they get priority envelopes. 
 
And still the protest mounted, and still the people were hurt by 
this — hurt over and over again. I have constituent who’s 
paying $500 a month on medical bills, on drugs, for two heart 
conditions in their family — $500 a month out of a senior 
citizen’s income. That’s a horrendous amount of money. And 
people all over this province are having that sort of thing 
happen to them. 
 
So then the government says oh, oh, we better set up a task 
force to study the future of medicare. And then when they 
didn’t announce the task force, they waited and they waited and 
they waited, and they couldn’t get it together, and they didn’t 
know who they were going to put on it. And it was all part of 
the government by chaos that we’ve been having for the last six 
or seven years. 
 
Then they bring in the plastic cards. They say they’re going to 
have plastic cards and they’re going to computerize everybody. 
Wonderful! You’ll get charged your 20 per cent, then you’ll get 
. . . the 80 per cent will be charged to the government. That’s 
another example of making a suggestion, an idea. Oh, we’re 
going to get plastic cards, they announce. They announced that, 
what? Six weeks ago? Two months ago? We still don’t have 
any plastic cards. 
 
We still don’t have any way . . . people are still paying a 
hundred per cent of their drug costs and waiting weeks and 
weeks and weeks to get it back. Now initially they said there 
was going to be a month’s turnaround that people could submit 
to the drug plan and they’d get their money back in four weeks. 
That’s not happening not at  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1902 
 

all. 
 
So people with a monthly cost to their drugs have to pay it one 
month, full cost. They have to pay it the next month, full cost. 
Then the third month, even, full cost. And then the government 
starts to get the rebates back to them. Meanwhile people haven’t 
got money to pay their phone bills that have gone up, their 
utility rates, the heating costs, the higher rents, and all the other 
costs and fee increases that this government has imposed on the 
people of Saskatchewan on top of things like destroying the 
drug plan. 
 
It’s completely unacceptable to people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and people have made that known to this government 
loud and strong — absolutely loud and strong. 
 
Our senior citizens, who so often have the large drugs bills, are 
now facing a cruel choice between food on the table or 
necessary medications. And that is happening, Mr. Speaker. 
That is happening a lot to seniors, but it doesn’t seem to matter 
to this government opposite. 
 
The loss of the drug plan imposes a severe hardship on 
Saskatchewan families, especially those with young children, 
and families who are already struggling to make ends meet 
because of the crushing tax burden the PC government has 
made them carry. But that doesn’t matter to the government 
opposite. It makes parents dig even deeper to find the extra 
$144 per year the average family of four pays, because of just 
this one harmful attack on health care. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what about the people who are 
young or old who are fighting severe or chronic illness? What 
about people with rare conditions who need the newest and the 
most expensive drug treatments? Without the drug plan, 
medication costs for the sick can be astronomical — hundreds 
and hundreds of dollars per month. And I’ve told you about the 
drugs for heart conditions; that’s one of the drugs that’s really 
most expensive. 
 
But that doesn’t matter to this government either, Mr. Speaker. 
It promised a special policy to assist people with the highest 
drug bills but it double-crossed them, and that no policy is in 
place at this point. 
 
This government taxes the sick and the elderly. It hits the 
weakest in our society who deserve support while they fight to 
regain their health, and they don’t need additional worries about 
paying for their medication. But this government doesn’t care 
how cruel and how uncaring it is when it makes the sick and the 
elderly choose between groceries or medicine — medicine 
which is life saving in some circumstances, and medicine they 
can no longer afford. 
 
Now prescription drug purchases have declined across this 
province since the drug plan was sacked. And the PC 
government knows that this means that people can’t afford to 
buy medicine. But instead of admitting the truth, it says people 
are avoiding unnecessary drug purchases. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s absolute hog-wash. Patients are given 
prescriptions by their doctors for a good  

reason, and if this government doubts that, it’s making 
insinuations about Saskatchewan doctors that it better stand up 
and defend. 
 
People who leave their doctor’s offices with prescriptions they 
never fill do so because they can’t afford the drug bill at the 
pharmacy, not because they question their doctor’s judgement, 
and they’re insulted that the PC government suggests otherwise. 
 
And I’m insulted, Mr. Speaker, that the PC government would 
suggest otherwise, that the people I know, the senior citizens, 
the people who are chronically ill, the people with high drug 
costs, are somehow abusing the system. Somehow they’re drug 
abusers and they’re making a buck on the drug prescription 
plan. That is the most callous kind of accusation to give to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s really happening is that because this PC government did 
not support the federal government in changes to the Patent 
(drug) Act, the cost of drugs have gone up and up and up, and 
it’s the fault of the multinational corporations, drug companies, 
that these costs have gone up. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I had bet that she’d say multinational 
before she was done. 
 
Ms. Smart: — It’s the cost of the multinational drug companies 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — She did it again. 
 
Ms. Smart: — . . . which the minister from Kelvington does 
not take seriously. He is laughing at my suggestion that 
multinational drug companies have any power in this country. 
And that just shows how ignorant the member is in terms of 
how drugs come across in this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — If you don’t know anything about the power of 
the multinational drug companies, you know nothing about how 
drugs are distributed in this country, and that appalling 
ignorance makes me even more frightened in terms of 
supporting legislation that destroys the drug plan and puts the 
costs on the sick and the elderly and the chronically ill and 
people on low income. 
 
You have a lot to learn, member from Kelvington, a lot to learn 
because the multinational drug companies, they have admitted 
. . . The president of the Canadian Pharmaceutical Association 
has admitted that the prices went up prior to the federal drug 
prices review panel being put in place, Mr. Speaker. The 
president, Judy Erola, admitted that the costs went up. 
 
I want to read you, Mr. Speaker, what Linda McQuaig in The 
Globe and Mail said, quoting Mrs. Erola: 
 

The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association of Canada, 
which represents the large multinational drug companies, 
pledged that drug prices increases would not outstrip 
increases in the consumer price index (CPI) when it 
lobbied  

  



 
June 7, 1988 

1903 
 

successfully last fall for increased patent protection for 
brand-name drugs. 

 
And they put on a very heavy lobby. But before the drug panel 
review could come into place, the drub prices went up. 
Sometimes they’ve gone up 100 per cent, “. . . and in one case 
the increase has been 250 per cent.” 
 
Now under the drug review panel that was to come in under the 
Patent Act, drugs were supposed to go up by 5 per cent. But 
they said that since the new legislation was not in place last 
July, companies were not obliged to keep price increases in line 
with changes to the consumer price index. 
 
And Mrs. Erola said: 
 

(You) don’t increase your income tax contributions until 
the law says you must. 
 
Since the legislation came into effect last fall, companies 
will tie their price increases to the consumer price index in 
the future but will probably not adjust prices that came 
into effect this month, she said. 

 
Now those, the prices that came within the last while have been 
very, very high. This has been documented; these are facts. I’m 
not fabricating this. This has been documented all across 
Canada. 
 
Jack Kay, the chairman of the Canadian Drug Manufacturers’ 
Association which represents the producers of low-cost generic 
drugs, said yesterday that some manufacturers are trying to get 
large price increases into place before the price review board 
comes into effect. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that in Canada we 
have two pharmaceutical associations. We have the 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association (of Canada), which 
is the multinational brand drug companies; and we have the 
Canadian Drug Manufacturers’ Association, which are the 
generic drug manufacturing companies. 
 
And it is these generic drug manufacturing companies that the 
PC government in power in Ottawa has attacked by bringing in 
patent legislation that will not allow our Canadian 
manufacturers to manufacture low-cost drugs for years and 
years to come. They used to be able to do it quite quickly. The 
new legislation means now that they can’t do it for a long time. 
And now we have in place much more power for the 
multinational drug companies. 
 
The federal Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs did 
absolutely nothing to support consumers in keeping the drug 
prices down. And our counterparts here, the government in 
Saskatchewan, the PC government in Saskatchewan, and the 
Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs provincially, did 
absolutely nothing to lobby on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan — the seniors, the chronically ill, people on low 
income, and people who need drugs for various reasons — did 
nothing to help them in terms of preventing this legislation. 
 
They’re just absolutely in bed with their federal  

counterparts. They won’t do anything to help the people at the 
grass roots level. They did nothing to prevent this change in 
legislation federally. And it’s because of that change in 
legislation that our drug companies are . . . prices are going up. 
It has absolutely nothing to do with the seniors in this province 
who need drugs because their doctors have prescribed them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And because this government opposite won’t 
even recognize the reality of multinational drug companies, 
they have absolutely no integrity and no sense of justice in 
dealing with this issue. Instead, they want to support their 
Premier in attacking the seniors and the chronically ill and the 
sick, and saying that they’re drug abusers. And saying that the 
cost of the drug plan — they were saying this — the drug plan 
is going to go up and up and up in cost. 
 
Because we’re taking more drugs, they say — not because the 
multinational corporations are gouging us for the price of drugs. 
No. Oh, no. The multinational corporations can charge 
whatever they like. And you’ll say that the cost of drugs are 
going up because the sick and elderly are abusing it. And that’s 
unacceptable analysis of a situation where the reality shows the 
power of multinational drug companies in the increase in cost 
of drugs. 
 
(1630) 
 
And your analysis about the sick and the elderly abusing the 
drug system in based on absolutely no foundation of reality or 
truth or fact whatsoever. You just want to malign people. You 
just want to get people set against each other. You want the 
province to think that somehow a few people are taking a lot of 
drugs and causing us all to have the price of drugs go up and up 
and up. There’s absolutely no truth in that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is, the cost of drugs is going up because of who’s 
marketing them, not because of who’s taking them. And if you 
want to find out about the doctors, and if you’re going to charge 
them, I suggest you should put your evidence forward and deal 
directly with the doctors, if you have a concern about 
over-prescribing from the doctors’ position. If you’re going to 
accuse the doctors, put your evidence on the table. All the facts 
point to the drug companies increasing the cost of drugs. 
 
Now one purpose of the task force, I note, is to have cost 
containment, to look at efficiencies. And I say the real 
cost-effectiveness would have resulted if the government had 
opposed changes to the Patent (drug) Act, if the government 
had kept the drug plan in place so that people could share the 
cost of drugs across the province, all of us sharing in that health 
care plan, instead of putting the burden on a few who were sick 
and elderly. And that’s the way you could have cost efficiency, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the government opposite that one 
in four people in Saskatchewan live in poverty; and that 70 per 
cent of the minimum wage earners in this province are women 
earning approximately $756 per month on minimum wage. 
Now you try to live on $756 a  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1904 
 

month. 
 
If you add children to that, there is extra money for medication, 
and especially for birth control. It’s beyond the reach of the 
working poor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to quote from a letter that was sent out to the 
Community Health Services Association, a letter written by Dr. 
Sally Mahood, in which she describes the most alarming 
circumstances in which the health and welfare of women and 
teenagers is threatened by the drug plan changes, is the whole 
area of birth control and contraception. 
 
Oral contraceptives now cost $15 a month, or $180 a year, 
minus the deductible of 125 and 20 per cent of monthly costs 
thereafter. This is $100 a year, even after the refund. One-half 
of Saskatchewan teenagers 15 to 17 years old are sexually 
active, and 54 to a thousand teenage girls get pregnant each 
year. 
 
How many teenagers have access to $30 for an initial 
prescription of birth control medication? How many have a 
hundred dollars a year to spend on birth control pills? And even 
more disturbingly, how many can be open enough with parents 
to submit their contraceptive bills to the family for 
reimbursement on a family claim submission? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve all acknowledged in this House that 
we already face a crisis in unplanned and unwanted 
pregnancies, and pricing birth control beyond the reach of low 
income women or teenagers is a sure and certain formula to 
make things worse. And on behalf of the many women who live 
in poverty in this province, Mr. Speaker, I want to really protest 
that change in the drug plan that made the cost of birth control 
prescriptions so high for people on low incomes. 
 
It’s really important that we support in every way we can, the 
dignity and the respect for women who want to control the 
number of children they have and who need access to things 
like birth control medication and oral contraception as easily as 
possible, so that they have the children that they can care for 
and that they want, and that they don’t get beaten up by this 
government opposite who says very sanctimoniously that they 
really support families and that they want to see all children 
well taken care of. 
 
And then they put in this kind of a changer which hurts families 
so badly in terms of their expenses, and hurts women who can’t 
get access to birth control information to help them to control 
the families that they have and to help them to have the wanted 
children that they need and want, and to be able to prevent 
unwanted pregnancies. 
 
That’s another dimension of the pain and the anguish that this 
change in the drug plan has cost in its destruction of the drug 
plan. It’s been completely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, to have 
this drug plan so changed at a time when the government then 
says it wants to study the future of medicare. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, there’s many more points I could 
make, including reference, I might add, to a  

campaign brochure from the former member for Regina 
Wascana who said in the 1982 election, “A Progressive 
Conservative government will eliminate dispensing fees on all 
drugs prescribed for senior citizens.” 
 
Well you eliminated the dispensing fee by bringing in a fee that 
was even bigger. They can pay now 100 per cent of the whole 
cost. Maybe that was what you meant behind this promise. 
Maybe that’s what it was. But it certainly isn’t an elimination of 
the dispensing fees on all drugs prescribed for senior citizens as 
any rational, thinking person would understand a promise like 
that. 
 
But like so many of the promises brought in by this PC 
government, you didn’t keep the promise, you didn’t live up to 
what you were going to do, you didn’t do what you said you 
were going to do. You say one thing and you do absolutely the 
opposite. And you go backwards when you say you’re going 
forwards. 
 
In my resolution, Mr. Speaker, I’m asking this Assembly, all 
the members opposite, to recognize that the Saskatchewan 
prescription drug plan, as it existed before it was demolished, 
meant a great deal to the people of Saskatchewan. It meant a 
great deal to those with chronic illnesses and chronic illnesses 
in families. If any of you have a constituent who’s got asthma, 
you know how high their drug costs have been. Asthma is not a 
very rare disease. There are many families with asthmatic 
family members and often there’s more than one person in a 
family with asthma, and the costs have gone up and been very, 
very high for those families. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And what does this government do? 
 
Ms. Smart: — This government charges the families 
themselves for their sicknesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the drug plan meant a great deal to the elderly and 
it provided necessary security to all Saskatchewan families. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m remembering a constituent of mine who 
has glaucoma, very high drug costs monthly to help with that 
condition. That’s a condition of blindness, Mr. Speaker. She 
couldn’t even read the form that was available to her to apply 
for a rebate quickly, and she needed a rebate quickly because 
her costs, her drug costs went up monthly — were there 
monthly for her to face. And if I hadn’t been able to find her 
and to help her fill out that form she wouldn’t even know it 
existed. But that’s the sort of condition that this government 
doesn’t take into account. And people with sight difficulties go 
down . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I want to say something 
about the way this government has destroyed social programs 
like the drug plan while it goes around sanctimoniously saying 
to people: oh, we build Saskatchewan, we’re building 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You’re destroying Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this government 
is destroying Saskatchewan, and they also are failing to take 
into consideration that building Saskatchewan is more than 
bricks and mortar. Building is providing services and programs, 
and the very seniors who are hurting so much by the destruction 
of the drug plan are the ones that worked so hard to put it in 
place. 
 



 
June 7, 1988 

1905 
 

They’re the ones that built this drug plan, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
the ones that have done it in the past. They’re the ones that have 
built up the social programs, the health care programs. They’re 
the ones that deserve consideration. They’re the ones that know 
that building Saskatchewan is building facilities — yes, is 
building services, is building programs. They know what it 
means to build Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, that during the first 
term in office this government opposite treated the health care 
system — the programs that were built up by the seniors in this 
province — they treated it with benign neglect. But since 
re-election in 1986, Mr. Speaker, this PC government has 
embarked on a contemptible policy of hacking Saskatchewan’s 
health care system to pieces. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a policy 
of destruction, not construction. That is not building 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we never know when illness will strike any one of 
us and devastate our lives. We may find ourselves unable to 
work or to carry on independent lives because of sickness and 
of illness, and the seniors of this province knew this. So I say to 
the government opposite, why not build good programs and 
services instead of engaging in demolition derbys, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then you look around at the debris that you’ve caused . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You guys stopped building nursing 
homes, and we started building them again. 
 
Ms. Smart: — You look around — and I’ll have a lot to say 
about the building of nursing homes when the Health estimates 
are up, Mr. Speaker. Right now I want to say that this 
government’s engaged in a demolition derby, that’s what it is. 
It’s not building Saskatchewan, not one bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — You’ve destroyed the drug plan, you’re 
destroying the services, you’re destroying this province. You 
are not building this province, and you have no respect for the 
health care programs and the social programs that the people in 
this province have built up over many, many years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And, Mr. Speaker, when they look around at the 
debris that they’ve caused, when they look around at the 
destruction, they say, oops, we goofed; we’re going to have to 
bail out with a task force. 
 
You’ve had so much flak that you’re bailing out with a task 
force, but the people of Saskatchewan won’t be fooled by this 
attempt to do some damage control, Mr. Speaker. They’ll look 
and see who the vice-chairman is; they know there’s a direct 
control from the Minister of Health on this task force. You 
won’t be looking at what really needs to be done in this 
province. You’ll be using this task force to go full steam ahead, 
co-operating with  

the companies and with the big-business interests that want you 
to do in this province the way you’ve done in the drug plan. 
That’s what you’re going to be doing with the task force. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I charge them with that destruction 
in this province. Mr. Speaker, I realize that in setting up the task 
force, they admit they’ve made a big mistake. I’m asking them 
now in this motion which I want to read. I’m moving: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to reverse its decision to ruin the Saskatchewan 
prescription drug plan, thereby immediately increasing the 
cost of prescription drugs and placing an unfair and severe 
financial burden on Saskatchewan residents least able to 
afford these increases: Saskatchewan seniors, the 
chronically ill, low income, and single parent families. 

 
I move this resolution, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: Thank you very much. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise today and second this 
important Bill introduced by my colleague from Saskatoon 
Centre. And I would like to compliment her on introducing this 
important Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no other issue, no other issue in the Eastview 
by-election was more important or more central than health 
care, and specifically, in that by-election, than the hardships 
created by this government through their cuts to the prescription 
drug plan. There’s no question about that. This government has 
created tremendous hardship that for thousands and thousands 
of individuals, families, and senior citizens. There is no 
question that this program must be restored, reducing hardships 
and the financial burden on families, low income people, and 
many seniors. 
 
(1645) 
 
This cut, another step in this government’s dismantling of the 
health care system, as was so eloquently described by my 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre, it’s just another example of 
the PC insensitivity to the plight of people who are ill. It’s 
another example of the formation in this province of a two-tier 
health care system. I have proof of dozens of people from 
Saskatoon Eastview who are experiencing tremendous hardship 
and are making choices between needed medications and food, 
Mr. Speaker. And I will talk about some of those examples later 
on, because I know that some members opposite find this 
funny. It is not funny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you add these costs — the cost of 
prescription drugs and the fact that they’ve gone up so much — 
with the record tax increases by this government, with the 
increases in unemployment, the increases in property taxes, 
nursing home fee increases,  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1906 
 

and on and on, we see that Saskatoon has the highest inflation 
rate in Canada last year. When you add all of these in with the 
prescription drug costs, which are up-front costs, we can see 
why so many people are experiencing tremendous hardship and 
families are in desperate financial trouble. When you add these 
together, Mr. Speaker, it’s a tremendous added burden created 
by the attitudes and the policies of this PC government. 
 
Governing, Mr. Speaker, is a matter of making choices and 
setting priorities — not priorities based on greed, as we see with 
this government. This government’s priorities are set by the 
Weyerhaeusers of the world, by the Ramada Renaissance folks, 
and the Pocklingtons — their blind, right-wing philosophy of 
giving away important provincial assets and then not having 
money for important health care programs. 
 
It’s wasting money that people of Saskatoon Eastview were 
well aware of, Mr. Speaker, money on vacant government 
office space, government advertising, flying off to family 
weddings, and so on. Some time ago — and this was brought up 
to me several times during the by-election — the Premier was 
in New York, talking about Saskatchewan being so wealthy that 
you could afford to mismanage it and still break even. Well I 
think we’ve seen . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — February of ’87. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — February of ’87, someone said. I think we’ve 
seen, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a limit to the degree of 
mismanagement that can occur. And now when we see the 
situation where every man, woman, and child has a debt of 
$4,000 in this province in six and a half short years, no wonder 
there’s no money for health care in this province. 
 
Thirty-four thousand dollars a day . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The member from Saskatoon Mayfair obviously wants to 
enter the debate and I hope to hear him later. Thirty-four 
thousand dollars a day for vacant government office space we 
waste, yet no money for the prescription drug program for 
senior citizens; $25 million a day . . . or a year for government 
advertising, self-serving government advertising, yet no money 
for a drug plan. This government is insensitive, it’s arrogant, 
and it cuts programs that put people first. PCs always have, and 
they always will operate that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s approach in health care can be 
summarized in the following statement, and I’d like to quote to 
show that it’s not just the New Democrats that are concerned 
about this government’s record and attitude and performance in 
health care. 
 
In March of this year, the Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association presented a brief to the Minister of Health. It has 
the 400 member organizations in Saskatchewan representing 
some 12,000 people, and they say in their executive summary, 
and I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Health-Care Association believes that 
the best solutions to problems are those arrived at through 
co-operation rather than  

confrontation. We must, however, acknowledge a certain 
degree of frustration with the lack of progress over the 
past two years on many important matters. The overriding 
theme of this brief is the urgent need for communication, 
co-operation and co-ordination. 

 
That’s a brief from a group that represents 1,200 member 
organizations throughout this province. 
 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association have said the same thing over the last year, Mr. 
Speaker. Anyone who disagrees, anyone in the province who 
disagrees with this government’s decisions, is viewed as being 
negative. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before and I’ll say again, I’m not 
negative, but I am angry about the way this government treats 
people. I’m angry about the way this government makes 
decisions and then thinks about the decisions later. I’m angry 
about the drug plan cuts, the cuts to the prescription program 
. . . or the dental program, hospital waiting lists, and the home 
care cuts; and on and on it goes, without consideration, Mr. 
Speaker, for those affected. 
 
Second, I think, a situation that typifies the way this 
government operates in health care was expressed by a 
prominent surgeon I talked to last week in Saskatoon who told 
me I could share this information publicly. He indicated that he 
was leaving Saskatoon, and he says: 
 

I’m fed up with the lack of priority, the lack of funding, 
and the inability of this government to allow us to give 
patients proper and basic health care. (Then he indicates 
that) This situation is a disgrace and something’s got to be 
done about it. 

 
And he says that the main reason he’s moving to Ontario, and 
he says the main reason . . . he indicates that four or five of his 
colleagues are leaving. The main reason surgeries are down in 
Saskatoon is because people like himself and other surgeons 
leaving the city are working hard because they feel dedicated 
and committed to their patients and want to tie up the surgeries 
before they leave. Well that’s not a health care system, Mr. 
Speaker, that is in keeping with Saskatchewan’s proud tradition 
in health care. That’s not a health care system that I’m proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen incredible mismanagement in health 
care, as was described so clearly by the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, and that’s nowhere more specifically the case 
than in the prescription drug program. There was no 
pre-thought to prevention and how this program related to 
prevention. There was no pre-planning or thought into the 
hardships that this drug plan changes would cause on people. 
 
Then the Minister of Health has the insensitivity and the disdain 
to those who feel they had to go public in order to present their 
case and get the help that they needed. Then, out of desperation 
and public pressure, we see the setting up a review panel with 
no terms of reference and no clear idea in the province how to 
access the panel. We see people waiting four to six weeks and 
longer for delays in the reimbursement of their money. This 
government  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1907 
 

created more stress for people who were already ill when they 
should have been supported by a helping health care system. 
 
What angered people more, as I travelled during the by-election 
in Saskatoon Eastview, was that people, in the face of all these 
hardships, people saw the Premier, the Premier of this province, 
in his usual callous manner, accusing people affected of being 
drug pushers and drug abusers. Mr. Speaker, from the Premier 
of this province, to say that is offensive and irresponsible. It’s 
this government’s typical insensitivity and arrogance. 
 
I promised a few of the constituents, Mr. Speaker, that if and 
when I got in, I would bring to the attention of this House some 
of their plight, and I would go on all night — I’ve got 30-some 
examples — but I want to mention three or four, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to share some of these. The point is, these 
represent thousands and thousands of situations of other people 
across the province, and this is why I’m going to raise them. 
 
First of all, I got a call from a single parent mother of four 
children, working full time trying to make ends meet as a 
full-time worker, having difficulty with child care arrangements 
thanks to, in many cases and many ways, the child care policy 
of this province. Trying to make ends meet; basically saying to 
me, look, I’m going under; what can you do? And basically 
feeling very, very desperate and unaware as to where to go. And 
that’s not an isolated example. 
 
Another example of a senior who’s a pensioner. She was not 
able to get special coverage. She was under tremendous 
financial stress, and at the time I talked to here it had been 
seven weeks since she had received her refund, Mr. Speaker — 
drug cost totalling $250 per month. 
 
I have another couple, an older couple who are retired, assisting 
a middle-aged daughter who had a disabled and mildly retarded 
child. And this family was under tremendous financial stress 
and strain. The man of this couple was on four drugs. And I 
could name them, but it doesn’t matter. They point is that one 
of these drugs had tripled in seven months; another one had 
tripled; another one had gone up 25 per cent, and another one 
40 per cent. As was indicated by the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, gouging of the worst degree by the multinational drug 
companies. 
 
And basically this person had an outstanding debt of 350 to 
$400 per month, again in severe financial stress and at his wit’s 
end, still worrying about their daughter, the mildly retarded 
child. 
 
Another senior citizen, Scott Forget Towers in Saskatoon, on 
two drugs, one for arthritis, one a drug to thin her blood; could 
be again under tremendous hardship. More importantly, she was 
placing herself at risk. She was supposed to take two blood 
thinning pills a day, and had made a decision on her own that 
she could not afford to take two a day; she would take one a 
day, and that way they would last twice as long, despite 
concerns from her  

doctor that that was injurious to her health. She was not 
prepared, she was not qualified, Mr. Speaker, to make that kind 
of a decision. But she felt that she had no choice. 
 
Also, she was on arthritis pills, and because of the cost of these 
arthritis pills was going for two and three months without 
taking the until the pain got so intense and the swelling got so 
great that she couldn’t get her shoes on, and she had to resume 
taking these again. And that was what her situation was all 
about; again, in desperate financial straits, sending back 
medications over the counter because she couldn’t afford them. 
 
One final example . . . two more examples, Mr. Speaker. One, a 
couple in Scott Forget Towers, again in Saskatoon, who spent 
between 250 and $350 per month on drugs — conditions of 
asthma and heart failure — had been waiting five weeks at the 
point I saw them for their last cheque. Again, this couple, 
they’d order their drugs over the counter, and then they’d take 
which ones they could, and turn the others back. They were 
refusing to establish at the drug store an account, because they 
knew they’d never be able to pay it off. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the final example . . . and I raise these 
because these people are feeling desperate, and they’re just sick 
about the fact that they worked over many years to build up a 
good health care system. Now at this point in their lives they’re 
feeling very vulnerable and feeling powerless to do anything 
about it, along with their concerns about if they should require 
nursing home care, they can’t get into nursing homes; and, of 
course, with the cut-backs last year to home care, they weren’t 
getting the home care service they required. 
 
But this example is a woman who had a husband in a nursing 
home, and she was in the Scott Forget Towers. Again, there are 
some 400 seniors there, in my riding. Her husband was in a 
nursing home. She thought she would be evicted soon because 
she was unable to pay her way in the Saskatoon housing 
authority, unable to pay the rent because the costs that her 
husband was incurring in the nursing home were continuing to 
eat into her pension at her apartment. And of course, as we’ve 
had to pay for more and more things in the nursing homes, 
pensioners have had to dip into their savings or their spouse’s 
pension. And Mr. Minister, there are many people in Saskatoon 
Eastview who are in a suite, but also have a spouse in a nursing 
home. 
 
Now this person was paying 50 to $60 per month for her 
husband in the nursing home; another 40 or $50 for her, and she 
simply was falling short every month. Besides worrying about 
his illness and not being able to see him because he was across 
the other side of the city — as you know we have the Parkridge 
Centre on the extreme west side of the city and this person was 
on the east side — so worried about him, worried about the 
finances and not able to see him and no relatives in the city, Mr. 
Speaker. again creating tremendous hardship and very angry 
with this insensitive government for making those kinds of 
changes to the prescription drug program. 
 
Importantly, Mr. Speaker, these are not statistics; these are real 
people, many of them Saskatchewan pioneers  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1908 
 

who are sick by this government’s dismantling of the health 
care system, one that took them, as I said, many, many years to 
help build up. 
 
In the by-election the voters of Saskatchewan Eastview and 
Regina Elphinstone said that this government’s record in health 
care was just not good enough. Residents are used to sensitivity 
in government, they’re used to co-operation with government, 
they’re used to co-ordinated services, and they’re used to 
competent government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Those were the good old days. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — The good old days, as my colleague says. 
They’re not happy with the ill-thought out, knee-jerk actions 
and planning of this PC government. They’re used to a 
government over many years, Mr. Speaker, that said one thing 
and does it. This government has no mandate to cut back on the 
prescription drug program. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


