


















































June 27, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 27, 1988 
 

2545 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, I recognize two 
constituents of mine who I present to this Assembly: a former 
member of the Assembly who sat in the government side, Mr. 
Paul Meagher, who represented the seat that I now represent; and 
business associate Boris Mamchur. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through all members to you, to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, the president of the University of Saskatchewan who I 
see in the far gallery today. I had the chance to meet with him this 
morning. I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming 
President Kristjanson to the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to, on behalf of members on this side of the 
House, join with the Minister of Education in welcoming 
President Kristjanson to the Assembly today. It’s a delight for all 
of us to have the president of the University of Saskatchewan with 
us to view the proceedings. I’m sure that all members will want to 
join with me in giving him a second welcome to this Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It is also my privilege this afternoon to 
introduce to the House, a group of 20 grade 5 students from the 
school in Cupar. They are accompanied by Mrs. Daradich, Mrs. K. 
Daradich, Mrs. Clark and Mrs. Schwartz. I look forward to 
meeting with these students after question period at about 3 
o’clock, to have drinks and to discuss this afternoon’s session. I 
would ask all members to please welcome these students to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Billing of Government Departments for Services Not 
Rendered 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Acting 
Premier. Mr. Premier, is it policy of your government to have 
advertising agencies overbill for services, or bill for services that 
are never rendered, and set that money aside for an election fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That is not the policy of this government, 
and has never been, and did not happen. 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Mr. Minister, you will know that 
a former employee of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 
Carl Shiels, has alleged that the Lights on for Life program was 
being billed a $4,500 monthly consulting fee from Dome 
Advertising for services never rendered, and that when Mr. Shiels 
questioned this, it ceased. In a court of law, under oath, Mr. Shiels 
testified, and I quote: 
 

“I told Grant (Gibson) in as much detail as I could remember 
of the meeting that I’d had with Det Rinker, the account 
executive for Dome, and with Suzanne Hart (of SGI). And I 
told him that Det Rinker had even said, quite frankly, it’s just 
money going into a campaign fund.” 

 
How do you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I explain it in two ways. I think, first of all, 
first of all I think you have to look at the court case from which 
you report, which one Carl Shiels was dismissed because of sexual 
harassment against a female employee. 
 
Now you say, what was the judgement? I would ask the 
Opposition House Leader to read carefully that case and within 
your own mind determine whether or not there was grounds for 
dismissal for sexual harassment. And I think that you could easily 
look at that, number one. So obviously Mr. Carl Shiels advanced 
this other argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our view, and the view that we saw, was as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
that there was some significant resistance by SGI to go forward 
with the Lights On For Life program, a program that has some 93 
per cent acceptance in this province; a program that I believe adds 
significantly to the safety of the driving public; something 
significantly resisted by management in SGI, later to find out that 
in fact it in fact worked very, very well. And that was in fact an 
individual was put in there to assist in the development of that 
program. 
 
What was done, Mr. Speaker, was done properly. The program 
unfolded properly, and Dome was paid for work that they 
provided. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
from your answer it appears to me that you are saying that this is 
simply sour grapes on the part of Mr. Shiels, but at least one Court 
of Queen’s Bench judge disagrees with you. In a judgement on the 
Shiels unfair dismissal suit against SGI, which Mr. Shiels won, I 
note Mr. Justice MacLean said the following, and I quote: 
 

I think it likely, too, that a contributing factor in the 
plaintiff’s dismissal was the attitude he adopted with respect 
to the accounts of Dome Advertising Ltd. 
 
The plaintiff testified, and I accept his evidence, that his 
superior was upset with the way he handled the matter, and 
perhaps too, because the superior himself has approved 
payment of similar  

  



 
June 27, 1988 

2546 
 

invoices when perhaps he should not have. In any event, I 
think it likely the plaintiff rocking the boat the way he did, 
contributed to his dismissal. 

 
Surely, Mr. Minister, you’re not suggesting that Mr. Justice 
MacLean is also practising sour grapes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not for a minute 
suggesting that Mr. Justice MacLean is practising sour grapes. 
Obviously he looked at the case. It was a question of fact. He took 
the interpretation of the facts as he saw them. Now that’s point 
number one. 
 
Point number two is, I don’t think by any stretch of the 
imagination, even from the members opposite, that they would not 
agree that one Carl Shiels was clearly a disgruntled employee 
looking for revenge. I don’t think there’s any question about that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest . . . Mr. Speaker, I would suggest 
that the reason for Mr. Shiels dismissal was — the reason for his 
dismissal was the fact that a female employee of the government, 
or of SGI, complained of sexual harassment my one Mr. Shiels, 
and that brought forward the dismissal of Mr. Shiels. He then 
commenced action on this basis. 
 
What I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, having reviewed the matter 
with the people within SGI, the service that he complained about, 
Mr. Speaker, the service that he complained about was in fact 
done; that program was launched; that program worked very 
effectively; that program was accepted and continues to work 
well, Mr. Speaker, and provides a positive safety element to the 
Saskatchewan motoring public. That is something they’re against, 
Mr. Speaker. That program has worked. That program was put in 
place by Dome, and I would suggest to you that that was a very 
good program. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the minister, Mr. Minister. I’d 
also like to quote one further reference from the transcript. And in 
this case, Mr. Shiels is talking to Grant Gibson, his immediate 
superior, and vice-president of SGI, and I quote: 
 

He said, “Well, yes, Carl, I know. It’s a very delicate matter. 
We have to be careful how we handle that.” He said, “That’s 
only the tip of the iceberg in comparison to what’s happening 
on the commercial side” (meaning the commercial side of 
SGI). 

 
Mr. Minister, what is happening on the commercial side of SGI; 
and for that matter, Mr. Minister, what’s happening in all the other 
Crown corporations and government departments? Answer that 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, what is happening, what is 
happening on the commercial side of SGI? The member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley just presented the annual report last week, 
and what is happening is, I think, was some $11 million profit, one 
of the largest profits ever gained or earned by SGI. So that’s 
what’s in fact happening on the commercial side of SGI, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, at the question with regards to the Lights On For 
Life campaign, what happened is the Dome advertising put in 
place a proper advertising scheme, something that SGI did not 
think was important, did not think that they should do because 
they were somehow in the commercial business and should 
provide nothing but the commercial service. 
 
What this was is preventative, Mr. Speaker. It was a positive 
campaign. The program was put in place; it received positives 
from all people, Mr. Speaker. Some 90 per cent of the population 
of the Saskatchewan accept that, and I believe it’s a proper and 
adequate program to help save lives on the highways of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. A new question. I 
want to say as an aside, Mr. Minister, that the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana was being very charitable when she described 
your approach as sour grapes. It’s apparent what we have here is 
an honest man who blew the whistle on you, and for that you tried 
to destroy his career with the allegations . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And I am outraged that you would repeat the 
remark after he was found not guilty in court. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Demand for Public Inquiry 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wouldn’t expect such comments in a 
barroom, much less an Assembly. My question, Mr. Minister, 
though, has to do with the allegation that was made. And I want to 
remind the Attorney General, the Minister of Justice, that these 
allegations were made by someone who was a respected career 
public servant and who made them under oath. He alleged public 
property was being diverted for private use through false and 
fraudulent means. That’s a classic definition of criminal fraud, it 
demands a public inquiry, and I ask you: will you not give us a 
public inquiry on this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 
Centre says that Mr. Shiels was found not guilty in court. Now 
you are a lawyer, sir, and you should know that this was a civil 
action, and you don’t get found guilty or not guilty in civil actions. 
You learn that in first year law school, Mr. Speaker, but for the 
member opposition, you do not . . . are you not found guilty or not 
guilty. 
 
He can say that that one Carl Shiels is an upstanding, long-term 
civil servant, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you, the female employee of 
SGI who brought this complaint against one Carl Shiels did not — 
did not — manufacture some suggestion that she was sexually 
harassed by one Carl Shiels. The members opposite are perfectly 
prepared to stand up and read the judgement. I would suggest to 
the members opposite they also read the facts as presented in the 
judgement and cast your self . . . and ask yourself, Mr.  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2547 
 

Speaker, and ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, whether or not one Carl 
Shiels is such an upstanding citizen. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister of 
Justice — and I have difficulty saying those words in this 
discussion — I want to read for you a short paragraph from Mr. 
Justice MacLeans’ decision: 
 

The plaintiff testified, and I accept his evidence, that his 
superior was upset with the way he handled the matter, and 
perhaps too, because the superior himself had approved 
payment of similar invoices when perhaps he should not . . . 
In any event, I think it likely the plaintiff rocking the boat 
(in) the way he did, contributed to his dismissal. 

 
Mr. Minister, it would be alarming enough if this were the first 
time it happened, but it isn’t. It’s apparent in a previous case that 
Dome Advertising and the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
share the same pockets, and the tax dollars which go to Dome 
Advertising are taken out of those pockets by the Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
I refer you to Bruce Cameron’s allegation, his letter. I gather about 
the end of April, in which he said that Smail Communications had 
contributed to the dog and pony show, and with their much larger 
share of government revenues Dome Advertising should do better. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that this is the second 
time the allegation’s been made, a full public inquiry is warranted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that did 
the court come to the view, as the member opposite would 
suggest, did the court come to the view that somehow this money 
was being stripped out by the Conservative Party, he would have 
taken some action then. And I don’t think he said that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dome Advertising provided a service to the 
government, and I would suggest, in the case of Lights On For 
Life, a good service to the government, Mr. Speaker, and to the 
public, Mr. Speaker. And I can say to the hon. member opposite, 
the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan does not need to stoop to 
that type of measure in order to raise money as we do, as we do 
raise money to fight campaigns, Mr. Speaker. We were not part of 
that, Dome was not part of that — innuendo by the members 
opposite. The court does not suggest that, Mr. Speaker, and the 
member from Regina Centre is famous for his innuendo, Mr. 
Speaker. This one has as much validity as the last one he raised 
with SGI four to five years ago. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Minister, it’s not 
innuendo. It was the basis upon which the judge made his decision 
that this plaintiff was wrongfully dismissed and was entitled to 
$33,000 in damages. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have, as I stated in my earlier question, a 
situation that falls within the classic definition of fraud — public 
property being diverted to private means by false  

and fraudulent means. Will you, Mr. Minister, undertake to have 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) investigate this as 
they should, and will you undertake to report to this Assembly 
when you have the RCMP reports? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
as a lawyer, or should know as a lawyer, at any time any 
individual who is alleging a criminal offence or criminal activity, 
does not have to raise in the legislature. The hon. member . . . if 
you are suggesting there that there is fraud and it’s a clear case of 
fraud, I ask you: why would you, as a lawyer and an individual, 
not do what is your duty and bring that to the attention of the 
RCMP? Everybody has an obligation to do that, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly a member of the bar has a responsibility to bring what he 
claims to be a blatant fraud to the attention of the RCMP. 
 
I ask the member why he, as a practising lawyer, has not in fact 
done that? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll tell you why, Mr. Minister, because the 
RCMP report to you, and I have no belief at all that you will deal 
with that report honestly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I assume the RCMP are 
investigating this. I ask you again: will you undertake to report to 
this Assembly when you have the RCMP report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I believe what the hon. 
member has just indicated is the RCMP in this province are 
biased, that they would not properly report to the Attorney 
General, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what I heard him say — the 
RCMP is biased . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. We have several 
people trying to answer the question. The Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member said what 
I thought I heard him say, which is that the RCMP are biased in 
this province and that he would not have any opportunity if he was 
to present that case to them, that we would somehow close it down 
or shut it down, that is a very, very serious accusation against the 
RCMP, Mr. Speaker, a very serious accusation against the RCMP. 
 
I would hope the hon. member would: (a) clarify that; and (b) 
apologize to the RCMP for such statements. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, we saw you attack Carl 
Shiels in an attempt to deflect this issue; now we see you doing the 
same thing with the RCMP. 
 
I said quite clearly that I trusted the RCMP to investigate this in an 
even-handed fashion. What I don’t trust is you to report the matter 
in an even-handed fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2548 
 

Mr. Shillington: — And I ask you again, are you going to do your 
duty as this province’s chief law enforcement officer and report to 
this Assembly when you get the report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I take it the hon. member has 
backtracked and said . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I don’t think he has. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well maybe . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order, order. Order, 
order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member, I 
say to the hon. member, if he alleges fraud in this particular case, I 
ask the hon. member why he has not taken that to the law 
enforcement authorities immediately. Mr. Speaker, I ask why that 
has not been done. Mr. Speaker, they have had this case for some 
two months now, and why, if he is genuinely concerned that there 
has in fact been a criminal fraud here, why he has not reported that 
to the authorities, Mr. Speaker? I asked that in a very, very serious 
way, Mr. Speaker. I think he is has not responded to that; I think 
he simply only looks, Mr. Speaker, to bring to the question period 
so he can obtain the headline, and the headline is what he is 
interested and not justice of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, your behaviour today leaves a 
cloud hanging over the entire government with respect to this 
issue. Mr. Minister, are you prepared to call Mr. Shiels to the bar 
of the Assembly and have him submit himself to questioning by 
both sides of the House so that we may know where the truth of 
this matter lies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the question before this was 
to . . . by the hon. member, alleging criminal fraud against Dome 
Advertising, criminal fraud against Dome Advertising. Now if the 
member is looking for criminal fraud charges, Mr. Speaker, 
criminal charges, now he shifts and says, could we have Carl 
Shiels in front of the bar, Mr. Speaker. I ask how genuine you are, 
looking for justice in this particular case, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re going to find out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, you’re going to find out, Mr. Speaker, 
and I wonder if you would also wish to rehear the entire case, 
rehear the entire case — all the evidence — that is before the court 
in this wrongful dismissal case. 
 

Discrimination Against Single Employables 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Social Services. We’ve just seen how this government, Mr. 
Speaker, has lots of money for their friends at Dome Advertising. 
I’d like to ask a question  

about how you treat the poorest of the poor in our society — 
single employables on social assistance who in 1984 you but by 
more than $200 a month, leaving them in dire poverty. 
 
The minister will be aware that on Friday a Saskatchewan Court 
of Appeal’s decision on the Murray Chambers case found that 
your government had indeed discriminated against single 
employable welfare clients; that you’ve violated the human rights 
code of this province, and that you owe every single employable 
$55 a month for every month in the last four years that you 
discriminated against them and that they were on social assistance. 
 
My question to you is this: in light of this court decision, will you 
now issue a cheque to each social assistance recipient for the $55 a 
month that you have illegally taken away from each of these 
persons? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all the member 
opposite is not very wise in his calculation of how the world 
functions. He hasn’t noticed that last January I changed the policy, 
and that this case has now come out, and we’ll deal with Mr. 
Chamber’s victory in court in the appropriate manner. But the 
policy was changed last January, and he hasn’t noticed yet. 
 
Secondly, there is an 8 per cent monthly turnover at Social 
Services so that people are coming and going off of the rolls. And 
if the member is truly concerned, I’m sure he will send over $150 
to pay his share of that cost that he proposes to spend. And maybe 
he should pay the $150 for his wife and children, so he should 
probably send over about $600 to this side for his share. And we 
will all try to do that for everybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
We will look at the situation. We will pay people enough to live 
on. But the member opposite has to remember we are dealing here 
with single employable adults in Saskatchewan, and we will 
provide them the essentials. But if you want to live better than the 
essentials, you have to try to find a job. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what 
we were talking about here is your government’s responsibility to 
uphold the law of this province, to respect the human rights code. 
 
The courts have found that you have discriminated against single 
employable social assistance recipients, and what we are asking, 
Mr. Minister, is: are you prepared now to provide the back 
payments that the court is requiring back to 1984? Are you 
prepared to do that? Are you prepared, in other words, to give 
these people who you’ve treated so unfairly, fair treatment for 
once? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, our policy since 1984 has 
been different. We’ve been providing jobs for these people, and 
since they now have jobs, they don’t need the back pay. 
 

Exodus of Farm Families 
 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2549 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Acting 
Minister of Agriculture. Lately I’ve seen some very disturbing 
reports on the exodus of farm families out of . . . off the farms, and 
farm workers — 17,000 gave up agricultural work in 
Saskatchewan in the last year. And, Mr. Minister, I don’t believe 
this is a very positive, well thought out program that you’re 
putting out. I don’t know why you’re maintaining it, and if you 
don’t stop to maintain it, the drought situation in Saskatchewan 
this year is going to amplify that; we’re going to see even more 
people. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: will you now agree that a 
unanimous resolution from this legislature is necessary to 
convince the Mulroney government in Ottawa that we need 
immediate action now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, relative to the report 
about 17,000 farm families leaving the land, I don’t think it takes a 
rocket scientist to figure out that with the downturn in the global 
agriculture economy, coupled with the effects of the drought, that 
there is significant hardship in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I think one has to be careful how one interprets those results. To 
merely suggest that there are somehow 17,000 fewer farmers 
today than there were six months ago would be wrong, because 
what this includes, of course, is people who work for implement 
dealers and fertilizer dealers. Even the hired hands and their entire 
family are counted as statistics, as I understand it. 
 
Having said all of that, there is no question that rural 
Saskatchewan has been buffeted in every which way. The course 
of this government has been clear, and the course in the future will 
be of the same, Mr. Speaker, in that we stand four-square behind 
the farmers, the federal government has stood four-square behind 
these farmers, and we look to their continued support behind 
Saskatchewan’s farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Changes to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, as you know the severe 
drought conditions which have plagued Saskatchewan this year 
have prompted the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada, 
through the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, to make a 
number of moves designed to allow farmers greater flexibility in 
dealing with the current crisis. 
 
These changes are also focused on dealing with the immediate 
problem of providing the much needed feed for Saskatchewan 
cattle owners. In this regard I’m pleased to announce that spring 
seeded crops will be allowed to be taken for fodder or feed, and 
will be adjusted in the same manner as the fall seeded crops. 
 
Therefore, retroactive to June 20, full coverage comes into effect 
and customers will be allowed to use the crop for feed or fodder, 
and appraisals will be carried out in the  

following manner. First, a pre-harvest appraisal will be completed. 
Customers can accept this appraisal and settle the claim, or if the 
crop is subsequently harvested, the pre-harvest appraisal becomes 
void and harvested production will be deducted from insured 
productions guaranteed. 
 
Second, customers may leave check strips in the field to base 
appraisals on a later date. It will be the customer service office 
manager’s responsibility to ensure the completion of pre-harvest 
claims in a timely manner before or near the normal swathing 
times. If the customer has grazed or cut for feed without notifying 
the customer service office, he must do so immediately. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, if he’s already cut it, he must do so 
immediately. 
 
We will appraise the field based on: (1) check strips, if any were 
left; (2), adjacent fields if similar conditions exist; (3), if (1) or (2) 
above are not possible, we will determine an appraisal based on 
whatever methods are required to make that determination subject 
to the approval of supervisor of claims and customer service office 
managers. 
 
Land that was seeded to a spring crop that was cut for feed, 
grazed, or fallowed by cultivation or chemical allow, if needed for 
weed control, Mr. Speaker — and I repeat that, chemical fallow, if 
needed for weed control — prior to July 11, will be eligible for 
summer fallow coverage for 1989 crop year. 
 
I believe that this change in policy will provide producers with 
another option when making the management feed decisions. It 
will also help to at least partially alleviate the serious feed shortage 
problems. We are considering a number of other changes, and 
further announcements will be made shortly. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to urge all contract holders 
who wish to exercise this option, or those who have any questions 
or concerns of any Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 
matter, to contact their local customers’ office as soon as possible. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re into a little bit of a game here 
called an announcement a day. I don’t know if it’s for government 
advertising purposes or what the purpose is. But I’ll tell you, we 
still are seeing these dribbles coming out and the lack of a 
complete package for farmers. 
 
I don’t see too much new in this and I don’t see the necessary 
monetary support these farmers will need. I don’t know why this 
government continues to consult and to try to formulate a program 
on June 27 when we’ve been into this thing for months. It just . . . 
it amazes me. 
 
And I just don’t know why they continue to come out — daily 
announcements. What’s that do for the farmer who’s sitting out 
there who has a number of things that he has to consider? Because 
tomorrow he’s going to find out  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2550 
 

something else, the next day something else. These decisions have 
to be made now in many cases. They have to have all the ground 
rules in place before they can make those decisions, and the 
government is not giving this to them. It’s a dribble a day. 
 
And I just don’t know what these farmers are going to think. In 
fact, I do know, because they’re calling me every day saying, 
what’s going to happen? What about this and what about that? 
And I’d say, you’re at the mercy of the government to make up 
their mind in these decisions. 
 
And I just hope, and I would just ask this government, please 
come out with a total package so all the farmers know exactly 
what the ground rules are. Would you do that for them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Severe Drought Conditions 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 
pursuant to rule 39 to seek leave of the Assembly to move a 
motion on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
I’ll just take a moment to explain to the Speaker the issue, and to 
indicate the nature of the motion itself. 
 
The issue is the severe drought conditions that are now causing 
extreme hardship to Saskatchewan agriculture. The exceptionally 
dry conditions over the past weeks and months are now being 
compounded by a wave of very high temperatures and wind. 
 
While this drought is most severe in Saskatchewan, it is not 
restricted to Saskatchewan and clearly calls for immediate action 
by the federal government. Farm families and rural communities 
can no longer wit. Their situation has been underscored by media 
reports today, or over the past 12 months as I have mentioned, 
17,000 Saskatchewan people left agriculture to find work 
elsewhere. 
 
I believe that all members of this Assembly will agree with me 
that the situation is desperate and urgent. I believe that we can 
approach it in a non-partisan way. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I see to leave to move a motion along the 
following lines: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to 
announce and implement immediately, in full co-operation 
with the provinces, a comprehensive drought relief program 
to respond to the severe drought conditions affecting 
Saskatchewan and other parts of Canada, and threatening 
Saskatchewan farmers and rural communities. 

 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I noted that the Premier appeared to respond 
positively to such a request. In the Hansard I can quote, on page 
2459: 
 

. . . I won’t rule out the possibility of committees or motions 
in the House as ways of extending the message to the federal 
government . . . 

 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the Assembly to move that 
non-partisan motion to send a clear message to the Government of 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Names on Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, with the government’s denial 
of that motion, I want to deal with another matter. And I’ve passed 
a copy over to the acting, acting, Acting House Leader, or is it the 
Acting Deputy Premier, that I want to move the following: 
 

That the name of Mr. Lingenfelter be substituted for that of 
Mr. Rolfes on the Standing Committee of Public Accounts. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by my colleague the member 
from Prince Albert. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debates on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 60 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to say a few words about the effect of extending store hours, 
including Sundays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is happening here is that we’re moving to 
centralize the economy. We’re doing away with . . . we’re 
potentially doing away with many of the local shopkeepers, many 
of the local jobs. What we’re seeing is a draining of funds from 
rural Saskatchewan into urban areas. And up till now those funds 
have been necessary, Mr. Speaker, to maintain the facilities, to 
maintain the services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Another problem that we could run into, Mr. Speaker, and already 
it’s becoming evident, whereby we can see shopping as being a 
form of entertainment, where in rural areas the family will go and 
do their Sunday shopping and maybe go out for something to eat, 
and thereby just moving the dollars from that rural community 
into the city. And I think that is a dangerous precedent to be set in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2551 
 

We also have the situation where we are going to reduce or 
potentially reduce the number of jobs in smaller communities, 
because when those funds are drifting out of the local community, 
there will no longer be the need for the local shopkeeper, because 
of the loss of revenue, for him to have extra staff on so he can 
employ those people in the local areas who need jobs. And I’ll tell 
you, we need them badly in rural Saskatchewan, because many 
people who are out of work . . . the farm economy is bad, there’s 
need for many farmers and farm men and farm women to find 
employment off the land, off the farm. 
 
These local shops could very well be a place that these people can 
find employment because the need is there; the economy is 
working if you keep the local dollars local. 
 
So we have a loss of sales, we have fewer employees, therefore we 
have a loss of business. And with that loss of business goes the 
loss of services needed to maintain those businesses. And this goes 
right through the whole rural community. We have a great strain 
on these communities, Mr. Speaker. We have a great strain on 
them to maintain their local identity due to a shrinking population. 
 
When you have people who are moving out of their communities, 
and dollars are tight now and these people will be looking to get 
the best deal they can get, but what happens is we’re losing the 
autonomy, we’re losing the businesses, we’re losing the support 
services, and this runs right through. 
 
With fewer people it affects all sectors. It affects the education 
system where they may not need as many teachers. It affects the 
hospital system whereby the services and the number and quality 
of services . . . or quantity of services aren’t necessary. 
 
We’re seeing a great, tremendous pressure now being put on rural 
post offices. And this type of a situation, Mr. Speaker, will add to 
that pressure because those people in those communities will not 
have as many dollars floating through their community as they 
once did have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter whether it’s the local co-op 
association or whether it’s the local independent business man; 
these people will be affected. And I just don’t say that on my own 
because they have been talking to me and I’m sure they’ve been 
talking to the member over there who’s pushing this through. 
 
And they’re very concerned, and I do not take their concerns 
lightly, Mr. Speaker, because they have to look after their 
business, they have to look after their livelihood, and they’re 
concerned, they’re genuinely concerned about the local strength of 
business, the local economy, and they’re scared that that’s being 
undermined here. And when that’s being undermined by this 
government, it shows me the lack of support that this government 
has for local communities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in some cases where a town did not have 
the support from the local residents. And I’ll tell  

you, those towns aren’t there any longer. Fortunately it’s very, 
very few, because the support has to come from the local farmer or 
from the local business person to his community in order to 
maintain that community. 
 
(1445) 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, we are in tough economic times. 
People are forced into going wherever they can. They will pay 
slightly higher, they have been able to in their local communities if 
that’s necessary; many times it isn’t. But they are now looking to 
stretch their spending dollar as far as they can. If that includes 
combining some of their entertainment with some of their 
businesses as shopping, then that is going to directly affect the 
local business community in small towns. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, people are being pressed, pressed hard to 
be very frugal with their spending dollars. And the decision made 
to combine shopping with entertainment is very, very scary in my 
books. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, also we must look at this as an assault on the 
family. I think Sunday traditionally has been the day of rest. 
Traditionally we have had one day during the week which we 
could take off and spend out time going to church and with the 
family in the local communities, and providing ourselves with a 
day that we can sit back and get ready for the next week to come. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what it is, we’re beginning to see an attack 
on the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan. When you start 
looking at the whole economic situation of rural Saskatchewan, 
the few dollars that are there, the pressure that they’re being put 
under, and now adding to this is another attack on keeping that 
family, keeping that far, keeping that business, in a local area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been built up over the years on a 
number of people supporting their local communities and, where 
necessary, going out to a larger community to get services that will 
not support themselves in small communities. 
 
But what we’re doing here is throwing it wide open. We’re having 
an open market in Saskatchewan whereby on Sunday you can go 
anywhere you want and do your shopping and bypass your local 
store. And I don’t think that is very . . . and I don’t think that’s 
what we want. I don’t think that’s what the people in this province 
of Saskatchewan have worked for over the number of years and 
have built up an economy right from the local level right through 
to the large towns and cities in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I say, the economic pressure the families in 
rural Saskatchewan are under, combined with the fact that they 
have to stretch their dollar as far as they can, combined with the 
fact that the people in rural Saskatchewan are telling me and our 
side of the House, and I’m sure the minister, that they don’t want 
this wide open game to go on on Sunday. Because if that happens, 
Mr. Speaker, you will see the face of this province change very 
drastically. And I don’t think they want that, and I’m sure that we 
don’t either, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2552 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to take 
part in this debate, along with my other colleagues on this side of 
the House who are opposing this Bill. 
 
My other colleagues have given a fine account of the content of 
the Bill and some of the effect that it will have on people in this 
province, both in terms of the ward system and how the ward 
system will be destroyed and people’s democratic right will be 
taken away from them on the one hand; and also by the imposition 
of a measure on the municipalities which will undermine the 
fabric of commercial life in this province and particularly give an 
effect which is detrimental to rural Saskatchewan, to small towns 
in rural Saskatchewan, to the shopkeepers and the owners of small 
businesses in rural Saskatchewan, and as well, in urban 
Saskatchewan, those family-owned businesses which we put 
under hardship. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, my other colleagues have spoken 
about that. I don’t want to speak about that today. I want to talk a 
little bit about the political operation which is behind this, because 
it’s a conspiracy, Mr. Speaker. It’s a conspiracy to hijack 
democracy in this province, and it’s a conspiracy to hijack city 
hall. And I want to point out to the people who are watching and 
in the galleries, who the members of that conspiracy are, and how 
in fact they’re working that conspiracy. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let’s name the members of this political 
conspiracy to hijack democracy and to hijack city hall. Well we 
have such actors as the chamber of commerce, both in urban areas 
like the Regina chamber of commerce and the Saskatoon chamber 
of commerce, guided by and working in conjunction with the 
Saskatchewan chamber of commerce. That’s one of the actors. 
 
Then we have the Saskatchewan Business Alliance, a group of 
business people in this province, closely aligned with the 
Progressive Conservative Party, who in fact are demanding that 
their taxes be cut and that the taxes that they want cut be passed 
along to property owners in this province, both in terms of the 
individual tax that property owners pay, and also the education tax 
portion of the tax. Here we have Conservatives who are 
demanding the end of that taxation system, a cut for business tax. 
We don’t see them demanding a cut for personal income tax or a 
cut on taxes for people on lower incomes, but for their business. 
That’s another act of the Saskatchewan Business Alliance. 
 
Thirdly, we have the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan who began to orchestrate this kind of deal 
throughout the province. 
 
Fourthly we have the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden who’s 
part of this conspiracy, joined by his colleague, the member for 
Regina South, the Minister for Urban Affairs. 
 
And those are the major actors in this conspiracy to hijack 
democracy, to take away the ward system, and in fact, to do a 
political operation in this province. It’s a conspiracy, a conspiracy 
based for one reason only. The urban people of this province have 
kicked their political butts out of office. 
 

We had the Minister of Urban Affairs who ran like a coward out 
of the seat that he originally ran in, in Regina North, who took and 
hightailed out into the south to try to find a safe seat there. In fact, 
despite the fact and despite the effort and despite his running and 
hiding, he was almost defeated in that seat in south Regina. 
 
So we have . . . so we have here, Mr. Speaker, a conspiracy to try 
to do through the back door which the PC Party of Saskatchewan 
was not able to accomplish through the front door, to try to gain 
the representation on the representative organs of power, by 
people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Urban Affairs sits there and 
chatters from his seat, and I’m glad he’s sitting here listening to 
this because his reaction shows what I’m saying is the truth. His 
reaction . . . by his reaction, he knows that what I’m saying, 
exposing this political operation, shows indeed the kind of person 
that he’s up, and the kind of political operation that the PC Party 
of Saskatchewan is trying to do. 
 
And people say, well that’s all very well; this may be partisan, 
political rhetoric that I can use words like conspiracy to hijack 
democracy, and that’s rhetorical. But let’s deal with the concrete 
facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s deal with the concrete facts of 
how that conspiracy is working here in Regina, and it’s not too 
very long ago that we’ve seen the outlines of the conspiracy 
coming to fruition. 
 
First of all, we have a long series of ads placed in the Regina 
Leader-Post by the Saskatchewan Business Alliance, false ads, 
ads which the city council in this city have proven to be false ads, 
alleging a number of facts. One is that the city of Regina and the 
city council are somehow responsible for a higher taxation 
structure here in Regina than in other places like Saskatoon or 
other cities. 
 
Secondly, they’re trying to paint the impression that it is because 
of the overspending of the city council that’s resulting in this high 
tax; that somehow the city council is spending money in areas in 
which services are not being provided and that there’s a whole pile 
of fat which has accumulated at city hall, which somehow needs to 
be cut out. 
 
And we’ve seen the Saskatchewan Business Alliance and the 
Regina business . . . its Regina arm, putting these ads in the 
Leader-Post, trying to build this impression, supported by 
statements, supported by statements from the Minister of Urban 
Affairs who is saying things to match what the Saskatchewan 
Business Alliance is saying, trying to leave the impression that 
somehow Regina city council is not responsible or Saskatoon city 
council is not responsible for spending. In fact, that was the 
original rationale that the minister was putting forward to do away 
with the ward system — that in fact representative democracy is 
too costly for the people of the city; that because councillors are 
elected to represent wards, that somehow they’re not concerned 
with the overall spending of the city as a whole. 
 
So we have the chorus — Minister of Urban Affairs on one  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2553 
 

side, Saskatchewan Business Alliance on the other — trying to 
paint the picture that somehow urban democracy, as we know it, is 
too costly for the people of this province. 
 
Secondly, we then go from that build-up scenario where the SBA 
(Saskatchewan Business Alliance), this business alliance, is trying 
to paint the full picture, to another couple of interesting political 
developments. We have the mayor of Regina, Mr. Larry 
Schneider, say that he’s not going to run for mayor again. What’s 
he going to do? Why he’s going to seek the Progressive 
Conservative nomination in the new riding of Regina Wascana — 
right? 
 
He’s going to seek the PC nomination in the city of Regina 
Wascana, and he’s doing it so he can open the way for the 
hijacking of city hall and the campaign and the high-priced 
political campaign to come, headed by the SBA, headed by the 
chamber of commerce, and orchestrated out of the office of the 
Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
When October comes, you will see this minister and this 
government involved in the Regina election and the Saskatchewan 
election up to their twitching noses. They’ll be involved in that. 
 
And who do we have that’s going to replace — who’s going to 
lead the Conservative charge on city hall; who’s going to be the 
master conspirator? Who’s going to be the master conspirator to 
run to take control of city hall? None other than Gordon Dirks, the 
former member from the constituency I have the honour to 
represent. 
 
Here’s Mr. Dirks, who made a recent announcement that he’s 
going to run as mayor for the city of Regina; promising cuts in 
taxes, promising better services, promising no layoffs; no job loss; 
promising better and more efficient government — the same kind 
of phoney baloney rhetoric we heard in 1982. We find Gordon 
Dirks and the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
trying to re-hijack Regina city hall, trying to do by the back door 
what they can’t do by the front door. 
 
The people of this province and the people of the city, though, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, will not be fooled. We heard the rhetoric of lower 
taxes; we heard the rhetoric of better service; we heard the rhetoric 
of more efficient government in 1982. And what have we got? 
 
We have got a deficit; we have got a province which is lying in 
financial ruins; a province which is taken to the brink of 
bankruptcy; a province which as suffered climbing —- double — 
the unemployment rate; a province which has seen the 
development of mass poverty, headed by the government 
represented by the Minister of Urban Affairs, partly responsible by 
the person who now claims, Mr. Gordon Dirks, that he is going to 
provide to the city of Regina what he and his government couldn’t 
do for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this city will not be fooled twice. You 
know, there’s an old saying — fool me once, shame on you; fool 
me twice, shame on me. The people of this city will not be saying 
after the October election,  

shame on me. They will not allow the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan to hijack Regina city hall. They will not 
allow the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan to 
hijack Saskatoon city hall. They will not allow the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan to hijack city hall in Prince 
Albert. 
 
We have here the member from Prince Albert and the member 
here of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and they’re sitting here on this 
side of the House because the people in Prince Albert rejected the 
PC Party of Saskatchewan, and they’re going to do it again in the 
municipal elections. We have here — if we need to look any 
further, the by-election in Eastview and the member who — my 
colleague my who sits beside me, the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview, now sitting in the seat because the people of Saskatoon 
rejected the PC Party of Saskatchewan. We have here in Regina 
eight out of the 10 MLAs from this city, because the PC Party . . . 
the people of Regina rejected the PC Party of Saskatchewan and 
they’re going to reject the conspiracy to hijack Regina city hall 
come October. You mark my words, Mr. Speaker; you mark my 
words. 
 
They’re trying to steal in the back door what they can’t get by 
coming through the front door. You know, there’s a saying, Mr. 
Speaker, that, you know, if democracy would change anything, 
they’d abolish it. Well that, Mr. Speaker, was what the Minister 
for Urban Affairs is trying to do. He is taking away the democratic 
right of citizens to have their own representation by electoral 
division. 
 
He is taking that right away for one reason and one reason only; he 
and his ilk can’t get elected in this city, and if he’d call a 
provincial election right now, the Minister for Urban Affairs 
wouldn’t be sitting there, the member for Regina Wascana 
wouldn’t be sitting there. And if you need any further proof, we 
have here on the front benches the new member for Regina 
Elphinstone, who received the highest provincial record when it 
came to percentages of popular vote in the history of this province, 
because the people of Regina don’t want you; they don’t want 
Gordon Dirks; they’re not going to have the business-dominated 
SBA dictate what city hall will do and what they won’t do. And 
come October, as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come October the 
PC Party of Saskatchewan will be rejected in the municipal 
elections, and I predict that they won’t get one member on the city 
councils anywhere across this province if they open up, run under 
their true colours. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on. I want to say two words on the 
other issue which is contained in this Bill, and that’s the question 
of store hours. The critic for small business, the member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, has spoken quite eloquently on what will 
happen to small businesses throughout this province when this Bill 
is passed. We’ve seen it in Ontario; we’ve seen it in rural Ontario 
when Sunday shopping has been allowed in certain areas, 
particularly the area of North York. We see what happened to the 
surrounding small businesses there. They’ve gone out of business. 
 
We don’t have to look very far. We can look to Weyburn.  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2554 
 

We can look down to Weyburn to see what happened with the 
Safeway stores and the Safeway workers and the families of the 
Safeway workers in Weyburn. Why? Because people from 
Weyburn were coming in to Regina to shop at Superstore on a 
Sunday . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, once again, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Urban Affairs sits there chirping away. 
He’s had his say and I’m hopeful that he will allow myself and 
other members of the Assembly to have their say. I know he 
doesn’t like what I’m saying. 
 
I know he doesn’t like the reaction that small businesses 
throughout the province have given him, the hundreds and 
hundreds of letters that have come in to him saying he’s crazy in 
what he’s doing; that it’s a crazy Bill; it’s a lunatic action, because 
it will undermine small business in rural Saskatchewan. It will 
undermine small business, it will undermine the work habits and 
the life habits of people who work in the stores, who will now be 
forced to work on the . . . what was generally accepted as a 
common day of rest in this province. 
 
There was not the freedom of choice for small business to remain 
open or to remain closed. There’s not the freedom of choice for 
workers to go to work or not to go to work, unlike in Ontario in 
which the Bill there that would allow for municipalities to open. 
And the municipality of North York passed an ordinance which 
said that workers who did not want to work on a Sunday could not 
be coerced or harassed into going to work, but in fact could stay 
home. 
 
We don’t see that kind of protection for working people in this 
Urban Affairs Act. No, all it is is the Minister of Urban Affairs and 
the PC Party of Saskatchewan giving in to their big-business 
friends in order to finance their political operations like the 
hijacking of city hall here in Regina — trying to grease the skids 
for their own political reasons. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a fair bit more to say on the issue, but 
I know other members would like to get into it, so at this point in 
time I will wind up my presentation. 
 
(1513) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Johnson 
Andrew McLaren 
Berntson Hopfner 
Lane Petersen 
Smith Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Schmidt Baker 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 
Martin  
 

Nays — 22 

 
Rolfes Solomon 
Lingenfelter Atkinson 
Shillington Anguish 
Tchorzewski Hagel 
Koskie Lyons 
Thompson Calvert 
Brockelbank Lautermilch 
Mitchell Trew 
Upshall Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky Koenker 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1515) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 61 — An Act to 
amend The Local Government Election Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my remarks 
on the day the Bill was introduced, this Bill in many ways is 
consequential to the Bill which we have just dealt with. Our 
position on the provisions in the Bill that deal with the abolition of 
the ward system and not giving the municipalities even the 
opportunity to choose the ward system if they so choose. On the 
basis of those provisions, we will be opposing that Bill as well, but 
we’re prepared to let it go to committee at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Extended Sitting Hours 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly, from Tuesday, 
June 28, 1988 to Thursday, June 30, 1988, both inclusive, 
meet from 10 o’clock a.m. until 10 o’clock p.m., with a 
recess of two hours from 12 o’clock noon and further recess 
two hours from 5 o’clock p.m. until 7 o’clock p.m., and oral 
question period of 25 minutes shall be at 2 o’clock p.m. each 
day. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to make a 
comment, Mr. Chairman, on the way that these estimates have 
been conducted, and in particular on the fact that this is the third 
time we’re up in this legislation on  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2555 
 

health care estimates when we could have finished these estimates 
off some time ago by dealing with it as one package. What the 
government has chosen to do instead is to bring up the estimates, 
leave them aside for another week, bring them up for a half a day, 
leave them aside for several days more. 
 
And what it’s done is it’s caused a lot of disjointedness in the 
estimates, Mr. Chairman. I find I’m in a position of having to 
repeat myself and put forward the line of argument that I was 
using at the beginning of the estimates each time. It’s wasting the 
time of this Assembly, and the only thing I can conclude from it, 
Mr. Chairman, is the fact that the government is deliberately 
attempting to cause these estimates to be disjointed and is 
attempting to try to get the upper hand by calling them at different 
times, as opposed to dealing with them in one block. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Chaotic climate. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, yes, it’s a chaotic way of managing the 
legislature, Mr. Chairman, and I want my concern on record. 
 
Now there were some things that were left over from the last day 
that we dealt with estimates, and I would like the minister’s 
response to those. There were two specific questions that were left 
over from last day, and they were: the per diem of the members of 
the task force, number one; and the question on community health 
services in the North. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a quick comment. I want to clarify 
just a couple of things; I won’t get into it in a big way. The 
member makes reference to the fact that we’ve been here, I guess, 
now the third time. I’ve seen that happen on many occasions prior 
to this, and it’s not something that’s unusual in the House. And I 
guess what I would say . . . By all means, you know, repeat what 
you feel you must and so on, and I will try not to. But I want you 
to know that it wasn’t any kind of . . . There was some agreement, 
I think, between House leaders on how we will conduct these, and 
so on, so I don’t think that it’s anything that we need to dwell 
upon. 
 
As it relates to the task force and the rates of pay for 
commissioners, the chairman will be paid $3,500 a month. The 
members will be paid $1,250 a month. And that’s just been by 
agreement, and we’ll pay them on a monthly basis, and that’s 
determined that in the case of the members of the commission — 
and they’re not sure at this stage just how many days of the month 
that would require, so we’re paying them $1,250 a month for 
commissioners through the duration of this. Some months, 
obviously it will be more days, and some months it may be three 
or four or five days. So that’s what we’re doing; that’s by 
agreement with all of them, and so those are the numbers. 
 
As it relates to the Prince Albert health region — you were saying 
about community health services in the Prince Albert region — let 
me just go back through this. I’ll go back a couple of years. In 
’86-87, the approved number of positions was 34.9 in that region. 
In the present year, under these estimates, the approved number is 
34.2, so  

it’s very similar to where it was. 
 
In the ’87-88 year, because we had some . . . with the early 
retirement problems and some of the things that went on there, we 
had a number of people in community health, as we did in mental 
health services, that took that early retirement, and we were short 
of folks there and we had a lower number. But that number is back 
to where it was in ’86-87 and is projected to continue at about that 
level — 34 people. So it’s 34.2 now; it was 34.9 two years ago; it 
was 29 last year. 
 
Ms. Simard: — With respect to the per diems, Mr. Minister, is 
there also an annual sum that is payable to the members of the 
commission, and are their expenses also payable? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes. Over and above that comes expenses 
and travel accommodation. Those kinds of things are paid over 
and above this amount which is, in effect, a per diem, but it’s 
based on a monthly number, is what I’ve been given here. Okay? 
 
So they get expenses, travel, and accommodation over and above 
the $1,250 a month, which they will receive in lieu of a per diem, 
as you and I both understand per diem. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Is that the sum total of the remuneration being 
paid to the task force members? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We expect that to be the sum total. If 
something — I should say this though, I want to clarify it — if it 
comes to the stage where on particular months that they are 
working almost full time on this as commissioners, you know, for 
. . . there may be some adjustments made, but that is the intention 
that we have, and by agreement with the members of the 
commission. 
 
Ms. Simard: — So what do you estimate the total cost of the 
health task force to be for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Approximately $1.7 million. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, we also talked a bit at the closing of 
the estimates, the last day, about speech pathologists at Wascana. 
The point has been made to me that the service at Wascana is a 
consultative service and not a therapy service, and so parents who 
are not getting adequate speech therapy in the school system 
because of lack of funding, who have contacted the Wascana 
hospital, are not being serviced with speech therapy. There is a 
consultative service at the Wascana hospital. And we find a 
situation where I have parents, for example, with whom I’ve been 
communicating who are having to pay for private speech 
therapists in order to supplement what is available in school. 
 
Now can you confirm that that’s the case, Mr. Minister, and if it is 
indeed the case, can you tell what plans your department has to 
make sure that this service is available for children who need 
speech therapy, and that adequate and complete comprehensive 
medical services with respect to speech therapy will be available 
for children in Saskatchewan? 
 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2556 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well let me just go through the way . . . 
the circumstances as relates to Wascana. And I say by way of 
prefacing my remarks, I know of the case, I believe, that you’re 
referring to in the sense that I believe you’ve written me a letter 
about a particular case and I have . . . you have either received my 
response or it’s on its way to you, because I can recall signing the 
letter to you. 
 
Here’s the circumstance: the Wascana Hospital provides 
consultative and treatment services for pre-school children and for 
adults — consultative and treatment services. As it relate to 
school-aged children, the Wascana Hospital has entered into 
contractual arrangements with the school boards of Regina for 
assessment and for consulting services. And so a child who is of 
school age and is part of the school system, once assessment is 
done through Wascana, the people employed by the school boards 
or teachers who may be working with these children on their 
special needs will then have consulting services done by Wascana, 
all of which is covered. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now there are cases — not many, but there are cases where 
parents will have an expectation of a service beyond what the 
school board gives through this contractual arrangement, and that 
service is not covered . . . I mean, if they want to take service 
which is beyond the service which is covered by the Department 
of Health. And that’s been a long-standing process, and continues. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the service beyond is needed; it’s 
required by the child; that’s why the parents are searching for it. 
Because of the lack of staff, because of underfunding for staffing 
levels, the staff is unable to meet the demand that’s out there, Mr. 
Minister, and that’s why we raised the question with you in that 
particular correspondence that you’re referring to. 
 
So my question is, once again: assuming that the problem is one of 
staffing and the fact that the staff is unable to meet the demand 
that is there, will your government be reviewing this situation and 
ensuring that there’s adequate staff? Because there are speech 
pathologists out there in Regina and Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, 
who are prepared to help. Will the government be ensuring that 
these children receive the services that they need? It’s not an extra, 
frivolous, frilly-type service; it’s a needed service, and it’s been 
identified as needed. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, as to your request that we review 
this and continue to review it, the answer to that is yes, we will. 
 
But as to your statement, in a very blanket type of statement that 
these services are needed above and beyond what is provided, in 
the broadest general sense, let me say to you that there’s a 
disagreement. And there are, you know . . . and I don’t want to get, 
in this forum, into the particular circumstance of the one case. But 
cases like this, there is a divergence of opinion within the 
profession. The consultants that are on staff for the school board, 
for example, as well as the assessment consultants that work at 
Wascana, don’t always agree that there’s a  

need for the further service, which, in a circumstance like this, a 
parent may say, well look, there has to be more service. And, you 
know, they become distraught in the circumstance and so on. I 
understand that, and I know you do. 
 
So we have to be very, very careful that we don’t just make a 
blanket statement and say there is need for a greater service, 
because the professionals within a school board don’t necessarily 
agree that there’s a need for that added service. While although 
they . . . and I know in this case that you know that to be the case. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, there are opinions with respect to 
the particular case, and I’ll deal in the particulars, but I know that 
it applied to other people in the province. There are opinions on 
file that indicate the service is needed, that further therapy would 
result in an enhanced treatment of the child, Mr. Minister. So I 
believe it is very important that you not pass these off. I believe it 
is important, Mr. Minister, that you not pass these off by simply 
saying the school board says it’s not needed. 
 
I want you to give me your undertaking that you will take another 
closer look at this situation, because I think that you have passed 
over it too lightly, and look at the opinions out there that are 
saying in this particular case that this child needs further therapy 
and would greatly benefit from further therapy beyond what the 
school system can provide. Would you please take another look at 
that file for us, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t want you to characterize what I’m 
saying as passing this off, because it’s certainly not my intention 
to do that. And as I say to you, we will look at this, continue to 
review the need for this service. 
 
The first thing that I will say, and I want it to be clear here, and we 
all must understand that what we’re talking about here is a very 
highly specialized service. There’s no question that that’s the case; 
it’s not something that’s dealt with in terms of a . . . so I didn’t 
want to give the wrong impression that it was some sort of broad 
generalization could be drawn here. 
 
And the second thing is — and I think you know this as well — I 
do know what you’re speaking of when you talk about the need 
for specific services and so on, and we’ll look at that. We’ll 
continue to review it, and I say that very . . . I choose those words 
carefully when I say we will continue to look at it, because that’s 
exactly what we are doing, and have been doing for some time. 
 
So the service is there. To a large degree the service is there, and 
there is some divergence of opinion — there’s no question that 
that’s the case — a professional divergence of opinion as it relates 
to which services are needed beyond what is provided. And we 
will continue to review it because I know, even from another life 
before this political world, what it means to deal with the families 
of children in need of this service, and so on. And I know that 
you’re aware of that as well. 
 
So, yes, we’ll continue to review it, and we’re cognizant that this 
is a very highly sensitive area for families  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2557 
 

certainly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, what is happening is that the 
speech therapists that we have who cannot find work that’s 
publicly funded in Saskatchewan are having to set up private 
practice and are supplementing the services that are available. It’s 
another example of your government underfunding health care 
services that are needed, and pushing health care service towards 
privatization — another example. 
 
And as you will recall, Mr. Minister, in the opening remarks that I 
made in these health care estimates two weeks ago, or two and a 
half, three weeks ago — I forget exactly how long ago now — I 
indicated at some length that what this government is doing is 
slowly eroding the basic principles of health care. They’re eroding 
accessibility to health care; they’re eroding the comprehensiveness 
of health care programs that are available; they’re eroding the 
public funding of health care; and they’re eroding the universality 
of health care. And we went at that at some length, Mr. Minister, 
and this is just another example. 
 
Now I also want to thank the minister for acknowledging in the 
estimates last time that there has been a substantial transfer of 
funding from other budget areas into the health care budget to the 
tune of $260 million in this particular budget. 
 
Now we’re not complaining about the fact that items may have 
been moved into the health care budget, Mr. Minister. That is not 
our complaint, but when you move $260 million from other 
budgets into the health care budget, which is something like 20 per 
cent of the budget this year and which is over 50 per cent of the 
increase in health care costs since 1982, and turn around and claim 
that you’re spending these enormous amounts of money with 
respect to health care, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that that is 
highly misleading to the public and is not the truth of the matter. 
 
With respect to . . . but I have some very specific questions, Mr. 
Minister, on the property management corporation, because under 
subvote 60 and 61, I believe it is, grants to hospitals and grants to 
nursing homes, we see a very substantial increase, which is loans 
being paid to the property management corporation, loans with 
interest. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, did those . . . are some of those payments 
money that has already been allocated to the Department of Health 
from the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation as 
grants for . . . or as capital funding grants? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The answer to the question is that the 
money has not been appropriated to Health in any other way prior 
to this. The process is that the moneys that are here in this budget 
are moneys which are being paid to SPMC on behalf of the 
specific hospitals, as it . . . it’s their payment schedule for this 
year, if you will, for . . . to SPMC for the loans which have been 
advanced to them through SPMC’s budget. Okay? So that’s . . . it 
has not been appropriated in another time through this department. 
 

And the one point I wanted to make just before I sit down as it 
relates to a former question — more of a comment than a 
question. Your comment about speech therapists and about speech 
therapists out there supplementing the services that are being 
eroded and so on, let me just say to you that we are actively 
recruiting, and on an almost a continuous basis, speech therapists. 
Speech therapists are being hired and recruited within the 
Department of Health almost on a continuous basis, so it’s not 
something that, you know, where the door has been closed and 
they’re forced to work in some other circumstance. That’s not the 
case as it was characterized. 
 
And I hope that the answer as it relates to SPMC was clear, but 
we’ll . . . we may want to get into that a little bit. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Okay. Mr. Minister, in the budget this year we 
have, under capital projects, SPMC, Health, 62,975. Now with 
respect to last year, does any of that same payment show up now 
in subvote 60 and 61? The capital funding for health projects 
under SPMC, does that show up, Mr. Minister, in subvote 60 and 
61 of this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If I could just walk you through this. Are 
you referring to page . . . or would you refer to page 117 of the 
blue book, please. Okay, on page 117 where . . . this is the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, capital projects, 
under Health, for ’88-89 there is an amount there of 62,975,000. 
Now that amount of money is appropriated in this budget to 
property management corporation. That’s the amount of money 
that’s in this estimate that is estimated to be going out in the form 
of loans in the health sector. That’s both the hospitals and special 
care homes. Okay? 
 
Now if we go back to page 48 of the same book, items 22 and 30 
on page 48 will give you the amount in this particular budget. In 
the case of item 22, which is grants to hospitals, repayment of 
principal and interest on capital loans from the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, in this case $15,936,000, 
that’s the estimated amount that is going to pay on behalf of 
hospitals to the property management corporation. That’s the 
amount that’s being paid this year from Health. 
 
And in the case of item 30, it’s 788,700 which is going to the 
property management corporation as this year’s payment schedule 
for special care homes. Okay? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, Mr. Minister. And if you look at page 117, 
you’ll see that there’s 66,527,000 allotted in ’87-88. 
 
Now as I understand it, subvote 60 and 61 are to pay back at least 
a portion of that, is that not correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, the way you characterize it is 
substantially correct — ’87-88 on page 117 is 66.527 million. And 
the amounts that I cited to you before — what I call item 22 and 
30, but they are certainly subvote 60 and 61 — those amounts, and 
let me just go through this, when the payments begin, the 
repayment schedule begins upon completion of the project. So if 
there’s a smaller project in terms of a renovation, some of those  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2558 
 

kinds of things, so some portion of that amount. $15 million, 
whatever it is, some portion of that for projects that have been 
completed could be part of the payment schedule of that amount 
that was shown in ’87-88. Others . . . the remainder of it is for 
payment schedules on projects from prior to that, prior to ’87-88, 
and the payment schedule goes on as it’s amortized out over a 
period of years. 
 
Ms. Simard: — So indeed, Mr. Minister, some of that money has 
been already granted to the Department of Health, and already 
granted . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, it’s already been granted by the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation to the 
Department of Health. And what is happening is the Department 
of Health is now paying back to Saskatchewan Property 
Management that capital funding at an interest rate, and I wonder, 
Mr. Minister, what that interest rate is. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just to clarify this, page 117 and all that’s 
illustrated on page 117 on behalf of Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, is in effect a statement. It’s a statement 
of the amount of money which is, first of all, borrowed by 
property management corporation, and then advanced, in the case 
that we’re talking about here, advanced to the health sector boards, 
like the City Hospital board or University Hospital board, or 
whatever. And that’s just a statement, of how much money was 
advanced to them. 
 
That money that you see, ’87-88, 66 million on page 117, does not 
and was not in the illustrated or part of the budget of the 
Department of Health prior. The Department of Health comes into 
this after the third party has been advanced its money, and once 
they’ve received their money and the payment schedule is 
established, then the money comes . . . it becomes a budgetary 
item in the Department of Health in terms of the repayment 
schedule that’s required to pay the particular loan that went to the 
hospital board from SPMC. So that’s not an amount of money that 
was in there. 
 
Secondly, your question was, what’s the interest rate. The interest 
rate is one which fluctuates, and it’s based on what SPMC is able 
to borrow the money at, and that will change as time goes on. But 
they will still be in a position to borrow the money in a better 
circumstance than will any hospital board. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, how far back does this 15 million 
go? These grants, what capital funding does that cover, and how 
far back does that go in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed that we’re into . . . this 
budget that we’re dealing with here represents the third year of the 
repayment schedules, as I outlined them before, and it’s really the 
fourth year of advances going out from SPMC to the health care 
sectors — well all of the sectors, but in this case the health care 
sector. Okay? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Does that 15 million then just refer to the 
advances received in the last three years or four years, the  

period you just referred to? Does it only refer to that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — For the most part that’s true, it would go 
back three years. I’ll just give you a couple of . . . or one example 
where there can be some exceptions to that. The Regina General 
Hospital burns unit is one that’s here that has some portion of it in 
this repayment schedule this year. That burns unit was under 
construction in ’84-85 and went over a period of time. And the 
first repayment that we have . . . the first repayment schedule for 
that unit began in May of ’87 which, as I said before, would 
indicate about the completion of the project. 
 
So some projects which were under way or which had begun prior 
to the SPMC coming into being, as we now understand it, could 
have gone back beyond the three years, and the advances would 
have been made on that basis. But for the most part, the three 
years . . . the most part of that repayment schedule amount that’s 
there, the 15 million or whatever you referred to, is for the three 
years. This is the third year. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Will you then correct your earlier statement, Mr. 
Minister, that that money was never allotted to the Department of 
Health in the past? Because what you are just saying is that some 
of that funding was capital funding paid to the Department of 
Health prior to this new fandangled SPMC scheme that your 
government has thought up for the purpose of skimming money 
from departments, with special interest rates, into the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, something 
totally unheard of, taking money from one pocket into another, 
padding budgets to make them look like they’re larger than what 
they are — by charging the Department of Health interest to make 
it look like this budget is much larger than what you say it is. 
 
And now you’re also telling me that it goes back to capital funding 
that was granted to the Department of Health prior to this scheme 
even being implemented, Mr. Minister. Would you please correct 
your earlier statement that none of this money was ever allotted to 
the Department of Health in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I want to clear this with the member, 
because it’s not any kind of . . . you know, the way you 
characterize this as some kind of double counting or whatever you 
might want to call it. It’s not that. I gave you the example of the 
burns unit, because it was an example, one of the very few 
examples that had begun at that stage that took longer to build and 
so on. And that example was there because it was caught in a 
transitional period between the operation of SPMC and the way in 
which it was done prior to that. There’s a couple of examples. 
 
But for those moneys that were advanced prior to the coming into 
force of the property management corporation, the property 
management corporation paid out the Department of Health for 
that amount. 
 
And all I can say to you is that in any of these things there will 
always be — it wouldn’t matter what it is — there will  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2559 
 

always be some projects which are caught in that transitional 
period. And some of them were. But that’s not how, you know, 
it’s not how it is now, certainly, and we carry on with the process, 
and it’s a very straightforward process as it now works. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Would the minister please tell us how many of 
these projects were caught in the interim period, how much of that 
15 million? And also, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you what the 
range of interest to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation is. You say that it fluctuates, but you haven’t given 
me the range of interest as to what these hospitals and these 
nursing homes are paying to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation for their grants from the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, the interest rate range, at least I’m 
informed, is . . . and we’re just going through the sheet here, but to 
clarify it, it is the government’s rate. SPMC gets the money at the 
government’s rate. The projects range from about 9.3 to 11.5, and 
it’s the government’s rate as they go into the market-place to 
borrow money. So that’s the circumstance there. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering why the 
government would be charging hospitals which are publicly 
funded and which you fund for operating purposes, and special 
care homes. Why would you be charging them interest on the 
capital funding that you give them to build their buildings? Could 
you tell me that please, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well first of all, this issue was debated in a 
full way when SPMC was set up. But just to be sure we 
understand this, as a project will go on, a particular hospital may 
spend in one year $30 million and on the same project spend 70 in 
the next year, depending on the construction schedule. And the 
way this process works, you know, the interest is then paid, 
according to that construction schedule, by the hospital. 
 
But let’s be very clear on this. Even under the system, before this 
SPMC came into being, under the former system, the government 
on behalf of the taxpayers in the public sector, borrowed the 
money and paid the interest over a period of time anyway. So 
under this system, the government still pays the interest. For you 
to characterize it as though the hospital is forced to pay this 
interest is not the case. 
 
I mean, we pay principal and interest in this amount which is 
allocated to the Department of Health for the repayment schedule. 
We pay both principal and interest, and we do pay the interest. So 
for you to say that, well, we’re somehow charging the hospitals 
interest, what we’re doing is . . . But the government pays the 
interest, in any case, and would under the old system as they do 
under the present system. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you guys sure have some game 
going there, I’ll tell you. Here you have a government corporation 
that you set up, the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation.  

You’d give the hospital moneys in order to pay the capital funding 
back and the interest to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. I would like to know what you’ve got going with that 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and how fat its 
coffers are getting, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I think this is absolutely ridiculous, the way you’ve worked 
out this scheme. The fact of the matter is, is that these hospitals 
and these nursing homes are paying interest to a Crown 
corporation established by the Tory government, Mr. Minister. 
This interest is going back into the government coffers. It’s not 
being used for health care, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now the other thing is that we referred to the fact that there was a 
reallocation of budget funding over a course of a number of years, 
and in 1988-89 this comes to some $260,000,020 of the health 
care budget. I think, Mr. Minister, that the evidence is 
overwhelmingly in . . . shows the fact that you have been padding 
your health care budget in one way or another and attempting to 
let the people of Saskatchewan think you’re spending much more 
on health care than indeed you actually are on a comparative basis. 
 
Now you had said to me you would tell me what portion of that 
$15 million are these sort of projects that got caught in between, 
and I still haven’t heard your answer on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well first of all, a couple of things. 
Because you stand there in your theatric way and say that we’ve 
got some kind of a game going there, let me just make sure that 
you understand, and I know some of your colleagues have come to 
understand, that this is a system which has worked in other places. 
 
The province of Manitoba under an NDP government in fact was 
one of the leaders in this area. They did this, British Columbia did 
this. The province of Quebec has a similar system. 
 
All the system is is what has been done for many years in the 
private sector, is to amortize the payment schedule over the useful 
life of the project and so on. That makes eminent sense, and the 
government borrows the money on that basis and the hospital gets 
their money on the basis of the repayment schedule. You don’t 
hear hospital boards complaining about this. They think it’s a good 
system, and they do think it’s a good system. 
 
Let me just give you a couple of examples of it, just so that you 
don’t stand here and suggest that there hasn’t been, under this 
system or any other system, the way in which rural hospitals and 
urban hospitals have been helped over a period of time here. 
 
Let me just give you these numbers, Mr. Chairman. The provincial 
assistance to hospitals, rural and urban, now rural and urban 
hospitals in the six-year period 1976-77 through 1982-83 — that’s 
a six year period — $112,239,180. 
 
A similar six-year period from 1982-83 through 1988-89, 
including the budget which we are now considering  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2560 
 

rural and urban hospitals, provincial assistance — 241,326,482. 
Quite a comparison from 112 million in that former six-year 
period to $241 million in that latter six-year period, Mr. Chairman, 
just so the member does not stand here and characterize this new 
system as some system whereby funding and assistance is being 
withheld from the hospital sector, because that’s absolutely not the 
case. In fact, quite the contrary. 
 
As it relates to rural hospitals alone, Mr. Chairman, and that’s 
something that the members ask little about, their interest is not 
there . . . But the rural hospitals . . . provincial assistance to rural 
hospitals in that former six-year period, ’76-77 through ’82-83, 
was 13,139,574, just over 13 million, Mr. Chairman. And in a 
similar six-year period, from ’82-83 through ’88-89, this budget 
which we’re now under consideration, that amount is 54,991,380, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
From 13 million to almost 55 million. The difference in the help 
and assistance from the province to rural hospitals, Mr. Chairman, 
a record which we are extremely proud of and which we continue 
to, you know, to operate in that sense. 
 
So I just don’t want the member to characterize our motives in any 
way, according to some of the suggestions she was making earlier. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I find this a rather interesting 
statement coming from a minister who commissioned a report that 
dealt with the closure of rural hospitals, Mr. Minister. I find that a 
rather interesting statement. 
 
We also know, Mr. Minister, that you have played around with 
these figures. You still haven’t told me what portion of that $15 
million was accounting before. And I think there’s a reason why 
you’re not giving me that information, Mr. Minister, because you 
were wrong when you stated that that money had not been allotted 
to the Department of Health at an earlier time in an earlier budget; 
that you made the statement that some of it had been allotted under 
this new scheme. And I’m prepared to accept that. But you almost 
made the statement that some hadn’t, and you’re not prepared to 
give me the percentages obviously, Mr. Minister. 
 
The fact of the matter is, there is $260 million in this year’s budget 
that was not in earlier budgets back . . . prior to 1983, Mr. 
Minister, or ’82. We’re not complaining that it’s in the health care 
budget, but for you to suggest that you’ve been increasing 
spending by that amount, by that 260-million-plus, is simply not 
fair, Mr. Minister. And I think that until I see how you break down 
your figures in details, there’s no way I’m going to believe what 
you say when you come in this House, because we have found that 
we cannot accept your figures on face value, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I want to talk somewhat about drugs, the prescription plan, 
Mr. Minister, and I’d like to direct your attention to that. The fact 
of the matter is, as I indicated before, this government has been 
attacking health care at an unprecedented rate that we have ever 
seen in the history of Saskatchewan. They’ve been attacking the 
basic principles of health care, universality, accessibility,  

comprehensiveness, and public administration. 
 
They’ve set up a task force to attempt to cover up, to attempt to 
cover up the fact that they’ve created a health care crisis in this 
province. They commission a report on rural hospitals, which 
report, by clear implication, points the government in the direction 
of the closure of rural hospitals, and by clear implication points the 
government in the direction of considering the free market system 
with respect to rural hospitals, the obviously . . . failing to 
understand the very foundation and fabric of Saskatchewan 
society with respect to the provision of health services in rural 
Saskatchewan and across Saskatchewan in urban and in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact that the free market system does not drive our medicare 
system, Mr. Minister, has to be driven home to you. This 
government has decimated the school-based children’s dental 
plan, and has so substantially altered the prescription drug plan in 
Saskatchewan that we find seniors and women and men in urban 
and rural Saskatchewan having to make decisions between buying 
groceries or buying needed medication. 
 
Fourteen years ago, Mr. Minister, under the leadership of Allan 
Blakeney and the Saskatchewan New Democrats, a world-class, 
top-notch prescription drug plan for the men and women and 
children of this province was established in order to ensure that 
every person, regardless of how fat their pocket-book was, would 
be entitled to needed medication, would have access to needed 
medication. 
 
And this, Mr. Minister, is a preventative program as well as being 
an acute care program. Because if people like diabetics, for 
example, require and are covered for the needed medication, we 
prevent illness down the line. Many people who take drugs today 
to control their blood pressure, for example, will not cost the 
health care system further down the line more money. 
 
But what we see is this government launching a $2 million 
advertising campaign which they characterize as a preventative 
health care approach. And we have no complaint with preventative 
health care approaches. We believe that we need this approach to 
health care. But when you cut back on prescription drugs so that 
people who need medication in order to prevent their illness from 
becoming serious, in order to keep them out of hospitals and 
thereby costing the medicare system even more, Mr. Minister, one 
wonders about your sincerity with respect to preventative health 
care, Mr. Minister. 
 
We find that under this PC prescription drug plan, something like 
60 per cent of Saskatchewan families will now pay 100 per cent of 
their drug costs, Mr. Minister; and a further 30 per cent will pay 50 
per cent of their medication expenses; and the remaining 10 per 
cent, those requiring more than 20 prescriptions a year, will pay 34 
per cent, Mr. Minister. 
 
Under this PC drug plan, there’s an estimated, according to the 
information I have, Mr. Minister, 50,000 families who will pay 
up-front costs in excess of $500. 
 
For example, a moderately severe asthmatic will require 
approximately $150 per month in prescribed medication.  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2561 
 

That is for one person, but because asthma tends to run in families, 
some families will be saddled with up-front costs two to three 
times that amount, Mr. Minister. And I say that’s causing these 
families a personal hardship, but it’s the legacy of this 
government, obviously. 
 
(1615) 
 
And with respect to women, Mr. Minister, women and 
prescription drugs, there’s a direct and immediate impact on the 
health care services required by women in this province through 
the reduction of the prescription drug coverage by the PC 
government. The information shows that women receive an 
average of seven prescriptions per eligible female beneficiary as 
compared to 4.6 per cent for eligible male beneficiaries. Although 
representing something like 54.8 per cent of the active 
beneficiaries, they receive something like 60.3 per cent of all 
prescriptions, Mr. Minister. In other words, women receive more 
prescriptions under the prescription drug plan than men do, and 
therefore are being more severely hurt under the circumstances, 
Mr. Minister. And I hope that you’re aware of that. 
 
I also want to comment on the fact that I have heard from doctors, 
and I know my colleagues have also heard form doctors, the fact 
that teen-age pregnancies are rising in this province as a result of 
the fact that you’ve taken oral contraceptives off the prescription 
drug plan, Mr. Minister. Teen-age pregnancies are rising as a 
result of your PC policies, Mr. Minister. And you may be trying to 
save money on the prescription drug plan, but I ask you how much 
money is there in terms of human suffering as a result of those 
short-sighted, ill-advised policies, and how much it’s going to cost 
the government in order to help these young mothers bring up and 
support their children in the future. And I have been told, Mr. 
Minister, that this is a direct result of the fact prescription drugs 
are no longer free to many of these young women, or oral 
contraceptives, rather than the prescription drugs. 
 
I think it’s important to note that seniors are another group of 
citizens in Saskatchewan who access the prescription drug plan 
and whose accessibility to the plan is being undermined and 
destroyed by this government, inasmuch as many seniors are 
having to make a decision as to whether or not they’re going to put 
groceries on their table or buy needed medication, Mr. Minister. 
 
It’s a direct attack; your prescription drug plan is a direct attack on 
women and men and children in this province, and on seniors, Mr. 
Minister. And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can tell me 
who the winners are in your prescription drug plan, the one that 
has caused so much suffering in Saskatchewan to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things, Mr. Chairman. The 
member just continues to use numbers that are a long way out of 
whack. She said the other day in this House, and she said again 
today . . . I believe she used the number 50,000 families. I believe 
you said 50,000 families who would have a net cost of $500 a 
year, whatever, which is . . . nothing could be further from the 
facts. 
 
The facts are that about 600 families across this province have a 
cost of more than $500 a year, a net cost. So I just  

wanted to be sure that the record is set very straight on that 
because there’s a very clear difference between 600 and 50,000, as 
is characterized and as is sent around the province by the NDP 
opposite. And there’s a very major difference between those two 
numbers. 
 
As it relates to the issue of the oral contraceptives, and the member 
says that we took them off the drug plan — that’s not the case 
either. The fact is oral contraceptives are included on the drug 
plan, but people must pay their deductibles. 
 
And it’s not fair as well to say that teen-age pregnancies in this 
province are as a result of the cost of oral contraceptives, because 
as you will know, I think, we have a high rate and have had for a 
number of years, a good number of years, a high rate of teen-age 
pregnancy in Saskatchewan. We had that all throughout the period 
of time when the oral contraceptives were there at varying rates 
and up to 3.95 only. And so the other issues which contribute to 
teen-age pregnancy are the issues which cause that to be the case, 
and certainly I don’t believe that you’re being fair to suggest that 
it’s because of the drug plan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member continues to make some . . . well I 
think the only way to say it is that she makes fun of, and she has 
done here now since . . . A few days ago she asked a question 
when I was here, asked the question regarding the potential for a 
life-styles program to be launched in the province. At that time I 
said that, yes, it was our intention to launch such a program of 
positive, preventive health care, and that was done on Saturday. 
 
The member at that time suggested it wasn’t a good idea, and 
frankly, it was only that member, I think, and all of her colleagues 
— just those people here, the NDP opposition, and one editorial 
writer in the Star-Phoenix, who’s been chastised by the public 
health association since. But those are the only people in the 
province who have said . . . who are involved in the health care 
sector, who have said that this healthy life-styles program is not 
what is necessary. 
 
Let me just quote a few things that are being said around the 
province, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to this program. And I would 
ask the member to set aside some of the venom which continues to 
roll from her, you know, whenever anything is suggested, whether 
it be positive or negative. 
 
Mr. Chairman, here’s what is said by the Saskatchewan division of 
the Canadian Cancer Society: 
 

Your “Everyone Wins” campaign to be launched in 
Saskatoon on (June) the 25th is very exciting and should help 
to motivate the people of Saskatchewan to make responsible 
decisions on their personal health and lifestyle choices. 

 
And it goes on. There’s a whole . . . 
 

It will indeed be our privilege and pleasure to work with you 
and your staff in this very valuable health promotion project 
for the province . . . 

 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2562 
 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, they say: 
 

The current health care system places considerable emphasis 
on sickness and curative treatment . . . the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association believes that Saskatchewan 
must move beyond traditional patterns of health services and 
that it is essential to reallocate human and financial resources 
to the prevention of illness and the promotion of wellness . . . 

 
And etc., etc. 
 
We have another statement by the dietetic association agreeing 
with the program, one from Sask Sport, one from the 
Saskatchewan Public Health Association: 
 

The Saskatchewan Public Health Association (SPHA) exists 
to promote individual and community health. One of our 
most important objectives . . . 

 
And so on. 
 

We look forward to working with the “Everyone Wins” 
campaign to assist us in pursuing this objective. 

 
The Saskatchewan Institute on the Prevention of Handicaps — it 
just goes on; Saskatchewan Safety Council; Saskatchewan 
Medical Association; College of Medicine, University of 
Saskatchewan; Canadian Mental Health Association, 
Saskatchewan division; life and health insurance committee; the 
chiropractors’ association; I mean, you name it, Mr. Chairman, 
they are all there. They all say this is exactly the direction we 
should be going. 
 
And if I might say so to the member opposite who chose not to 
come, I really wish you had set aside your partisanship for just one 
day and take your responsibility as health critic and as one who is 
interested in the health promotion in this province to come to the 
launch. Because I can tell you that a good number of people, some 
of whom . . . who very openly say that they are supporters of 
yours, frankly, in a political sense, some of them will say, I’m 
supporters of theirs and I was very disappointed, indeed upset, 
with the way in which the member characterized promotion of 
healthy life-styles that is being . . . that was launched on Saturday 
in Saskatoon. And I think it’s fair, Mr. Chairman, to pass it on to 
the member because I’m sure she will be hearing it from some of 
her own supporters, and certainly her leader will be hearing about 
it from some of those same people. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, let me just say, first of all, on the 
50,000 families, I am quoting from a letter that was written in the 
Pulse magazine with respect to changes in the drug plan by a 
doctor in Regina claiming that under the new plan more than 
50,000 families will pay up-front costs of more than $500, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I take it you’re suggesting that this doctor is . . . and this is an 
estimated amount . . . that this doctor is not correct. I take it that 
you’re suggesting that, Mr. Minister. 
 

With respect to your life-styles program, Mr. Minister, I note that 
you cancelled the life-style program that the New Democratic 
government had implemented, the Feeling Good program, when 
you came to power. You cancelled it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now with respect to our portrayal of life-style programs, Mr. 
Minister, we have repeatedly said that we strongly support 
preventative health care. What we don’t support, Mr. Minister, is 
self-serving advertising on your part and gala events that waste the 
taxpayers’ dollars when there’s needed people out there who need 
that money, Mr. Minister. 
 
We don’t argue with preventative health care programs, but we 
argue with you wasting the taxpayers’ dollars through gala events, 
Mr. Minister, and through expensive self-serving advertising 
which this government has been doing at an unprecedented rate 
over the last several years. 
 
Now you haven’t told me who the winners are with respect to your 
prescription drug plan, Mr. Minister, because you can’t tell me 
who the winners are because people are losing under your new 
prescription drug plan. 
 
Are you going to correct the wrongs that you have levied on the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, by returning to the 
prescription drug plan that we had before you made your cut 
backs? Are you going to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, just one more comment as it relates to 
the healthy life-styles program. You mentioned the program 
Feeling Good, which I will say was a good program. It was a 
two-year program, and it had run it’s course, and it was a . . . And 
it probably should have, there should have been some form of that 
continued. 
 
Feeling Good program dealt with two things, fitness and nutrition, 
and only those two things. And that’s . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No, it’s very true, I mean, the program and the 
criteria for the program. I see the former minister saying that that’s 
not the case, but it is the case. It dealt with fitness and nutrition in 
a very good way, and both of them were dealt with well. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was very successful. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Both of them were dealt with successfully, 
as I hear the former minister of Health saying. I know he was 
proud of the program and should have been. He should say to his 
colleagues not to oppose another program that is similar in those 
two narrow areas and which includes five other areas, including 
mental health area and some other . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
Mr. Chairman, the member says about advertising; advertising is 
obviously one aspect of this campaign, and in the other program, 
advertising was the only aspect of the campaign. 
 
This program also includes a major grant to the University of 
Saskatchewan for epidemiological research, and it also includes 
community grants for community development project which can 
tie into the whole theme of healthy life-styles and in the kinds of 
things that community groups, or communities at large, can do to 
promote the  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2563 
 

healthy life-styles which we all must address as a wider society as 
we go on. 
 
Now as it relates to the drug plan, you have heard us talk before, 
and I have said to the member before about the potential for the 
new card which is coming. And I know that the member has, as 
well, characterized this, because she will always do that, in the 
partisan sense and say, oh yes, well that’s just some . . . I forget to 
use her words; if I can just quote for a moment, Mr. Chairman — 
some Tory scheme, or some kind of a . . . you know, I’m not as 
theatrical as that, but I could . . . you know what I’m speaking of. 
 
So all I will say to the member is, the plastic health card which is 
coming will solve one of the difficulties of the drug plan 
administration, and that is the necessity to pay up front the total 
amount. And if we can . . . But it will still maintain two principles, 
one being the deductible amount, and it will still maintain the need 
to pay 20 per cent . . . for the individual to pay 20 per cent of the 
cost of the drugs. 
 
But with the card and its capability, the citizen, the consumer, will 
have the opportunity to present that card, and if the deductible has 
then been paid, the card will be computer readable. That will be 
determined right there at the drug store and the person can then, at 
that stage, pay only the 20 per cent. And I’m sure that will 
alleviate some of the concerns that have been raised by people for, 
you know, for some period of time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the plastic cards, I 
note that you made the announcement with respect to plastic cards 
during the by-elections in Saskatoon Eastview and Regina 
Elphinstone, and I note it didn’t do you any good in those 
by-elections either, Mr. Minister. The fact of the matter is . . . 
When were those by-elections? — back at the beginning of May, 
and now we’re at the end of June, almost two months later, and we 
still haven’t seen anything with respect to these plastic cards. And 
as the months click by, Mr. Minister, there are people suffering 
every day. 
 
Now it appears to me that you wanted to make that announcement 
during the by-elections, Mr. Minister, because you were hoping 
that it might reduce your loss, for example, in Saskatoon Eastview. 
But it didn’t do you any good, Mr. Minister. And we haven’t see 
those plastic cards yet. And we’re waiting with bated breath. We 
hope that they’ll be coming along soon. But I am pleased that 
you’ve at least acknowledged that your scheme was wrong to that 
extent, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I’m asking you: what are you going to do with respect to 
those individuals who can’t afford the 20 per cent up-front costs 
— and don’t tell me that social assistance pays for them, because 
there are people who fall between the cracks, who aren’t on social 
assistance, who cannot afford the 20 per cent up-front costs — 
what are you going to do for them, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Now I just want to put this into 
perspective as well, Mr. Chairman. The member says,  

what are we going to do, and I will say to her that with the review 
panel that we have in place, the drug benefits review panel that 
was put into place back in — when was it? — in August of 1987, 
where people are able to get various benefits depending on the 
circumstance that is presented, I want the member not to get away 
with, and she should not get away with, being able to say that 
there are all these thousands of people out there who are in 
difficulty. Because it comes from the same sort of source as what 
we just heard here — 50,000 people she was saying a while ago, 
and it turns out that the number is somewhere in the order of about 
600 . . . 610 or 12. 
 
So there’s a very great difference between that, and there’s a very 
great difference between the reality out there in our society, with a 
drug plan which was essentially copied from the province just to 
the east of us where the demographics are very much the same, 
where the people have very much the same sort of livelihood as 
our people here in Saskatchewan, and where there are no problems 
with people being able to pay the 20 per cent. 
 
I just say to you, Mr. Chairman, there are not problems with 
people being able to pay the 20 per cent. And if there are for 
individuals because of a particular circumstance, they are able to 
come forward to the drug benefits review panel. 
 
We’ve had . . . she mentions this great number, you know, and it’s 
always characterized as in the thousands, in the many thousands, 
out there who are suffering because of the . . . to pay the 20 per 
cent, and I will say to you that it’s not the case. And we’ve had 
about 1,700 people who have come forward to the drug review 
panel, and they’ve been . . . and it’s been well publicized, people 
know that it’s there, all pharmacists know that it’s there. And 
about 1,700 people have come forward; not all of those have been 
approved, but the panel has met a number of times, 22 times, and 
they’ve gone through the various proposals that have come 
forward and they’re given benefits, varying benefits, to a number 
of people. 
 
So I just want to clarify, Mr. Chairman, while the members 
opposite will lay this out in a very different way, the facts are not 
as they are presented by the NDP opposite. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Obviously the minister is unaware of the 
seriousness of the problems that are out there with respect to 
people who are unable to obtain prescription drugs. He’s totally 
unaware and he’s exhibited that on numerous occasions in this 
Assembly and outside this Assembly. He has absolutely no real 
knowledge about what’s going on with respect to prescription 
drugs and the difficulties that people are having paying for these 
drugs, including the 20 per cent, and just how many people are 
falling between the cracks and are unable to buy their prescription 
drugs. 
 
I want to take the minister back, however, to the question of oral 
contraceptives, because here I want to illustrate how his facts are 
very unclear and susceptible to a different interpretation. He said 
oral contraceptives were on the prescription drug plan. We were 
talking about teenagers and teen-age pregnancies, and the fact that 
the medical profession . . . And I have spoken to several  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2564 
 

doctors who have indicated to me that they have patients who 
come into their office who are pregnant . . . And they are pregnant; 
they are young girls who are pregnant because they have been 
unable to get oral contraceptives, either because they are living on 
their own and they can’t afford them or they’re living with their 
parents and they’re afraid to tell their parents they are on oral 
contraceptives. 
 
Now with respect to oral contraceptives, the cost, I understand, 
according to the information I have here, it’s $15 a month or $180 
a year, minus the deductible of 125, which leaves us some $55, 
and 20 per cent of that has to be paid as well by the person 
needing the oral contraceptives, Mr. Minister. And you just told 
this House that oral contraceptives were covered under the 
prescription drug plan. 
 
Now they may be listed on the Formulary or listed in what is 
covered, but the fact of the matter is there’s no access to them by 
many teenagers in this province, Mr. Minister. And you better 
realize that. I want you to admit that there isn’t access to these 
drugs by many teenagers and I want to know what you’re going to 
do about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The point I would make here is that, and 
the member will know, and I know . . . I believe we’ll agree that 
there’s a . . . As I said before, the issue of teen-age pregnancy has 
a lot more, you know, there are a lot more social factors involved 
with that than the cost of contraceptives, and I think you will at 
least acknowledge that much. 
 
The case in our particular province of teen-age pregnancy, 
teen-age births are dropping significantly and they’ve been 
dropping on a trend line for a number of years. Teen-age birth 
rates in Saskatchewan are dropped, and they have dropped as well. 
Let me just give you some numbers here. Back as far as — I won’t 
go all the way through all of the years here, but just the trend line 
— in 1976, there were 2,274 teen-age births in Saskatchewan — 
1976, 2,274. That’s at a time, remember, when the drug plan was 
in place and the contraceptives were at a much cheaper rate, and 
the teen-age birth rate was 47.9. In other words, 47.9 births per 
1,000 young women of between 15 and 19 years of age. In 1986, 
10 years later, the teen-age births, the rate 1,800 and the rate per 
thousand is 46.5 per thousand. 
 
So while that trend is on a downward trend, and we’re glad to see 
that it is, the factor if we were to take your assertion to its logical 
conclusion, one year ago we began to charge the deductible level 
for the oral contraceptives. And to take your assertion to its logical 
conclusion there should have been an increase, a dramatic 
increase, in the number of teen-age births and that’s not the case. 
So I just want you to be sure of that. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, do you have the figures from June 
of last year to this year, in particular the last say two or three 
months? Do you have those figures, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We don’t have them but I will provide 
them to the member and I’ll tell her that the belief is — and when 
we have them together because they come together at a certain 
stage of the year — the belief is  

there is not a marked increase. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, the comparison obviously 
has to be made over a period of when you cut back — which was 
when? — last May, June of 1987, to these months and the 
following months in the years to come. That’s obviously where 
the comparison has to be made, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m concerned about it because doctors have spoken to me about 
it, Mr. Minister. That’s where my concern generates from, Mr. 
Minister. And if they’re concerned about it, I’m going to be 
concerned about it and I believe you should be concerned about it, 
Mr. Minister, and not be passing it off lightly. 
 
Now I would like to know . . . and I should also say that I 
recognize there’s far more than simply oral contraceptives with 
respect to the issue of teen-age pregnancies and birth control in the 
province. But certainly when you make birth control pills 
inaccessible to teenagers, you aren’t helping the problem, Mr. 
Minister. I think you would have to at least admit that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I would like to know, Mr. Minister, as I understand the volumes of 
prescriptions increased by 4.9 per cent last year, but the cost of the 
plan increased by 22 per cent. And I believe that information 
comes from the annual report on the prescription drug plan. Could 
you please advise me what the reason for that is? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe the member has characterized it 
well, in that the number of prescriptions — if you’re referring to 
the annual report of ’86-87, page 22, is that right? — for the 
number of prescriptions was 5,714,957. That was an increase over 
the year prior; there was no question that that’s true — and the 
increase in cost was based on that increased utilization, which was 
significant, but also based on the cost of material, which is another 
factor, obviously, in the increasing cost. 
 
Ms. Simard: — It’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, that the cost 
of drug material accounted for roughly 80 per cent of this total 
increase. Is that not correct? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t have the actual . . . the number. 
We’ll dig it up and they’ll do the calculation. You say it’s 80 per 
cent, but let’s say it is. I know it’s a significant number is 
attributed to the rising cost of drug material. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, our calculation shows it is 80 
per cent, but you know, I would like to see what your calculation 
says. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll send you the calculation. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. He’s going to send me a copy, let the 
record show. 
 
Mr. Minister, however, you have said that a substantial portion of 
that increase is due to drug costs. Why, Mr. Minister, then have 
you agreed to support the drug patent  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2565 
 

legislation in Ottawa, which you know has already led to an 
increase in drug costs and which will lead to further increased in 
drug costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Okay I will. 
I wanted to give you accurate numbers. The members are yelling 
over here that they want more quick answers, and I want to be 
giving very accurate answers. And I wanted to, in support of my 
answer, to be able to give them the actual numbers as it relates to 
our costs, post-Bill C-22 at the federal level, and projections that 
they are, and costs, prior to Bill C-22 in the federal House. 
 
I will just say to the hon. member a couple of things. Throughout 
all of the debate, much of it . . . much of the debate surrounding 
Bill C-22 at the federal level, much of it that came from the 
member’s political colleagues in Ottawa and so on, against Bill 
C-22 and all of the research and development that it would need, 
the patent legislation has not and is not projected to come to pass 
in terms of their view that this would increase the costs of drugs in 
a very substantial way over and above the kinds of increases that 
have been the case for a good number of years. 
 
Since the advent of the drug plan in Saskatchewan in whatever 
year . . . anyway in about 1975, there has been a significant 
increase, year over year, in terms of the costs of drug material, and 
that carries on. But the patent legislation has not and is not 
believed by folks within the area here to be a major factor in terms 
of increasing the cost of drug materials. 
 
That’s on one side of the issue. And on the other side of the issue 
there are definite benefits for all of Canada. So for the question is: 
why did I, and why did we as a government, support that 
legislation? We supported it because we believe that it’s good for 
this country in terms of the research and the development and the 
kind of knowledge industry that’s needed in this country as we 
develop in this global village we’re in. We believe that strongly; 
our federal colleagues believe it and we still believe that and that’s 
why we supported it and that’s . . . and as I say, some of the 
hysterical debate that surrounded it from the point of view of those 
who are against most everything has not come to pass. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, that’s simply not the way we understand it, 
Mr. Minister. I understand that there has been an increase in drug 
prices across Canada, largely because multinational corporations 
have been trying to get their prices bumped up before the price 
review board comes in under the drug patent legislation. 
 
With respect to inventory allowances and dispensing fees, I 
understand, Mr. Minister, that these inventory allowances and 
dispensing fees increased by 2 million or some 20.2 per cent. And 
I believe that information also comes from your annual report on 
prescription drugs. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just while my folks dig up the answer to 
your last question, let me just say this. In the first quarter of last 
year, the average cost of prescription was 12 . . . $12.35 — I can’t 
read this fellow’s writing. And the first quarter this year the 
average is $13.03, about a 5.5  

per cent increase just so you can see the difference and that’s very 
close to the rate of inflation. It’s the kind of number and the kind 
of change that has gone on over a long period of time, so the trend 
line has not changed in that area. 
 
I’ll just wait for a second here and I’ll give you the answer to your 
other question. 
 
Yes I believe that’s about a $2 million increase. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, could you please advise when this 
inventory pricing, or inventory allowances came into effect and 
why it was brought into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It came into effect in the early part of 1986 
during a contract which was negotiated with the pharmacists of the 
province at that time, and it’s there; it’s something that they’ve 
been negotiating on for a good number of years, and it’s related to 
our recognition, or the department’s recognition of the costs to the 
individual pharmacies of the inventories which they must keep on 
their shelves and so on. And it’s paid out on a basis of so many 
cents per prescription dispensed, and it’s based on the inventory 
they must keep and the cost of that inventory. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Your annual report, 
Mr. Minister, indicates that 38 per cent of prescriptions do not 
utilize the lowest-priced drug product available, and I understand 
that this is an exceptionally high percentage. I have been advised 
that it is 40 per cent higher than other jurisdictions. 
 
Now I am wondering whether your department undertook any 
efforts to estimate the impact on this practice on the cost of the 
drug program? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The issue that you raise, as it relates to the 
drug . . . the prescriptions going out for, not necessarily the 
lowest-cost drug . . . In other words, when the doctor would write, 
in many cases would write, “No substitute” for . . . and say that it 
must be this particular drug when the pharmacist in many cases 
would say, well there is another drug which is cheaper, generic, or 
whatever, and the physician would be saying no substitute. 
 
Under the former drug plan . . . You said, what are we doing to 
solve this problem? The new drug plan, and under the 
configuration of the new drug plan has, by and large, solved that 
problem already. And that is because consumers, who have some 
responsibility for the cost now, are saying to their physicians, 
because they hear from the pharmacist there is another drug that’s 
equally as effective, that is cheaper, and physicians are finding 
themselves in a position, frankly, finding themselves in a position 
where the patients are asking them the question: will you give me 
the cheaper drug, and is there any reason why I can’t have it? And 
the physicians are, by and large, saying: no, there’s no reason and 
certainly you can have the . . . So the market-place has taken the 
. . . is having its effect out there. 
 
And that’s the case. It has been the case across the country before, 
and that’s why we had such a high number of no  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2566 
 

substitutions here in this province under the other drug plan where 
provinces like Manitoba and Alberta and our neighbours and all 
. . . most of the other provinces in the country did not have that 
same circumstance. So, by and large, the problem has been solved 
by the configuration of the new drug plan. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I note that the minister says, the 
market-place has its effect. Did you hear that, Mr. Chairman? 
Because I did and everybody on this side of the House has heard 
it. He said, the market-place has its effect. 
 
What he’s saying, Mr. Minister, is the prescription drug plan, as he 
envisaged it, is to move to the free-market system and that when 
people have to pay for their own drugs they’re going to be 
insisting on generic drugs as opposed to accepting what the doctor 
says. That’s what he’s implying. 
 
Meanwhile, we have many, many people out there in 
Saskatchewan — seniors, women, men, children — who can’t 
obtain access to needed medication because this minister wants to 
move to the market system, Mr. Chairman. That’s what he said. 
The market system takes its place. 
 
And that’s what we heard in the rural hospital closure report about 
the free market system. We heard that in there as well, Mr. 
Chairman, about moving towards, or how different it would be, I 
suppose is more accurate, under the free market system. That’s 
what’s in that report, and that’s how that government thinks. And 
this minister, by a slip of the tongue, let us know where his heart 
is, Mr. Chairman. He let us know where his heart is. 
 
Now with respect to no substitutions, Mr. Minister, I should advise 
you that there are . . . surely there were other ways to deal with this 
problem, rather than making people pay for their own medication 
when they can’t afford to pay it and thereby forcing people not to 
take and receive needed medication. Surely, Mr. Minister, there 
were other ways that you could have dealt with this problem. 
 
And let me give you one example. In 1987, in July of ’87, in 
January of ’88, the editions of the Saskatchewan Formulary, the 
format was altered, as I understand, and currently the Formulary 
contains prices for only those products purchased by the standing 
offer contract, and it no longer contains comparative prices for all 
drugs covered. 
 
Now I want you to tell me whether that’s indeed correct, Mr. 
Minister, and why you are not . . . and if it is correct, why the 
Formulary is not containing comparative prices for all drugs 
covered to enable doctors to prescribe equivalent drugs at a lower 
price? 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the Formulary price list that you 
refer to is meant to be and, in fact, is a list of the highest prices that 
a pharmacy is allowed to charge for a particular drug. But that’s 
not to say that they are not able to charge a lower price. 
 

And what we see happening out there now is that we have a 
number of pharmacies — well, some of the large ones, but we 
certainly have many of the smaller pharmacies — who are telling 
me that they are banding together in terms of bulk purchasing and 
volume purchasing and so on, and they are able to then charge a 
lower price than what the Formulary list is, and some of them do 
that. So the Formulary price is not a hard and fast price list that is 
the cost of that drug — it is only the maximum that can be charged 
for that drug. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, did the Formulary in earlier times 
not have comparative pricing of drugs? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes that’s true, as you say that. And in the 
past, because the majority of the drugs on the formulary were 
purchased on contract by the province — and the facts are that 
some of the drug stores are able to, in the case of some drugs, 
some particular materials, are able to buy them cheaper than what 
that price is. And because they can, they’re able to go to a lower 
price on some cases. And so if that’s the case, we allow it to 
happen because it helps the consumer; it doesn’t hinder the 
consumer in any way. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you haven’t addressed my concern 
— a concern that has been expressed to me by doctors — that is 
that the formulary had comparative pricing in the past which 
allowed them to take a look at it and prescribe cheaper 
prescriptions. Now they don’t know what the comparative pricing 
is, Mr. Minister. And you have said that yes, it had that in the past, 
but for some reason the druggists can buy their own drugs, you 
haven’t put it in. It doesn’t make any sense to me, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to know why the formulary does not have comparative 
pricing in it for the use of doctors when they’re prescribing 
prescription drugs. Would you please advise me, Mr. Minister, 
why that comparative pricing is not in there any longer? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well let me address your question this 
way, and this is the case not only here, but anywhere else, where 
there’s a . . . The physician would . . . Let me give you an example 
of valium, for example. The physician would write the 
prescription for valium under the old system, or under the former 
system. If the physician chose to, it could write the prescription for 
a particular brand name and say, “no substitute” on there, and that 
would be the case, and that would be as it would have to be filled, 
regardless of whether that particular brand was three times the 
price or double the price, or whatever, of another drug which 
would have the same effect. 
 
In the case now, what we see happening, and what is in fact 
happening across the province to a much greater degree, and that’s 
the case that’s happening in other provinces and has for a long 
time, is that physicians will, in the case of valium, will write an 
open prescription for valium. And the person will take their 
prescription to the pharmacist, and the pharmacist then has the 
costs of the drugs and then would fill the prescription on the basis 
of the lowest cost drug that they can sell to the patient. So that’s 
the system that’s there now, and it’s a system that,  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2567 
 

frankly, works well. 
 
And I don’t know why there would be need for the other . . . I’m 
not sure why there would be a need for the comparative price. 
 
I believe you’re asking why the physicians don’t have 
comparative price in their particular office. And I guess what 
we’re saying is, if the physician has a particular reason — and 
even the physicians are saying this to us through their association, 
and so on — if the physician has a particular reason to write a 
prescription for drug ABC because that is the brand name and 
there is to be no substitution, the physician will write that. If the 
physician has no medical reason for writing that, they won’t, and 
they’ll write the open prescription, and then that will be 
determined at the pharmacy level, which brand and so on will be 
dispensed to the patient. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well physicians have expressed to me, Mr. 
Minister, the desire to see the comparative pricing, the desire to 
have some input into which of these drugs their patient is going to 
receive, rather than having their hands tied in the fashion that you 
are insisting. They want to know what the various pricing is when 
they’re prescribing. 
 
And that concern has been expressed to us by physicians, and I’m 
sure that your office has also made that . . . has also heard that 
complaint from some members of the medical profession, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
With respect to no substitutions, as I understand, they could still 
write “no substitution” on there if they wanted to, Mr. Minister. So 
that hasn’t been solved; you haven’t solved that problem. 
 
I also want to ask you, Mr. Minister, now, to go on into another 
area, is whether or not there has been an increase in the number of 
prescriptions that are being prescribed under the prescription drug 
plan, and whether or not the dispensing fee and the inventory 
allowance appears to be gauged to the quantity of drugs being 
prescribed and the number of prescriptions — whether or not there 
is any sort of a connection in this regard. Have you looked at that, 
and what conclusions have you drawn? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We don’t have final numbers on this, but 
we are told by the pharmacists — and I think their numbers may 
be pretty reliable, but we are told that the number of prescriptions 
written has dropped about 15 per cent. 
 
And in terms of your other question in terms of the relationship 
between the drop of the number of prescriptions written and the — 
what were you saying? — dispensing fees to the pharmacists. But 
dispensing fees, inventory costs allowance, mark-up, all of those 
other things, are based on the number of prescriptions written, and 
so there is a relationship. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the information I have shows that 
the number of prescriptions has increased from 4.88 million to 
5.714 million between ’83-84 to ’86-87, and this represents a 17 
per cent increase or 5.6 per cent annually. I’m wondering if you 
could take a look 

 . . . like I don’t know whether these figures are accurate. This is 
the information that’s been given to me. 
 
Could you please take a look from your records and advise me — 
not necessarily this afternoon, but in correspondence — as to the 
number of prescriptions from ’83 to today’s date, the increase, and 
on a year-by-year basis, so I can take a look at the situation and 
see whether or not there has been an increase and in what years the 
increase has been and how much it has been, and analyse this a 
little bit further. Because I think that the government should be 
doing this, and as opposition Health critic, I would like to as well. 
 
So would the minister be prepared to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d be prepared to 
provide that information. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. Now I think it is very important for 
the Minister of Health to have this information. He talks about 
spiralling health costs at length, and we note that there has been 
approval by this government for the drug patent legislation. And I 
believe that we will be seeing in future months, when these drug 
costs have an opportunity to sift down into Saskatchewan and into 
prescriptions, we will be seeing an increase in the cost of 
prescription drugs. We’ve noted that there already was a 
substantial increase the year preceding — something like 80 per 
cent of a 22 per cent increase was due to drug material costs. 
 
We note that the formulary is no longer showing comparative 
pricing for doctors, so that doctors can take a look at the various 
drugs that are out there and decide which one will be best and look 
at the cost of the drugs before prescribing or writing “no 
substitution” on the prescription. And we note that the government 
hasn’t helped the medical profession in that regard, in order to 
reduce the costs of the prescription drug plan. Instead the 
government has tried to solve the problem and correct it by letting 
the market take its place, which were the clear words of the 
minister this afternoon. 
 
I believe that this shows that the government is not serious about 
controlling the spiralling costs of drug prices in Canada, if indeed 
that is the fact. I think that its blind support for drug patent 
legislation is clear evidence of that, and the fact that it hasn’t taken 
some very obvious measures to reduce the costs of drugs, such as 
a comparative pricing formulary in Saskatchewan. It’s clear 
evidence of the fact that this government’s not serious bout 
controlling prescription drug costs, but simply wants to move the 
prescription drug plan toward a free market system so that the 
market can take its place. 
 
Now with respect to hospital waiting lists, Mr. Minister, we see 
that there has been PC underfunding and understaffing that has 
caused a crisis in Saskatchewan with respect to hospital waiting 
lists. it’s resulted in tragically high and unacceptable hospital 
waiting lists. I believe the figures in February of 1988 were 
something like 12 or 13,000 in hospital waiting lists in the two 
major cities of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
(1715) 
 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2568 
 

We note that there will be further summer bed closures this 
summer, and we see the minister commissioning a report that 
refers . . . or tends to push the government in the direction of rural 
hospital closures which will encourage more people to go into the 
cities and thereby increase the hospital waiting lists in the cities 
once again. There’s no question that the crisis with respect to 
hospital waiting lists exists, and there’s no question that the 
government appears to be doing very little with respect to this 
problem. I know there was some initial funding available some 
time ago, but there has been nothing done of late with respect to 
hospital waiting lists. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, could you please tell the members of this 
Assembly what immediate action you’re going to take with 
respect to dealing once and for all with this unacceptable level on 
the hospital waiting lists, with the unacceptable numbers of people 
who are waiting to get into hospitals. Could you please tell us, Mr. 
Minister, what immediate action you’re going to take? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, a couple of things to 
put this into perspective. We have been through this once before 
and I just . . . and I know on several occasions, and we’ll be again, 
I’m sure. 
 
As it relates to this summer, Mr. Chairman, the base hospitals, the 
large base hospitals have all received funding which would 
provide and which can provide for them to remain open 
throughout the summer, and many of them are. 
 
I know Regina General’s staying open throughout the summer. I 
believe University Hospital is staying open throughout the 
summer with all of their beds. City Hospital in Saskatoon is not, 
and they have a much shorter period of time when they will have 
some beds closed. But those will . . . none of that, I want to make 
this very, very clear to the member and to the House, that none of 
that is based on any funding levels from us. It’s based on the 
administrative structure of the hospital and the way in which they 
believe they can best utilize those beds. And it’s based on their 
surgeons in specific areas and the time that they take away, along 
with specific specialized nursing staff and so on. 
 
So I just would say to the member that the numbers — and I don’t 
want to get into numbers too badly because, as I’ve said on many 
occasions and as everyone else who talks about waiting lists in a 
responsible way will know, the key thing always is the waiting 
times, the waiting times for individuals. 
 
But even with that, we have a shortening of that period of time for 
waiting on individual cases — I’m speaking now of Saskatoon — 
and also a lowering of the number of people who are waiting for 
specific surgery in the Saskatoon hospitals, and that’s gone down 
since we took the initiative last year of the couple of million 
dollars which was targeted — something that had not been done 
before and something which was very important to do — to target 
the extra expenditure going to those base hospitals, to target it 
directly at areas, or speciality areas, which were causing the 
log-jam, so to speak — and those areas being ophthalmology and 
orthopedics and, I believe, ear, nose and throat, and some of those 
areas. 
 

So, Mr. Chairman, we directed money directly at those areas. 
There was significant work done, and to the credit of the people 
working, both in surgical staff and people working in those 
surgical theatres and so on, and the administration of the hospitals, 
to their credit they have this thing on the trend line downward. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, one more thing. They are all looking forward 
to the time when their new hospitals, which are under construction 
right beside them now — at St. Paul’s, I think of, and at the 
University Hospital, which is in the process of a move in now, and 
the City Hospital, obviously, which is a new hospital coming on 
stream, but it’ll be a number of years before that’s done — those 
hospitals which were much in need for a long time, and which 
were commissioned by this government and, frankly, should have 
been commissioned prior to us coming to office, Mr. Chairman, 
those hospitals and those new facilities will contribute 
significantly to a reducing of the length of time individuals will 
have to wait for specific surgery. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, obviously you’re not doing enough 
when we have hospital waiting lists at the tune of 10,000 people, 
when we have Mrs. Klotz waiting for her hip replacement and she 
still hasn’t got in, the last time I spoke to her, which was last 
Friday. For how many months? When we have Mr. Smith, who’s 
waiting to get his blood clots looked after and he’s been waiting 
since last December; when I spoke to him a week or so ago he still 
hadn’t got in for surgery, Mr. Minister. 
 
Obviously, if you want to talk about waiting times, we can talk 
about waiting times. We’ve talked about waiting times in this 
Legislative Assembly on numerous occasions, Mr. Minister, and 
the facts are against you and your government. You’re simply not 
doing enough with respect to hospital waiting lists. 
 
And the point has been made to me, and I’ll make it here in this 
House today for your benefit, Mr. Minister, the point has been 
made to me on numerous occasions that yes, we do need new 
hospitals and more hospital beds, but if we’re not going to be 
funded to keep the beds open that we already have, what is the 
point, Mr. Minister? That point has been made to me on several 
occasions. 
 
And I want your assurance today that that funding will be 
available for the beds in the new hospitals as well as the beds that 
are already existing, Mr. Minister. And I want to know what 
you’re going to do about the City Hospital’s summer bed closures 
and whether you will make funding available to them so that their 
hospital beds can be open this summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I gave the member the assurance before, 
and I say that again, and I’m glad to have the opportunity to repeat 
it because I know that’s not the way in which you have been 
suggesting here and around the province that is the case. 
 
The case in fact is that all of these base hospitals have the money 
to be able to remain open throughout the summer. They know that. 
If you ask any of them of that, they will say, yes, we have the 
money. It’s not a case of the  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2569 
 

provincial government funding level if we choose to, over the 
middle of the summer, to stop for three or four, or whatever, 
weeks. It is strictly based on the way in which they will administer 
and the way in which they feel they can make best use of that very 
specialized staff they have, to have holidays at the same time. 
 
But I just want to say that . . . I’ll give you an example of City 
Hospital in Saskatoon. Between October and March . . . between 
October of ’87 and March of ’88, we have . . . in each of these 
areas there’s a decrease in the number of days that individuals will 
have to wait for surgery in those areas. And I know that some of 
those are high, but general surgery, there’s a 13 per cent decrease 
in terms of the number of days that they have to wait; orthopedics 
down 35 per cent; gynecology down 21 per cent; ophthalmology 
down 26 per cent; ear, nose, throat down 16 per cent; pediatric 
patients down 66 per cent. Where pediatric patients were waiting 
210 days back in October, which I know is unacceptable, they’re 
now waiting 71 days, so there’s significant work being done here. 
 
City Hospital, for example, and we’ve talked about it here before, 
Mr. Chairman, the day surgery unit which was opened at City 
Hospital, which is an initiative that they had asked for and that we 
provided to them, is making excellent use of it, and their medical 
staff are making excellent use of that day surgery unit. 
 
And I might say, as it relates to Regina, because often we talk 
about Saskatoon here because that’s where the log-jam seems to 
be the greatest, to the credit of the specialists in Regina, they have 
been utilizing day surgery — and day surgery for some of these 
areas for a longer period of time than they have in Saskatoon, I’m 
told — and to the benefit of the people of southern Saskatchewan 
in terms of keeping down some of the length of time individuals 
have to wait. 
 
So there is a good deal going on in this area in terms of trying to 
alleviate a challenge that’s there for the health care system. And I 
say not only in this province for the large, base hospital centres, 
but across this country, and it’s something that we have to 
continue to be very vigilant about. But it is not based on — not 
based on — a lack of funding from the provincial government. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I disagree with you. It is 
based on a lack of funding from the provincial government to keep 
hospital beds open. It is based on that. And you aren’t . . . as far as 
Mrs. Klotz, and Mr. Smith, and many of the other people that 
we’ve raised in this Legislative Assembly, and many . . . and all 
those that we haven’t brought up, you’re obviously not doing 
enough, Mr. Minister, because their waits are unacceptable, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I want to ask you a question now about poor people skipping visits 
to doctors, Mr. Minister. And I’m referring to a May 24th article 
in The Globe and Mail where there was a reference to the 
elimination of a travel allowance for Saskatchewan welfare 
recipients which jeopardized the health of hundreds of low income 
people who could not find transportation to medical offices. 
 

Welfare recipients were delaying visits, Mr. Minister, missing 
operations, failing to keep appointments with specialists for tests 
and treatment; fewer children were getting immunized, women 
were unable to get prenatal check-ups — prenatal check-ups and 
prenatal medicine is preventative medicine, Mr. Minister — and 
there was increased emotional stress on these people because of 
isolation. 
 
A study of some 80 welfare recipients found that 56 of them had 
problems getting to medical appointments, and 23 of these people 
had physical disabilities, Mr. Minister, that made walking difficult, 
such as arthritis, respiratory ailments, back problems, and heart 
conditions, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I want to know, as Minister of Health, because you are 
responsible for making sure that every man, woman, and child in 
this province has access to medical care. I want to know what you 
have done as Minister of Health to bring this problem to the 
attention of your colleague from Melville, and to insist that the 
special travel allowance be reinstated for the purposes of obtaining 
access to medical services and obtaining transportation. Please tell 
us what you’ve done, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well a couple of things first of all that I 
. . . is the article you’re referring to in The Globe and Mail? Could 
I ask the member just to clarify, is that the one that was written by 
one Geoffrey York? I believe there was a question to the Minister 
of Social Services, and it was answered here in the House before, 
in terms of travel allowances for medical services. Now I’m just 
going by recall here because I don’t have anything in front of me, 
but I believe the response from my colleague, at that time, was that 
medical . . . allowances for medical travel have not been cut, but 
allowances for travel, in a general sense, have been. I don’t know 
if that’s the case, and I just . . . I’ll go through it with him if that’s 
the case. 
 
But as it relates . . . and the reason I wanted clarification, if that is 
the article written by one Geoffrey York, . . . you know, we’ve had 
him quoted from time to time in the House, probably more often 
than he deserves, and frankly the way . . . the circumstances as he 
outlines them are very far from the actual facts of the matter on 
several occasions. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the problem is the travel allowance 
is not available until they’ve spent the money and hand in a 
receipt, and that’s my understanding of the problem. And indeed if 
that’s correct, they don’t have the up front costs. It’s the same as 
your prescription drug plan, Mr. Minister. Welfare people do not 
have the up front costs to pay to get to the doctor and then submit 
a receipt and get the money in. 
 
Now with respect to Mr. Geoffrey York, I note that you’re saying 
that he’s not a credible person, Mr. Minister. And I take exception 
to that because I think that you should just check the facts out with 
the member from Melville before you accuse Mr. York of not 
being credible. 
 
Mr. York indicates that doctors and nurses at the West Side 
Community Clinic in Saskatoon, which has a large number of 
welfare recipients, have reported a noticeable  
  



 
June 27, 1988 

2570 
 

decline in the number of patients receiving treatment since the 
government abolished a $27 monthly travel allowance late last 
year. 
 
(1730) 
 
Now the survey was conducted with respect to 80 welfare 
recipients. Now, Mr. Minister, are you telling us today that this 
survey was not done by the West Side Community Clinic in 
Saskatoon, and that if it was done it was inaccurate. Are you 
telling us that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, no I’m not and I just . . . I made my 
comment as it relates to the particular article, and I was trying to 
go by recall on what . . . or what my colleague, the Minister of 
Social Services had answered. 
 
I will give you this undertaking. I will look into it in a more 
detailed . . . from the health perspective, from our side of the issue. 
I will look into it and, you know, and see what is the real 
circumstance there. 
 
Ms. Simard: — One more question, Mr. Minister, on that issue. If 
you determine . . . one more question, Mr. Minister. If you 
determine that poor people indeed are skipping visits to doctors, as 
claimed by the community clinic, and if you determine that the 
reason this is happening is because they cannot get transportation 
to doctors’ offices and to the hospital, will you ensure that your 
government rectifies the problem by giving them the up front costs 
of that transportation, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will check into the circumstances as 
you’ve been outlining in this line of questioning. If I find that 
there’s not a system in place, of vouchers or otherwise, there’s not 
some system in place in the Department of Social Services to 
accommodate people who . . . and if I find that . . . and we in 
Health believe that there are people who are in the circumstance as 
you’ve outlined it, I will undertake to deal with the Minister of 
Social Services and talk to him about how we might rectify the 
circumstance. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


