


















































April 14, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 14,1988 
 

557 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure and my honour 
today to present to you and to this Assembly some special guests 
who are just now, Mr. Speaker, arriving in the gallery above us 
here. I refer to some 90 people from le Collège Mathieu in 
Gravelbourg. They are both students and staff members at this 
unique and historic French language high school in our province. 
 
Monsieur l’Orateur, ces personnes sont vivement concernées par 
la question des droits de la minorité de la langue officielle en 
Saskatchewan. Leur présence parmi nous aujourd’hui démontre 
le courage de leurs convictions, et je les en félicite. 
 
I would ask all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, to join with me in 
welcoming these special guests from Collège Mathieu with us 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr.Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg welcoming the students 
from Collège Mathieu. I just came from a meeting with them with 
a rousing debate with regard to Bill 2. I hope their visit here is 
enjoyable. Their questions were probing, and perhaps you will 
see some further probing questions in this question period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, a 
group of grade eight students from Cudworth, accompanied by 
their teacher, Jim Bridgeman, and their bus driver, Dwight 
Windrum. Mr. Speaker, I’m very honoured to meet with these 
people at 3 o’clock for pictures and refreshments. I hope they 
have an enjoyable day in Regina. Would you please help me 
welcome the students from Cudworth. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join in 
welcoming the students who are here today, and to the students 
at Gravelbourg I’d like to say: Bienvenue a la législature. C’est 
un grand plaisir d’avoir fait votre connaisance cette après midi, 
et nous espèrons que vous ayez du succès en votre mission 
speciale pour protéger vos droits fondamentals. Bonne chance. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and to the members of the legislature today 12 
grade 8 students from Bruno, Saskatchewan, accompanied by 
their teacher, Mr. Jmaeff. And I would say that I’ll be meeting 
with them later for pictures and refreshments. I hope they enjoy 
the proceedings here  

today and enjoy their visit to Regina. 
 
I would like to thank you and help you welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
legislature, a special group of gentlemen sitting in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to introduce Mr. Peter Steen, the president and chief 
executive officer of Royex Gold Mining Corporation, Mr. Anton 
Hendriksz, the president of Mahogany Mineral Resources, Inc., 
joint venture partner with Royex Gold Mining; Mr. Rob 
McCallum, vice-president of operations for Royex; Mr. Garry 
Biles, mine manager of the Jolu mines project; Dr. Ralph 
Cheesman, manager of the Saskatchewan Mining Association, 
and also an official from the northern affairs secretariat, Ms. 
Allison Stickland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen are in town today to announce the 
opening of the Jolu gold mine project in northern Saskatchewan, 
and I would like to take this time to thank them for the initiative 
that they have shown and the confidence that they have shown in 
our province. As we all know, a major project such as this creates 
economic opportunities and job opportunities for the people of 
Saskatchewan and, particularly, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. And I would like all members to welcome them 
in the customary manner. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would, on behalf of 
the New Democratic Party opposition, extend a welcome to the 
officials from Royex. I had the pleasant occasion of having lunch 
with some of them just recently — actually at the Sheraton at 
noon today. And I would like to, on behalf of our caucus, wish 
the Jolu mine great success, and I hope that you are able to find 
and refine and produce that gold at very high levels  
 
An Hon. Member: — Those flow-through shares. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So those flow-through shares will be working 
well. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It seems 
to be a day in which we have quite a number of students present, 
and distinguished visitors. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce 20 students from the Holy Rosary 
Elementary School — these are grades 7 and 8 students — 
accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. C. Chastkavich and Mr. — 
here the handwriting is not very clear actually — Smadu, I guess. 
If it’s not correct, I’ll apologize later. I will get to meet with them 
at 2:30 p.m. I look forward to discussing today’s proceedings 
with them and to get their reaction. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

558 
 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Farm Debt Crisis 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 
recognizing me. My question today was to be to the Premier and 
the Minister of Agriculture, but in his absence I direct the 
question to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it pertains to the crushing debt load of Saskatchewan 
farmers — I think the minister knows that it amounts to 
approximately $6 billion in Saskatchewan alone — and today’s 
protest march by a number of Saskatchewan farmers to the farm 
credit corporation about the debt crisis. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as the government knows and as the 
House knows, the budget by the Minister of Finance had nothing 
concrete to offer by way of specific joint action involving the 
provincial government, the federal government, and the lending 
institutions, to try to give some farmers hope on easing this debt 
crisis. 
 
My question therefore, to the Acting Minister of Agriculture, is 
this: will he be able to advise the House today what specifically 
the provincial government has in mind with respect to the debt 
crisis — such things, for example, as perhaps the restructuring of 
the debt or a strengthening of the debt review board? What 
specific legislative or financial action is in place to help 
Saskatchewan family farmers on the debt crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, and hon. member, as 
everyone in Saskatchewan knows, there have been a number of 
initiatives already undertaken by this government relative to 
dealing with the financial pressures and the low commodity 
prices, the trade wars, the debt that farmers in Saskatchewan, and 
indeed across the western world, face. 
 
What additional measures that might be taken, I would 
recommend to the hon. member to stay tuned. Obviously the 
Premier has been involved in discussions and negotiations with 
the farm groups. And just as this government has been there for 
the farmers, whether the issue was droughts, floods, 
grasshoppers, operating — a shortage of operating cash, high 
interest rates, whatever the case has been, this government has 
been there for the farmers of Saskatchewan and will continue to 
be there for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, quite frankly I welcome the 
hint, if I may use that word, by the Acting Minister of 
Agriculture, that there may be some announcements in the near 
future. My new question of course is predicated on what I believe 
the minister would agree with me is a crisis which demands 
almost immediate action, certainly before the summer gets going 
in Saskatchewan, so that the farmers know exactly what their 
game plan is for the weeks and months ahead. 
 

My specific question to the minister is this: the Premier, I gather, 
is in Saskatoon meeting with M. Bourassa and with M. 
Mulroney. Will the minister tell the House whether or not the 
Premier is raising specifically with the Prime Minister and the 
Prime Minister of Quebec, particularly the Prime Minister of 
Canada, the gravity of the farm debt crisis? Is it on the agenda 
for his discussions today with the Prime Minister? And if it is on 
the agenda, would the minister tell the House, with some degree 
of specificity, if I may use that word, exactly what it is that the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture is advocating that the 
federal and provincial governments should do to ease the farm 
debt crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t know exactly what’s on 
the agenda when the Prime Minister and the Premier meet, but I 
can tell you this, when it comes to agriculture, our Premier has 
proven to be a very persuasive individual with the federal 
government because he’s delivered not only on grain 
stabilization payments that have been of record high levels but 
on two deficiency payments. We had a price increase in the initial 
prices earlier this week that represented $170 million. 
 
And the other thing that I think will probably get some discussion 
today is agricultural research, given that they’re at the university. 
And I’ll tell you one other thing. Our Premier delivered for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan where you and your party didn’t deliver 
for 25 years, and that is on the building of a new agriculture 
college at the University of Saskatchewan, and it’s under way 
right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
acting minister. He may not believe this, but I’m trying to ask 
these questions in as non-partisan an atmosphere as is possible. I 
don’t know, quite frankly, how in the world a new College of 
Agriculture, as welcome as it may be, is going to ease the debt 
crisis for the family farmers of Saskatchewan who are being 
foreclosed on and are being deeply troubled. 
 
So my question to the minister, and I put it to him, if he could 
possibly spare the partisan, political rhetoric, my question to the 
minister is this: can he tell this House whether or not the Premier, 
the Minister of Agriculture, is raising specifically with Mr. 
Mulroney — I gather they’re meeting about now — the issue of 
joint federal-provincial debt relief and debt management for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can count on it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And if the answer is yes, as the Deputy 
Premier indicates, more than just simply saying yes, in order to 
justify the meeting and in order to put at ease some of the 
concerns of the members of the House, will he give this House 
and the public an indication of precisely what it is that the 
Premier is putting on the table in his talks with Mr. Mulroney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

559 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I view the answer to the questions 
in the same non-partisan dimension, Mr. Speaker. And the point 
that I would like to make, relative to the member’s opposition to 
a Premier and a Prime Minister viewing agricultural research and 
a new agriculture college and biotechnology, agricultural 
biotechnology as important, we view it as important; they may 
not. 
 
But I think that points out the difference between the Progressive 
Conservative administration of our Premier and the NDP 
philosophy when it comes to farm issues, Mr. Speaker. They are 
interested in short-term Band-Aids; we’re interested in, yes, 
making sure our farmers get through the immediate term, but as 
well looking to the longer term. 
 
And that’s the kind of thing that agriculture research does. It 
brought us rust-resistant wheat for this province, Mr. Speaker. It 
brought us canola, Mr. Speaker, for this province. And who 
knows what lies ahead that will come forth from the good 
research at the University of Saskatchewan, out of that new 
agriculture college, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have one final new question 
to the minister, if I might, with your permission. I want to make 
it clear to the minister opposite that no one on this side of the 
House is opposed to more research in agriculture, to a college of 
agriculture, to any of these kinds of programs. I think anybody in 
the province who in fact would oppose those would be doing a 
disservice to the farmers of Saskatchewan. That’s not the issue. 
 
But the issue is, and the minister acknowledged it in his first 
answer to the first question that I put to him — he was fair enough 
to do so — that there is a serious debt load crisis, Mr. Speaker — 
$6 billion on Saskatchewan farmers alone. Surely that demands 
some indication by either the minister or the Minister of Finance 
or the Premier; it indicates and demands a specific course of 
action. 
 
Can you tell us: are you planning to strengthen the debt review 
provisions? Are you planning some form of joint 
federal-provincial financial help? Are you planning some form 
of debt restructuring? What specifically is it that your 
government has in mind? — because it’s already the middle of 
April, and I submit to you, Mr. Minister, that this is such a grave 
crisis that everybody in Saskatchewan concerned with the future 
of family farms ought to know now what your administration has 
planned for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be leaving my 
announcements to the Premier and Minister of Agriculture, but I 
would just reiterate: we have been there for the farmers, no matter 
what the issue has been. We will continue to be there. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the debt 
situation and for protecting farmers, The Farm Security Act, the 
counselling and assistance for farmers, the loan  

guarantees has done a great deal over the last three and four years, 
Mr. Speaker, and we can be proud of that. 
 
And not all members in the NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker, can 
talk forthrightly about protecting farmers in this province like 
this side of the House can, Mr. Speaker, and there is no doubt 
about that. It has been written into this record many times relative 
to that point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
same minister. Mr. Minister, I thought you understood the 
problem. I’m not so sure now from your comments. 
 
But what is needed is a way to ease the farm debt load through 
co-operation from the provincial government, from the federal 
government, and from the financial institutions. You three were 
part of the problem; you have to be part of the solution, and you 
can take the lead on that. 
 
You’ve wasted a year now trying to sell your equity financing 
corporation solution to the financial crisis. Farmers have rejected 
that idea, and my question is this: is your government going to 
continue to push an idea of equity financing that the farmers of 
this province have rejected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — This whole question of farm debt — 
the fact that the hon. members would raise it today, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s almost suggesting that this is somehow a new issue, and it is 
not. And it is something that many government members have 
been turning their heads to for a good long time now over this 
past several months, consulting with farm groups as to what some 
other options might possibly be. 
 
It’s not a new issue, Mr. Speaker, and I would simply ask: would 
the NDP even be raising this issue if it weren’t for the fact that 
this very day the NFU (National Farmers Union) are staging 
some kind of mock funeral downtown? Are they merely playing 
to the NFU crowd, Mr. Speaker? I ask you in all honesty, is that 
all they’re doing raising this issue here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the non-answers 
from this minister. I asked a question on equity financing and he 
didn’t give me an answer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you are so void of ideas that all you are 
pushing is an equity financing corporation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool now have a plan out called the 
rural stability program that would ease the farm debt crisis and 
take away the idea that the farmers are telling me that if we have 
equity financing we’ll have bank land. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question is this: since you obviously 
don’t have any better ideas, will you sit down  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

560 
 
 

with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, discuss their policy on rural 
stability program, and implement a program like that before the 
end of this session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. 
member for his question wherein he suggested that we are 
somehow devoid of ideas when it comes to helping build 
agriculture, diversify agriculture, and protect agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because if that’s the case then what does he call things like this: 
a livestock cash advance; the agriculture research fund, Mr. 
Speaker; a production loan program, Mr. Speaker, credit and 
agriculture credit corporation like we’ve never seen it before, Mr. 
Speaker, for our farmers; feeder associations and loan guarantees 
for feeder associations — across this province, a network that 
we’ve never had for a half a century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Farm Security Act; counselling and assistance; oil royalty 
rebates, Mr. Speaker; a special deficiency payment from the 
federal government; rural natural gas  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I think the minister 
has made his point. Next question. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — One final question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
obviously you have no ideas, you have no solutions  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Is the hon. member asking 
a new question or a supplementary? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, if you didn’t hear me. I 
said another question, a new question. 
 
Farmers in this province are frustrated. I am frustrated, and the 
people other than the farmers are frustrated because you have no 
solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Will you and your colleagues on that side of the 
fence please convince the Premier, who is the Minister of 
Agriculture, that we cannot afford to have a part-time Minister of 
Agriculture. We need a full-time minister to address the problems 
of farm debt crisis in this province now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I want to tell this member, Mr. Speaker, 
and his colleagues across there, that he is absolutely naïve if he 
somehow thinks that some provincial government can fiddle a 
few dials and change a few programs and make the farm debt or 
the commodity price crisis go away, because you cannot. It is an 
international situation; there is no simple answer for this, Mr. 
Speaker. We have responded time and time again. We will 
continue to respond, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll tell you what — you’ll 
never see a headline in this province like you’ll see in the Ottawa 
Citizen where it says, “Manitoba Farmers Threaten to Oust  
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Property Tax Burden 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the minister, 
or the Acting Minister of Agriculture, has given up on trying to 
find solutions, so let me address a question to the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And it deals with your government’s favourite 
game, Mr. Minister, shifting the tax burden, shifting the tax 
burden because of the waste and mismanagement of your 
government. 
 
And I want to ask you specifically about property taxes. In six 
years, the property tax burden in this province has sky-rocketed, 
thanks to your failure to provide adequate funding to local 
governments and to school boards. And my question to you is 
this: is the minister aware that since his government came to 
office that the property taxes collected in Saskatchewan have 
jumped by $400 million, about 92 per cent. And I ask you, in 
light of those facts, when can Saskatchewan property taxpayers 
expect some form of tax relief from this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, today we have just seen the 
New Democratic response to the provincial budget. And all 
through their response did they ever talk about taxes? They 
didn’t, Mr. Speaker, because this government  we have brought 
in the second lowest taxes of any province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the second lowest taxes of any 
province in the Dominion of Canada. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, 
independently shown that we have the lowest overall tax load in 
the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, local governments do have some responsibility and 
role in maintaining and reducing their property taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, it is this government that has brought in the proposals 
for responding, for example, to the business tax for the business 
community of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the hon. member to join with me in 
condemning Regina city council for having the highest taxes in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and I hope he joins with me in 
suggesting that they begin to reduce their taxes for the people of 
this city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, your answer falls on deaf 
ears. Even your back-benchers don’t believe you. I  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

561 
 
 

think we’re going to have to change the Minister of Finance’s 
name to Pinocchio. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to say, Mr. Minister of Finance, let’s take 
a look in Saskatoon. New question, Mr. Speaker. This week the 
Saskatoon public school board was forced to increase it’s mill 
rate. And you know why? Because their operating grants were 
cut $513,000. Twenty-seven dollars a taxpayer on average is the 
mill rate increase. Ten years ago, 43 per cent of the operating 
grants for the city of Saskatoon public school operation was paid 
by the government. Today it’s 33 per cent. 
 
Now that’s a tax shift, Mr. Minister, and I’m asking you again: 
when are you going to come and give some relief to the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan instead of to your corporate friends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — First of all let me say, Mr. Speaker, that in 
light of the proposals to reduce the business tax in this province 
by one-half, and it being targeted to small business, it’s actually 
with some pride that I take the criticism that we’re helping our 
corporate friends when we reduce the business tax by 50 per cent 
for the small business of this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s how 
far out of touch they are with small business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We would indicate, Mr. Speaker, that in fact  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The grants for education, Mr. Speaker, have 
increased. The hon. member knows it. They’re up significantly 
since they were the government of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I think we can single out, we can single out, for example, 
the city of Regina governed primarily, I think it fair to say, by 
New Democratic supporters on council that have brought in the 
highest taxes of any government, any civic government in the 
city of  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Alleged Mismanagement of STC 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 
the people’s bus company. The company’s 1987 annual report 
documents show you  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I’m sure we’re having difficulty 
hearing the member from Regina North, and could we have some 
silence in the House, please. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I say, my question is 
to the minister responsible for the people’s bus company, STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company). The 1987 annual 
report shows how you people have run this publicly run, publicly 
owned company into the ground. 
 
Since you took office, STC has had a loss every single  

year, and these losses now total over $13 million. The number of 
passengers carried by STC has dropped by more than 100,000 
per year. The number of buses has dropped. The average age of 
your buses has more than doubled, increased very dramatically, 
Mr. Minister, my question is: are you people deliberately running 
this company into the ground, or are you just plain incompetent 
managers? Which is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In defence of 
the government as a whole, you may know, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know today, that the overall management of this 
administration with respect to many Crown corporations is a 
very, very fine record, and the profit showed by many, many 
corporations being tabled today by their annual reports that they 
are good. 
 
Now you bring up the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 
and indeed the Saskatchewan Transportation Company is 
operating at a significant loss. But I want you, hon. member, and 
I want the people of Saskatchewan to know that this 
administration, this government, supports, supports the service of 
bus transportation to rural Saskatchewan. And we will maintain 
that support. And if we have to lose a little bit of money to 
provide that service, we’re willing to do it. 
 
I will admit, Mr. Speaker, there is room for improvement in the 
management of the bus company, and there will be changes to 
the bus company. But I want to stand very firm, Mr. Speaker, that 
this administration supports whole-heartedly bus service to rural 
Saskatchewan, and it is something that we will not let the 
members of the New Democratic jeopardize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I hear your rhetoric 
about how fine you’ve mismanaged our Crown corporations, and 
I have to point to STC, where the debt has more than doubled; 
PCS, where it’s more than 10 times the debt under  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I think we’re getting into debate. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I have here a report from a major 
competitor, Greyhound, in the very same bus industry. These 
annual reports show that Greyhound has been making money, 
adding buses, and adding service, and making money, while you 
people are selling off buses, cutting service, and losing money. 
 
My question is — you are talking about privatizing STC, changes 
to our bus system — how is that going to help maintain the 
service to many of the rural outlying areas of this province? How 
is privatizing STC going to benefit anyone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not certain of 
what will happen with the bus company in future years. But one 
thing that I am very certain of — and the hon. member compares 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company with the Greyhound 
Corporation bus lines.  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

562 
 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we do not have lines 
that run  that are similar to lines that run between New York and 
Detroit. We don’t have lines that run between Toronto and 
Montreal. 
 
This is rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This bus company is a 
company that services rural Saskatchewan, and indeed we don’t 
have the population to support the figures that the Greyhound or 
other major transportation companies do. 
 
The only thing that I can say positively, Mr. Speaker: this 
government is committed to bus transportation to rural 
Saskatchewan. It may take a slightly different form in the months 
to come, but this government is firmly, whole-heartedly 
committed to service to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I did 
not hear you answer the question about privatization and when is 
it going to happen, and how is that going to guarantee service to 
many of the outlying communities in Saskatchewan? Answer the 
question: how is privatization in any way, shape, or form going 
to help the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, excuse me, 
but I am a little confused by the member’s comments. I don’t 
know if he is for privatization — he brings up Greyhound, and 
they’re making all sorts of money, maybe we should privatize it 
— or if the member is against privatization. 
 
I think the one thing that stands out abundantly clearly is the 
member is against rural Saskatchewan. This government is for 
rural Saskatchewan and transportation services to those areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Formation of Telephone Directly Review Committee in 
SaskTel 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for 
SaskTel, I am pleased to announce that a telephone directories 
review committee has been formed to examine ways to better 
manage SaskTel’s telephone directory issue. 
 
Recent production problems experienced in publishing some of 
the directories were the factor in the decision to establish this 
review committee. 
 
I’ve asked the review committee to assess the directly operation 
from a customer and a corporate point of view so that the 
business can provide greater benefit to the people in the economy 
of the province. 
 
I have directed the review committee to examine alternate ways 
of operating the business, including possible economies of scale. 
I’ve asked the committee to provide recommendations which 
will give SaskTel future  

direction for the directory business and identify factors which 
will influence the future growth of the operation. 
 
I have given the committee a very broad mandate to examine the 
directory business with the expectation of receiving 
recommendations for the long-term benefit of SaskTel and its 
customers. 
 
The members of the committee are Linda Prettie, an office 
manager in Prince Albert; Marcel De La Gorgendiere, a 
Saskatoon lawyer and former president of the Saskatchewan 
chamber of commerce; and Bob Bundon, an accountant in 
Saskatoon and president of the Saskatchewan chamber of 
commerce. 
 
I look forward to the recommendations of the review committee 
to provide SaskTel with important guidance in dealing with the 
future direction of its directory operation. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I was a bit surprised at the 
minister’s comments. It has been traditional in this House for a 
long, long time, even when I sat on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that the ministerial statement was provided to the critic. 
 
And if the members opposite will be quiet, Mr. Speaker, while 
I’m making my response to the ministerial statement, I want to 
point out a couple of things to the minister in charge of SaskTel. 
The minister in charge of SaskTel had a colossal, a colossal 
bungle in SaskTel while he was the minister, and he now moves 
to attempt to correct the situation. I say it’s long overdue. 
 
There are a number of other things that the minister should be 
looking into in SaskTel, one of them being the publication of 
glossy books for the employees of SaskTel which have run into 
tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, of dollars. That 
program, a total waste. And I intend, Mr. Speaker, to get to that 
subject later on in this session and spend some time on that 
matter. 
 
The minister announces that the SaskTel has a profit this year. 
Well I say to the minister: where is the settlement with the 
employees of SaskTel? Where is the settlement? These 
employees have been out for months and months and months, 
with no settlement to the contract. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, aside from these oversights on behalf of the 
minister in charge of SaskTel and the oversight to extend the 
courtesy to send the ministerial statement across to the critic 
before he makes it, I want to say that I’m pleased to hear, even 
though it’s a late conversion, to have the minister announce that 
he is going to have a committee look into this colossal bungle 
that was carried on in SaskTel recently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

  



 
April 14,1988 

 

563 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $306,635,100 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1989. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, the sum 
of $306,635,100 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to make a few 
comments in respect to the resolutions and the Appropriation 
Bill. I want to, at this time, thank the minister for sending over 
an advance copy. That is one of the few decent things that I have 
seen him do, and I am suspicious. But I do thank you sincerely 
for the consideration of an advance copy so that we could have a 
chance to look at it. 
 
I think, when we’re looking at the appropriation of a part of this 
budget, that I think it’s important that we have some very serious 
reflections in respect to where the government is going, its basis 
of funding to the various programs and departments throughout 
the government. 
 
And I want to start off, Mr. Chairman, by saying that the people 
of Saskatchewan, in my view, are very decent and fair, 
fair-minded, very progressive, compassionate. And the people in 
turn, I think, expect no less from its government. They want a 
fair government, they want a competent government, they want 
an open government, and they want an honest government. 
 
And each of us being elected to this Assembly, it seems to me, 
have a duty to act in the best interests of all Saskatchewan 
residents. And I say that we here in Saskatchewan have been 
blessed with great acres of the best farm land in the world. We 
have potash and uranium supplies equaling the world’s supply. 
We have oil and gas; we have coal; we have forest resources. And 
so I want to say here that having all of these, being blessed with 
all of these things, I want to address the issues which I think has 
to characterize a government and, in this, the financial affairs of 
the province. 
 
And I want to turn first of all, Mr. Chairman, to the aspect of 
whether this government has been fair to the people of this 
province. I want to deal with some of the aspects to see whether 
or not they were indeed fair. 
 
This Minister of Finance, who brought down the budget on 
March 31 just before Good Friday, brought in yet another 
massive deficit of $328 million, with an accumulated deficit of 
$328 million, with an accumulated deficit during his three 
budgets of $2.1 billion or, on average, $700 million annually has 
been the average of the budget deficit under this Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Today the total deficit, as I indicated, is $3.7 billion, and  

to service that debt alone costs the people of Saskatchewan $330 
million. And those are large numbers. But to put it into 
perspective, that we have a million people here in Saskatchewan, 
and I say to those who are listening here this afternoon that just 
to service the debt costs almost  costs $330 million. That amounts 
to almost $1 for every man, woman, and child in the province of 
Saskatchewan, every day of every week of every month for the 
entire year. 
 
(1445) 
 
And when you sit down at the supper table — I’ll tell you what 
it is — with your family, the father, the mother, and every child 
sitting at that supper table at every supper on every day has to put 
into the bucket to pay the Premier’s and the Minister of Finance’s 
mismanagement, $1 — $1 a day for every man, woman, and 
child, just to service the debt of this province. 
 
And let’s take a look at how they have been fair in respect to 
taxes. This government and this Minister of Finance in the last 
two budgets has imposed the greatest tax increases that this 
province has ever known — in last year’s budget, $263 million 
dollars of increased taxes on ordinary people in Saskatchewan. 
They increased the E&H tax, which they said they would 
eliminate; they increased the flat tax; they increased the gas tax 
— tax upon tax. And this year again, what they’ve done is added 
further tax to the ordinary people of this province — another $70 
million; a half a per cent increase in flat tax of $50 million; an 
increase in the consumer tax on tobacco of $18 million. But let’s 
see whether they’re fair to the people of the province. They have 
imposed, in the last two years, over $330 million of additional 
taxes, direct. 
 
But what do they do for their friends? They got a different recipe. 
For their friends, what did they do? Well to the corporate boys 
they said, you need a tax break, and so the Minister of Finance 
cut the tax, corporate income tax, by 2 per cent, losing some $8 
million of revenues to the province. 
 
He cut the corporate tax more than the total amount of revenue 
that he provided to the operating  increases to the operating grants 
for all of the schools operating in Saskatchewan. There he offered 
$7 million to operate all of the schools throughout the province, 
but to the corporate friends he said, here’s $8 million of tax 
rebate, tax cut. Not very fair, I say — not fair to the people that 
have built this province. 
 
And then let’s take a look at the program cuts. Throughout his 
department  throughout all of the departments of government you 
will notice that 11 departments have received less funding, cuts 
in their funding. 
 
You will find that the health program has been savaged — the 
drug program and the dental program — the most savage cuts to 
the drug programs. And today as you visit around, if they dare go 
into Elphinstone and meet with some of the constituents there, 
they will find the problems that are caused by the slashing of the 
drug program, where people on limited income have to decide 
whether they’ll put food on the table or purchase drugs to keep 
them living. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

564 
 
 

Those are the choices that this government has made and forced 
upon the people of this province. And I say that’s not fair, and 
the people of Saskatchewan say it’s not fair. And the people of 
Saskatchewan say it’s not fair that for every $1 we have to pay 
in personal income tax, that the corporations pay 16 cents. I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan want a fair 
government. The people of Saskatchewan are not getting a fair 
government, and it’s demonstrated by the deficit that they have 
burdened the people with, by the increase in the taxes, by the 
massive cuts and underfunding of basic programs. 
 
And let’s take a look again. Let’s ask ourselves, is this a 
competent government? Well I’ve just said that it has run up the 
largest, the most massive debt that this province has ever known, 
and that’s not being very competent. 
 
But most of all, this government had a choice. This government 
had a choice to keep that debt down. They could have chosen to 
charge to the oil companies something like $1.7 billion in oil 
revenues, but they allowed the oil companies to drift off with that 
revenue. And they have left this province burdened with debt. 
 
Let’s take a look at what they have  some of the other actions. 
Here is a government that can’t afford a dental program for our 
children, but they can spend $8.4 million on empty office space. 
Eight million dollars would guarantee and reinstate the dental 
program, but they spend it on empty office space. They spend 
$24 million advertising, trying to brainwash the public into 
believing in their performance rather than, I say, rather than 
performance in programs — $24 million wasted annually on 
wasteful advertising, empty office space. 
 
And now that they have devastated the treasury — they have 
literally made the province broke — do you know what they say? 
The Minister of Finance says, well we can’t help our farmers; 
course not! How can we help them in their debt situation? They 
say the problem is too big for the provincial treasury to solve, but 
at the same time the Premier goes around and says, we’ll open 
the treasury to help our farmers. The only problem is, they have 
emptied the treasury; they’ve handed it over to their friends. 
 
Competent government, economic planning for the future — 
really demonstrated. It’s really demonstrated when you look at 
the welfare budget. Over $190 million that is spent supporting 
welfare recipients, 57,000 of them; 45,000 people unemployed. 
Those are the statistics which indicate categorically that this 
government has no direction, that this government has no 
competence, that this government is unfit to govern this province. 
 
I want to look at the source of revenues. The Minister of Finance 
is bragging about having reduced somewhat the deficit from the 
previous year. Well if you look at the revenue source, do you 
know what the biggest revenue source increase there is? 
 
Well it’s certainly not corporate income tax, because they cut 
those. And it’s not individual retail sales, because they’re down. 
But I’ll tell you where it’s coming from. The  

biggest reduction in the deficit accounted for was $175 million 
increase in equalization payment — $175. When we left office, 
Mr. Chairman  
 
An Hon. Member: — 175 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One hundred and seventy-five million, yes. 
When we left office, Mr. Minister, we were in fact a “have” 
province, and this outfit has turned Saskatchewan into a “have 
not” province. And the biggest increase in revenue is equalization 
payments from the federal government — $175 million, because 
they can’t run the province. 
 
If you take a look at the increase in the payments or receipts from 
the other governments, it’s over  the increase is about $208 
million from other governments that is flowing in here. That 
indeed is about equal to the deficit increase. It is paid, not from 
generating an active and vibrant society, not that new businesses 
is springing up and new jobs being created, and more people 
paying taxes, and more revenue, and more retail sales, more 
personal income tax. No, we’re getting our extra revenue by 
being a “have not” province, by being a province which they have 
driven the people to the highest per capita debt in the nation. 
That’s the legacy of the competence, rather the incompetence, of 
this government. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that one other thing, as I said, the people of 
Saskatchewan also want is an open government. When this 
government assumed office, I think they believed that they were 
going to operate in an open fashion. And I can remember the 
speeches that were made by members opposite indicating the 
necessity to consult with other people. 
 
And I can remember the former minister of Finance. He said, we 
will consult; we will go down to the shopping malls and we’ll set 
up computers and let the people go in, and they can plug in what 
programs they want to cut and what programs they want 
extended, and we’ll have full participation. 
 
And the Premier immediately after becoming Premier said, oh, I 
will set up a youth council that I will consult with. Huh, have you 
heard of it since? They’ve now sold the computer. It’s no longer 
available for the people to have input. And total consultation with 
the public has been withdrawn. 
 
They say the minister in charge of privatization  He goes on 
television and he says to the people of this province, no, none of 
the Crown corporations will be sold — none — unless the people 
of the province have an opportunity to discuss it and are in 
agreement. That’s what he said to the people of Saskatchewan, 
and what did he do with Sask Minerals? Well ask the people that 
are working down at Chaplin because I spoke to some of them. 
And you know when they were informed in respect to their 
participation in the privatization of Sask Minerals? They were 
told on the day that the sale was announced. 
 
And did the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to buy 
a share in the corporation which they already owned? I say no. 
What they did is they went down to  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

565 
 
 

eastern Canada, rounded up a couple of their corporate friends 
and said, here’s a corporation, Sask Minerals; take it. We want to 
get rid of it. That’s our ideology; we want to get rid of it, 
regardless of what the people of this province have to say. 
 
Really an open government. Really letting people participate. 
Fantastic participation as evidenced there. 
 
And let’s take another example. Throughout the history of this 
legislature, Public Accounts and the auditor’s report has always 
been filed so that when the session opens in the spring that the 
opposition have an opportunity to review the expenditures of the 
previous year and to look at the auditor’s report. 
 
Today we’re into the middle of April. We’ve asked the Minister 
of Finance to table the Public Accounts, and if the auditor’s report  
to table that. And what has he said? He said they’re — he didn’t 
say this, but one can gather they’re afraid to have the books open 
to disclose the expenditures of this government. 
 
This is not an open government any more. This is a government 
that’s running afraid of the people of this province, and the facts 
will destroy them. And as a consequence they say, do not file the 
Public Accounts. 
 
And then they brought in the budget. They were supposed to be 
so proud of their budget, except no one in the back-benches 
would get up and speak and support it. Very strange — not many 
of them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The budget? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, that’s right — the budget. You didn’t speak 
on the budget; that’s the problem. 
 
But when did they bring the budget down, Mr. Chairman? Did 
they want the public to be able to address the budget, to review 
the budget, so there could be comment on the budget? 
 
Well what they did is arrange that they would have it just before 
Easter season — March 31. Next day was Good Friday and 
Saturday and Sunday and Monday, so the public wouldn’t have 
an opportunity. Now that’s confidence in a budget. That’s 
openness. I say it indicates that this is a closed, it’s a secretive 
government. This is a government that is now, as I said, afraid of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The final characteristic that the people of Saskatchewan want in 
their government is that they want an honest government. And I 
say that the people of Saskatchewan have learned to expect that. 
 
(1500) 
 
There’s been a tradition in this province that when the premier of 
a province spoke — whether it was Tommy Douglas or 
Woodrow Lloyd or Ross Thatcher, the late Ross Thatcher, or 
Allan Blakeney — one thing the people may not agree with all 
of their policy, but one thing was sure that you could trust the 
promises that those men made to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Integrity, it was  

called, decency, honesty  
 
An Hon. Member: — Fairness. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Fairness. But look at this government’s record. 
And how can there be any possibility of integrity being left, Mr. 
Chairman. This government and many of the members in the 
back benches promised, promised that they were going to 
improve the drug program. And the Minister of Finance himself 
signed a certificate indicating a guarantee that he would in fact 
eliminate the prescription drug fee. 
 
And look what has happened. How can the people of 
Saskatchewan believe them? In 1982 they said to the people of 
Saskatchewan, elect us and we will eliminate the education tax, 
the E&H tax. They promised that. Millions of dollars of cut in 
taxation, they said. First term of office, and last year what did 
they do? They increased the sales tax, the E&H tax by 40 per cent 
to 7 per cent — $100 million they took out of the people’s 
pockets — $100 million. 
 
And then they promised the gas tax. In 1982, they said we will 
eliminate the gas tax, get rid of it. The Premier said in this House, 
never again as long as there’s a Tory government sitting on this 
side of the House will we ever see again this gas tax. After the 
election what happened? Back on goes the gas tax. 
 
And do you know who he gives the rebate to? He doesn’t give 
the rebate to the business men who are helping to generate the 
economy. He gives it to the ones that use it for joy — not joy 
riding — but for ordinary family driving, pleasure, pleasure. 
That’s what he did. And a basic, basic plank in their program that 
they reneged on. 
 
Another one that the seniors are asking as we go around in 
Eastview and into Elphinstone, they’re saying this government 
made a promise, and we haven’t heard about it lately. We want 
to know where that promise is that the Premier made to us, that 
the Minister of Finance made: free telephones to all seniors, they 
said. Where has that got? Broken promise, no integrity, not being 
honest with the people of this province. 
 
Where is the farm purchase program that they said that they 
would put so many young people onto the farms? Well they 
introduced it, but then they decided that they didn’t have enough 
money to help the farmers any more, because they had to choose 
between the farmers or the oil companies or the resource 
companies. And they opted, Mr. Chairman, for the oil companies 
and the resource companies, and they abandoned the farm 
purchase program. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the ultimate was in 1986-87, this 
same Minister of Finance brought down a budget before the 
election and he said there’s going to be a deficit of $389 million. 
And one of the highlights of his budget, he said, this will be a 
reduction of the deficit, meaning from the previous year. And do 
you realize what happened? He brought in a deficit of $1.2 
billion. 
 
Eight hundred million dollars it cost more than what he budgeted 
for just to elect another Tory government. They  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

566 
 
 

used the people’s money to buy their way back into power. But 
I’ll tell you, it won’t work and we’ll test it in Eastview and we’ll 
test it in Elphinstone, and I’ll say the record will show come May 
4. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, while we are going to be 
supporting, in principle, the appropriation, because this has been 
a normal thing to do — that if a government brings down its 
budget in the normal time, in late February-March, that as we 
proceed through the estimates, that an appropriation be granted. 
 
But I want to say that we do it with reservations, reservations 
because we believe this government’s priorities are wrong. We 
think that this last budget has been unfair, that it was mean. I 
think it was a budget that catered to the large corporations at the 
expense of ordinary Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, while we’ll be supporting it, I want to 
say that this government has, with this budget and with the 
previous budget, has really burdened the people of this province 
with a heavy legacy of crushing debt, of reduced services, of 
massive increase of taxes. And as I indicated today in question 
period, a more massive shift of taxation is going on to the 
property owners. 
 
So they’ve given them the legacy, then, of debt, of higher taxes, 
of cut-back in programs, and most of all what they have done, 
they are starting to shatter the hopes of the people of this 
province. They have indicated to the farmers of Saskatchewan 
that they will not in fact be able to assist them because they have 
made their choice, they have given to the oil companies and the 
resource companies; the treasury is empty. They say, we are not 
going to be able to help the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We will support the Bill, but on those reservations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I, too, would like to add a few words this afternoon to 
this Appropriation Bill. And I would want to say, on behalf of the 
people of this province who have been looking at the legacy of 
mismanagement and incompetence displayed by this 
government, that not all of the people of this province are willing 
to accept the kind of government that this Premier and that 
Executive Council and those back-benchers have delivered. 
 
And the member from Weyburn is yapping and yipping, and I 
just want to tell him that we spent a little time in his riding the 
other day, and he would want to know that it wasn’t all New 
Democrats, as he indicates, that are disgusted and dissatisfied 
with the kind of government you’ve delivered. There were people 
of other political stripe who are not very comfortable with what’s 
gone on in this province since 1982 as well. 
 
This government has built up a massive $3.7 billion deficit. This 
year alone they’re forecasting yet another 350 million — I say a 
record that no government should  

be proud of. At the same time they’ve built this massive deficit, 
individual income tax is up 103 per cent — 103 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in a short period of time that a Premier and his 
council and his back-benchers, since 1982, have been running 
amok over the last six years or so. 
 
As well, the people of this province are looking at a flat tax, from 
the most intelligent budget that costs a family with an income of 
$25,000 some $500 a year — this from a government that 
promised in ’82 to reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent in 
this province. 
 
And I say to you, that while we’ll be supporting this 
Appropriation Bill, as my colleague from Quill Lakes says, we 
do with reservation. 
 
And I want to say today, if I could, a few words about this 
government’s proposals for privatization of some of the vehicles 
that we’ve used to deliver health care service and education, and 
that we’ve used to balance our budgets over the year. And I want 
to speak to the privatization of the liquor stores in this province. 
I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there has been an awful 
lot of revenue generated through those vehicles over the years, 
and this year alone I note they’re forecasting some $140 million 
to go in to the Minister of Finance to keep his deficit to $350 
million. And were it not for the 140, you’d be looking at some 
490 million as opposed to what we’re looking at. 
 
And I want to say that whatever trickery they use to try and 
convince people that those revenues will still be there when you 
put a middleman in or when you privatize it, it can’t happen, 
because anybody with any common sense would understand 
when you add someone to a business transaction, be it selling 
liquor or dry goods or whatever it happens to be, those people 
aren’t going to perform that function for nothing; they want a 
profit. They’ve got to have a profit in order to maintain their 
business. 
 
And I would like the minister of privatization to stand up in this 
House and indicate to the people of this province how they’re 
going to maintain those revenues without increasing prices or 
without increasing the taxes on that commodity. I say to you that 
there is no way to do it, and the people of this province 
understand that there’s no way to do it. I say, $140 million worth 
of revenue that after privatization is going to be decreased, and 
decreased substantially, is not the way to be operating. 
 
The people of this province demand the services that they’ve 
become accustomed to, and no one can blame them for that. They 
demand a decent system of health care and a decent system to 
educate their children. They demand a system of taxation that 
will allow them to keep their homes and drive their vehicles. And 
I say that this government is moving in just the opposite 
direction. 
 
And I said we support this Appropriation Bill with reservation. I 
want to talk about what was in for small business. What was in 
this budget for small business? And I say to you — nothing. 
 
When I talked to the truckers around this province who were 
asking for some relief from the unfair gas tax that  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

567 
 
 

they imposed upon them, that were promised in 1982 they were 
never going to see, what they tell me is that coupled with the 
deregulation of the trucking industry, this government is forcing 
them out of business. 
 
And the members opposite might want to start talking to some of 
those small truckers who are losing their businesses, people who 
have served their communities and their province for 30 and 40 
years. Because I want to say that I’ve been speaking to them and 
they’re another group who are dissatisfied, disgusted, and are 
rejecting the policies of this PC government under the leadership 
of this Premier. 
 
My colleague from Quill Lakes was indicating this government’s 
lack of openness, and he was referring to the fact that the 
auditor’s report is not available to the people of this province so 
that we can closer scrutinize the kind of spending and the kind of 
mismanagement that they’ve perpetrated upon the people. 
 
They’re afraid to go to the people with the facts and the true 
figures. They’re afraid to let the people know just how bad their 
record of mismanagement has been. And the people of this 
province won’t forgive them. 
 
The kind of waste when you see $8 million worth of commercial 
space empty, sitting vacant, and being paid for out of general 
revenue; that’s not the kind of government that they promised to 
deliver. But I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the kind of 
government that they have delivered. 
 
They indicated in this budget they were going to address the 
problem of the business tax. They tell the municipal governments 
they’ve got $10 million — ah, but there’s some conditions. What 
are the conditions? The conditions are that you find out of your 
revenue another $10 million to alleviate the business community 
of 50 per cent of that tax, of the $40 million worth of taxation 
through the business tax. 
 
(1515) 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nowhere in that budget address did 
they give the municipal governments any indication that there 
would be funds in order to do that. Well what’s their answer? 
How do you do it? We’ll privatize services. 
 
Administrators in the cities and in the towns across this province 
have told this government that privatization isn’t going to bring 
extra revenue or lower costs in terms of delivering services. 
There may be areas and there may be times when that may be the 
case. But as a general rule they’re not going to be able to find the 
matching money in order to remove or reduce this business tax. 
 
So what has the government done? Have we seen any municipal 
revenue-sharing grant increases? Not in this budget — not in this 
budget. Prior to 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a pretty 
consistent thing in the budgets every spring that were delivered 
that you would see an increase, so that the local governments 
didn’t have to increase their taxes to the people that they serve. 
But where is this government going? 
 

This government says, well you find this money, find this $10 
million. Well how do you do it? Do you quit collecting the 
garbage? Do you quit cleaning the streets? Is that their answer? 
Because I tell you, that’s what they’re telling the mayors and the 
municipal governments throughout this province to do. 
 
Are they saying, cut the funding to the school boards and that 
that’s going to enhance the quality of education, and then through 
cutting that money through the school boards you can reduce this 
business tax and find this $10 million? Is that their answer? 
Because I’m telling you that those municipal governments are 
scratching their heads right now, trying to find the $10 million to 
match it to alleviate the business tax problem. 
 
And this government has clearly abrogated its responsibility not 
only in that area — not only in that area. When you look at the 
number of bankruptcies of the small businesses, and what have 
they got? They’ve got a scam, a scheme: you find 10 million; 
we’ll give you 10 million. But they never address the problem as 
to where those governments are going to find that money. 
 
And then to put controls on those governments, to say to these 
governments, well you can quit picking up garbage, that’s 
acceptable — I mean we don’t mind, we don’t mind — or you 
can quit cleaning the streets, or quit your highway  your little 
roads programs in your communities. You can cease all of that, 
like you guys have done provincially. And they can quit 
upgrading their roads in their communities, as you’ve done 
throughout this province, and they can find the money through 
that. 
 
But I say to you, and I say to members opposite, those 
governments in the areas of the different communities in this 
province are not going to forgive you either, because you’re 
placing burdens and hardships on them and you haven’t helped 
them find solutions. 
 
I say to you that time after time after time I’ve heard members on 
the other side of the House stand up and chastise municipal 
governments for being inefficient and not managing their 
communities’ funds properly, and at the same time I say to you 
that we’ve got municipal governments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who 
have done good jobs on behalf of the people of their province. 
 
But while this government chastises municipal governments for 
inefficiencies, what are they doing? A total provincial debt of $11 
billion, a deficit of $3.7 billion now, and this government has the 
audacity to stand up and chastise anyone for mismanagement or 
running an inefficient government. I say to you, shame on the 
members on the other side of this House. 
 
You would want to govern as leaders and you would want to 
show leadership, I would think. And as a senior government to 
municipal governments in this province and to school boards, 
you should be showing some leadership in terms of sound 
economic planning and management. But what do we see? Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this government has demonstrated just the 
opposite from what they’re asking others to do. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

568 
 
 

I see my time is passing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I just want to 
close by saying that of course, as history has, we will be 
supporting this Appropriation Bill, but as the member from Quill 
Lakes said, we do it with some reluctance. We know that the 
wheels of government have to keep turning, and we know that 
this government needs an awful lot more money than they’ve 
been able to generate, consistently year after year after year. But 
as I said, we’ll be supporting this Bill. 
 
But I, Mr. Speaker, would want to say that I do it with a great 
degree of reluctance because it doesn’t address the problems, and 
it doesn’t address the issues. And I want to end by saying, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this government has been unfair, they’ve been 
indecent, and they don’t deserve to hold the reins of power in the 
province that all of us hold so dear. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to participate this 
afternoon in the interim supply motion put forward by the 
Minister of Finance, the purpose of which is to provide funding 
to the government to continue operations until such time as the 
actual budget that’s been prepared by the Minister of Finance has 
been passed by the due process of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just since October of 1986 we’ve seen a great deal 
of changes in the face of Saskatchewan, in this province. The 
changes have been harsh, cruel, and unusual as to what 
Saskatchewan people have grown to expect from their 
government, whether it be a government of the years of Tommy 
Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd, or the years of the late Ross 
Thatcher, or the years of government under Allan Blakeney as 
leader of the New Democrats. They always had some 
appreciation for compassion and understanding, and there was 
always at least some semblance of a planned economy and a 
planning process for budgets in the administration of the 
province. 
 
This is no longer the case. We have in Saskatchewan a very 
vicious attack on medical care. We find a government that wants 
to limit essential medical services to people. It seems strange. It’s 
not only because of people’s income in some instances; even 
people with the resources, the income to be able to afford good 
quality health service, find it difficult to attain in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You look at the waiting lists throughout the province, and some, 
depending on the month and the figures, some 11,000 to 15,000 
people — they’re on waiting lists that can’t get into hospitals for 
surgery — some cases elective surgery, granted. But the waiting 
lists are far too long to have people suffer the harsh reality that 
this government has cut funding so badly in health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan that people are no longer receiving the 
health care that they were used to in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Even the Saskatchewan Medical Association and physicians 
throughout the province are deeply disturbed with this 
government. They’re deeply disturbed by the  

capping of fees that are available for doctors to be paid out under 
the great medicare program that has been established in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It ended up in a court case, and the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association won the court case. 
 
The judicial system in our land ruled in favour of the physicians 
and medical practitioners. They ruled that the government, this 
Conservative government, had no right to say that there was only 
this much available for medical care regardless of how serious 
people’s medical problems may be or may become in the 
province. 
 
Well, the Saskatchewan government wasn’t happy with that. 
They’ve appealed the case, and the appeal is scheduled to be 
heard, or may have been heard at this point in time. I believe it 
has been heard at this point in time, but as yet the judgement has 
not been handed down on the appeal. 
 
So they have not only attacked the people who are on fixed 
incomes in the province, they’ve attacked almost everyone in the 
province. I believe it was Senator Davey Steuart that once said in 
this House — and it would apply to the government opposite — 
Davey Steuart, at one time, said after the defeat, I think it was, of 
the Liberal government in the province of Saskatchewan, that if 
there was a group in the province or an individual that wasn’t 
mad at them, it’s because they haven’t talked to them. 
 
Certainly this government has touched so deeply so many people 
in the province that there is a massive group out there that is just 
waiting for the opportunity to go to the polls in a general election 
and soundly defeat the government of the member from Regina 
St. south, the member from Estevan, and that day will come soon. 
At least in terms of a smaller test, we have the by-elections in 
Regina Elphinstone, and Saskatoon Eastview where I would 
predict, and I’m sure that the government’s polling would show, 
there’s going to be a very sound defeat of the Conservative 
candidates in both of the by-elections that are going to the polls 
on May 4 in this province. 
 
That will just be a small picture of what’s going to happen to this 
government when you’re brave enough to again go before the 
polls and go before the Saskatchewan people in a general election 
in this province. 
 
You see, first you came after working people — and in particular 
you can use dental therapists. And you didn’t care, you didn’t 
care that you destroyed a part of the medical care program in the 
province of Saskatchewan. You viciously attacked about 400 
dental therapists, took them into rooms across the province and 
told them that their jobs were being abolished, the program that 
they had developed as the best dental program anywhere in the 
world, and you destroyed it — you absolutely destroyed it. 
 
But it wasn’t just enough to attack medicare and the dental 
therapists and the school-based children’s dental program. Then 
you targeted at the sick and the elderly. You attacked the sick and 
the elderly because you destroyed the prescription drug plan in 
the province of Saskatchewan. You decimated that drug plan in 
the province of Saskatchewan so that those that are on  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

569 
 
 

limited incomes and those that are disabled and those that rely on 
prescription drugs, especially the elderly in many cases, can’t 
afford to take the drugs that they need — drugs prescribed by 
their family physician or by some specialist within the province. 
They have to make a choice between buying food or buying their 
drugs or paying another bill. 
 
We never thought we’d see the day in this great province where 
people would have to priorize their spending to decide whether 
they’re going to take care of their health or to take care of some 
other necessity. 
 
People in this province always felt, and justly should feel, 
because of the precedent was set in the past, that you had equal 
care for medical care and you had equal access to drugs 
regardless of what your income is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And this government has no compassion, no 
compassion whatsoever. 
 
And you didn’t stop. After you went after the dental therapists, 
and after you went after the seniors, and after you went after the 
disabled, you went after public ownership in the province of 
Saskatchewan. You don’t want to call it public participation 
really; that’s what you call it for the public, because the polling 
shows that, and that’s what rules the governing party of the day 
in the province of Saskatchewan. The polling shows that the 
phrase “public participation” is popular, so you created a 
Department of Public Participation. 
 
But it’s not really a Department of Public Participation, it’s 
piratization; it’s destruction of the public institutions and Crown 
corporations that have been built up over the years in the 
province. There’s been examples talked about in this legislature, 
and I can offer you those examples again because they’re worth 
repeating, in case there’s some people that haven’t heard about 
it. 
 
(1530) 
 
What about Saskatchewan Minerals, the first Crown corporation 
in the province of Saskatchewan, established in 1947; established 
to get a share of the resource revenue which had previously been 
lost, completely lost from the province. Because we weren’t 
getting that fair share, Sask Minerals was set up. They started off 
in the sodium sulphate mines in around the Chaplin area and they 
did an excellent job. Between the years 1947 and present, as far 
as I know, Sask Minerals only one year — only one year — had 
a loss. Every other year they made a profit to go into the programs 
that people in Saskatchewan had come to appreciate. 
 
And what did they do through the Department of Public 
Participation, Mr. Chairman? Maybe some of the members 
opposite would like to say what they did. They sold the sodium 
sulphate division of Sask Minerals for twelve and a half million 
dollars. Twelve and a half million dollars to whom? To the 
people of Saskatchewan? No, it wasn’t to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They sold it to one company from Toronto in 
partnership with another company from Quebec. Participation 
from Toronto and  

Quebec — hardly public participation for people within the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it wasn’t just enough to go after the dental therapists, and to 
go after the disabled, and to go after the seniors. They’re so 
desperate for funding they’re going after the revenue-generating 
mechanisms of public ownership that we’ve had in the province 
of Saskatchewan to pay off the short-term debt in terms of a big, 
long-term loss for people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What else do you want to do to try and raise money? You’re 
deceiving people in Saskatchewan by saying free trade is going 
to be good for us over a long period of time. Are you going to 
debate free trade at some point in this legislature? They’re afraid 
to debate free trade in this legislature because they know the 
people of Saskatchewan will see it as another nail in the coffin 
— another nail in the coffin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Free trade is nothing more and nothing less 
than a sell-off, very rapid sell-off of Saskatchewan’s resources to 
pay for the staggering debt that’s been run up by this and the 
previous Minister of Finance in the province of Saskatchewan — 
just staggering debts. 
 
What’s free trade going to do? Is free trade going to help 
agriculture and add to manufacturing, add to manufacturing in 
the province of Saskatchewan? The government says yes, and the 
member from Yorkton over there is saying yes. It’ll help 
manufacturing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well let’s look at the facts, because I think what they’re saying 
are contrary to the facts. We’ve had relatively free trade, or we 
have had free trade in farm machinery for years. For years we’ve 
had free trade in farm machinery between the United States and 
Canada. How many manufacturers are there now of major farm 
machinery in — not only Saskatchewan; in Canada? I ask the 
members opposite: how many manufacturers of farm machinery, 
in which we’ve had free trade for a number of years, how many 
are there in Saskatchewan? Silence. How many are there in 
Canada? Silence. 
 
There are zero manufacturers of farm machinery in Canada, and 
we’ve had free trade for a number of years. So how is free trade 
going to help manufacturing in the province of Saskatchewan  
(inaudible interjection)  You want to participate in the debate? I 
hear some of the members clacking over there now. You 
wouldn’t answer the questions when I posed them to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The member opposite, in his remarks just 
now presently, indicated that he heard members opposite 
clapping — truly not a very factual statement. There was absolute 
silence. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The point of order is not well taken. It’s a 
dispute  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. It’s a dispute  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

570 
 
 

between two members, and the debate will continue. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you. Thank you for your very accurate 
ruling, Mr. Chairman. Obviously something of what I’m saying 
is getting to the members opposite, and I’m glad that they have 
been listening. I thought they were trying to participate in part of 
the debate here today, but we see no one rising on that other side 
to participate in the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how about going back to this free trade again? 
What’s going to happen when the Americans say to us, we don’t 
have medicare in the United States of America — our great 
friends to the south. But you have medicare up there in Canada 
— incidentally, which started in the province of Saskatchewan 
— and you’ve got to develop this level playing field. So if that 
comes about, what assurance have we got that this government 
will stand and defend medicare in the province of Saskatchewan? 
None whatsoever. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Look at the record. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Members are saying, look at the record. 
Members opposite and former members of that same political 
party said that medicare was a sacred trust. But look what you’ve 
done to the dental program. Look what you’ve done to the drug 
program in the province of Saskatchewan. And I maintain, when 
the Americans say it’s unfair for you to have a medicare program 
and we don’t, you’ll knuckle under like you’ve knuckled under 
to the Mulroney government in Ottawa, and will knuckle under 
to the American government to the south of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker  Mr. Chairman — we’re in the Committee of 
Finance; you’ll have to excuse me if I keep calling you Mr. 
Speaker. But, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to a debate on free 
trade in this legislature so that the people can see the devastation 
that’ll be brought about by a thoughtless plan by a thoughtless 
government. 
 
The only plan that’s taken place by this government is public 
opinion polling. And that’s obvious through the deficits that have 
been created over a number of years. In fact, every year since this 
government has come into office, they’ve created just horrendous 
debts for the people in this province. 
 
Addressing in more particular, I’d like to move to agriculture. In 
many ways, Mr. Chairman, the biggest surprise, and likely the 
most bitter disappointment for the agricultural community, was 
what the spending in the budget is not going to do. There’s 
nothing really for Saskatchewan agriculture; there’s nothing for 
Saskatchewan family farms; there’s nothing for rural 
communities. There’s nothing for our number one industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan — agriculture — our number one 
industry. And you’re watching it go down the tubes. 
 
Again, I want to talk about a lack of planning from the members 
opposite — lack of planning, where you have put billions of 
dollars into the farm economy through thoughtless kinds of 
programs, in many instances, which farmers were appreciative of 
because they needed the money. After all of those expenditures 
in previous years,  

we have a worse problem now than what we had in the years 
when that money was being put in — absolutely no plan. 
 
In the budget, Mr. Chairman, and I quote, they promised to 
address two central issues facing our farm community — low 
commodity prices and high debt. That’s what they promised. 
What are they going to do? Nothing, no action whatsoever, no 
action there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the throne speech before the budget, they virtually ignored 
those problems. There was no mention, no plan put in place. And 
I’d ask the members opposite, what have you got for contingency 
plans for the drought situation in southern Saskatchewan? 
 
You must be aware that there is a water supply problem in the 
southern part of the province. Any area south of the 
trans-Canada, or if you drew a line from Regina over to the 
Rosetown area, there’s a very serious water supply problem. The 
jury’s still out, I suppose, in terms of agricultural drought, 
because we can’t predict whether there’s going to be spring rains 
or not, but we do know now that there is a very serious problem 
in water supply. 
 
The town of Limerick, which I would hope some of you would 
be aware of because it’s been in the news, has had a water supply 
problem for a few years now. Well last year their dug-out went 
dry, but they were able to pump water into their town dug-out 
from another water supply six miles away, but because the 
problem is worse this year, that water supply that was there last 
year, only six miles away, no longer exists. But what does the 
government do? What does the Minister of Rural Development 
do? They sit by in silence. 
 
They have nothing to offer those people who are facing a very 
serious situation. This isn’t droughts in the Sahara Desert or in 
Bangladesh or even in the sand hills out in the western part of 
Saskatchewan; this is agricultural communities, Mr. Chairman, 
where the government sits by and does nothing. They sit on their 
hands and do nothing to help those rural communities. 
 
I’m told, and the facts will bear it out, that in the hydrometric 
stations across the province — we have some 400 of them; some 
of them established as long as 50 years ago — where they record 
the water supplies, is that this year, in terms of water supply 
drought, is the worst year in recorded history of  since they 
started recording water supplies about 50 years ago. 
 
What is the government going to do about that? Are they going 
to spend part of this appropriation today to assist those 
communities, hundreds of communities, that are facing a very 
serious water supply problem? Not likely, Mr. Speaker, not very 
likely. 
 
In terms of the agricultural budget itself, they say they’re going 
to help agriculture. That’s contrary to the facts. What are they 
going to do? The budget this year cuts $8 million from the 
agricultural budget just looking at the bottom line. If you look at 
what the Department of Agriculture has to pay to the property 
management corporation, it’s much more than $8 million. You 
could likely double that amount if you did an analysis of the  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

571 
 
 

budget. 
 
The government always says that they have no options; well they 
do have options. I hope that some of the members who are 
listening  that there is a water supply problem in southern 
Saskatchewan. And they want to build a dam, the shafferty dam 
project, as it’s become known, and spend a billion dollars, or 
maybe in excess of a billion dollars on that project. 
 
The experts acknowledge that the valley in which they want to 
contain the water is not suitable: it’s not deep enough; it’s not 
steep enough; it’s too wide. The evaporation will not allow water 
to fill up the reservoir, and when there’s no water in southern 
Saskatchewan, how do you expect the reservoir to fill up? 
 
Are you going to spend a billion dollars to create jobs in the 
Premier’s riding and say, to heck with the rest of the citizens who 
can’t get their drugs, can’t get the medical services they need? 
You say, to heck with the people who work in the province of 
Saskatchewan that are uncertain about their jobs, just because of 
political patronage you want to spend in one area. 
 
If the town of Limerick can’t fill up their own little dug-out as a 
water reservoir, how in Heaven’s name do you expect to fill up a 
dam that would take millions and billions of gallons of water to 
fill the reservoir? 
 
Does it mean that you’re going to go ahead with major diversions 
from northern Saskatchewan? You don’t know that, because 
you’ve got no plan. You can only fly by the seat of your pants for 
so long, and there’ll be so many people that are angry with you, 
that you might as well stop functioning as a government because 
you’re not helping anyone. Anyone you touch, you’re hurting. 
 
What about the the last year we had Public Accounts tabled in 
here was the ’85-86 Public Accounts. And to those that may be 
watching on the legislative channel this afternoon, I’d like to say 
that the Public Accounts is very important. The Public Accounts 
is very important because it draws the government to account for 
the money they’ve spent over that particular fiscal year. 
 
And it’s audited by the auditor, the Provincial Auditor, who is 
not an employee of government; he’s not an employee of the 
opposition; he’s an employee of this legislature. He’s the 
watch-dog of the public purse. 
 
(1545) 
 
So the Public Accounts has a great deal of importance, and what 
I was saying was that in the last Public Accounts that we received 
— and we’ve got to remember, this was the Public Accounts that 
didn’t take into consideration the election period where there 
were huge expenditures on advertising to prop up the 
government’s sagging popularity at that time, and it obviously 
worked to some extent because they’re re-elected. In the Public 
Accounts we do have, $20 million was spent on government 
advertising — $20 million spent on government advertising. And 
I would predict that in the election year, the ’86-87 Public 
Accounts, the advertising will be much,  

much higher than that. 
 
Well what would that $20 million alone do? It would put the 
school-based dental program back into effect, if you hadn’t sold 
off all of the equipment. It would put back into place the 
prescription drug plan where people who need those prescription 
drugs would have easy access to them again, instead of having to 
priorize the scarce funds that they do have. 
 
And rural residents want to know why there’s no increase at all 
for revenue sharing for rural municipalities. I was up in the 
constituency of the member from Meadow Lake the past couple 
of weeks for a day or two, and many of the rural municipal roads 
are in worse condition than they’ve been for many, many springs, 
and I would assume it’s because the R.M.s have a scarcity of 
funds. They have to priorize these days — the roads they’re going 
to grade and the roads they’re not going to grade, so that they 
remove the snow from some roads and other roads they don’t 
bother removing the snow from. 
 
In the Department of Highways’ budget, while we’re talking 
about roads, Mr. Speaker, they’ll boast on that side that they’re 
spending about $110 million for highway construction. You 
know, Mr. Chairman that’s I think about $5 million less than the 
last year that Allan Blakeney and the New Democrats were in 
government in the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s going 
back to 1982. So here we are, six years later, and they’re 
spending less money on highways but yet bragging about it. 
 
No, Mr. Chairman, the government opposite doesn’t show either 
the awareness or the sensitivity or have the leadership for people 
in this province to have any confidence in them. The only people 
that may have some confidence left are those people in some of 
the rural areas that haven’t been touched as harshly by the 
government as those that live in rural areas closer to this centre 
of power in Regina, where they like to run everything out of. But 
people in those rural areas will be touched at some point in time 
because of the sheer incompetence of the Minister of Agriculture 
— the sheer incompetence of the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Never before in the history of the province of Saskatchewan has 
any government had a part-time minister of Agriculture. We find 
it hard to believe in the province of Saskatchewan that they 
would have a part-time minister of Agriculture. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Newfoundland, maybe. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — One of the members says, maybe they’d have 
a part-time minister of Agriculture in the province of 
Newfoundland. Well that may be possible, but it is appalling to 
think that we have a part-time Minister of Agriculture in this 
province, where agriculture’s our number one industry. 
 
Myself and my colleagues hear from agricultural groups, on 
many occasions, that can’t get a meeting with the Minister of 
Agriculture — too busy to meet, too busy to meet with farm 
organizations in the province. Well I can understand, and people 
should know that what I’m talking about is that the Minister of 
Agriculture is also the  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

572 
 
 

Premier. 
 
And surely the Premier, you would think, would be a full-time 
job in the province of Saskatchewan, in charge of many 
important programs and an entire government. And yet that 
person wants to be the Minister of Agriculture — a job that they 
might have the expertise to handle, which is questionable, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
But shouldn’t that particular member make a choice? Maybe that 
individual should resign as Premier and become the Minister of 
Agriculture. And I think, if the truth was known, some of the 
members opposite would be happy in that situation, because I 
think that the Premier in the province is losing it. He stands up 
and he rants and he raves in the legislature, and it’s certainly 
unbecoming the office of the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve seen the Premier of this province in the past week stand in 
this legislature and brag, about five or maybe 10 minutes, about 
government programs and what a good job that the province  the 
Conservative government is doing in the province. And then he 
gets off that right away because he knows that anybody listening 
doesn’t believe the rhetoric that’s coming out any more, because 
people know what’s being said is contrary to the facts. But after 
that first five or 10 minutes, the Premier goes on for another hour 
into a tirade of slamming and kicking and screaming at individual 
members on this side of the House, because they don’t want to 
talk about the real issues of health care and education and those 
issues that affect Saskatchewan people. 
 
Well what is the other option that the Premier has in the 
province? If he doesn’t want to resign as Premier, he should 
maybe resign as Minister of Agriculture. Would that be a good 
option? Well on this side of the House we say yes. What do you 
members think over there? The people also say, especially rural 
people, in increasing numbers, that the member from Estevan, 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, should resign as 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
They’re starting to ask questions as to why is he not appointing a 
full-time Minister of Agriculture. Why is he not appointing a 
full-time Minister of Agriculture? Is there no one in the back 
benches who wants to be Minister of Agriculture? Is there anyone 
over there that wants to be Minister of Agriculture? I see a 
number of farmers sitting there this very afternoon, that I would 
have thought would have had the capability. But obviously the 
Premier of the province doesn’t think you have the capability; 
otherwise he would have appointed one of you as a full-time 
Minister of Agriculture. It wouldn’t cost any more in the budget. 
Or is it because of other reasons that we don’t know? People in 
the province think we need a full-time Minister of Agriculture, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I’ll wrap up my comments. I strayed 
a fair bit to number of topics, but I think they are worth 
mentioning. What we have to remember is that the money that’s 
being approved here today — and we’ll support it, as my other 
colleagues have said as they’ve spoke — is because we care 
about the operation of programs that people need in the province. 
And if we didn’t approve the funding, then many people would 
be  

seriously and adversely affected. 
 
But we want to raise those concerns, because so much of the 
money, by this government, is not spent in areas where it should 
be — in areas such as health care, prescription drug plan, the 
dental plan, to decrease the number of people on waiting lists. It 
should be spent on education so we can fund our education 
system properly. It should be spent on the development of the 
province, improving our own economy, instead of the desperate 
struggle by this government to try and get out of the huge, huge 
debt they’ve created by a legacy of mismanagement and 
incompetence and uncaring and unsharing government of the 
Conservatives in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I 
rise today to support the interim supply measure that’s before us. 
All the members on this side will be doing that; it’s normal for 
both sides of the House to support the interim supply measures. 
These measures are basically to ensure that the government has 
enough money to meet its commitments pending the passage of 
the budget and the completion of the estimates. But it should be 
made clear that, even though we support these interim supply 
measures, we do not support the budget, the budget which 
underlies the interim supply measures. 
 
We do not support the budget, because the budget is essentially 
one of increasing the personal property tax load on the people of 
Saskatchewan, while decreasing the services that they normally 
expect to receive for the taxes that they pay. The people of 
Saskatchewan are being asked to expect less in the way of 
services and programs from this PC government, and we cannot 
support that. 
 
We cannot support increased imposition of personal taxes, 
income taxes, the flat taxes, the sales taxes and also of property 
taxes and other charges and fees in our province at a time that the 
government moves to decrease corporation taxes; at a time that 
the government is saying that we really need to level the playing 
field in preparation for free trade and therefore we need to reduce 
corporation taxes; and saying to the people of Saskatchewan, but 
you have to dig deeper into your pocket because somehow, in the 
long run, it’s all going to be better for you. Well people don’t 
believe in those kinds of fanciful theories, even if the members 
opposite do. 
 
The budget reflects also a legacy, a legacy of debt, a legacy of 
wrong decisions, a legacy of massive tax breaks for oil 
companies, a legacy of unfairness. Today, Mr. Chairman 
yesterday we had a retired superannuate, one of 6,000 men and 
women who have worked many long years for the provincial 
government, this person picketing the legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s there today, too. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And he’s here today, picketing the 
legislature because the government opposite says that it’s so 
broke, says that it has no money to provide for a modest  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

573 
 
 

cost-of-living increase for his pension and for the pension of the 
other 6,000 other superannuates in this province. 
 
This is the legacy of that government, a legacy which says that, 
yes, we need to give massive tax breaks to major oil corporations, 
but cannot find the money to provide for a modest increase of the 
pensions of those who have worked for many long, hard years 
for this government, for the Government of Saskatchewan, to 
provide the people of Saskatchewan with competent services and 
programs, services and programs that the people enjoyed. This 
government says, we can’t support that. 
 
The budget essentially says to the people of Saskatchewan that 
we’ve made a mess of things; that we, the PC government, have 
made a mess of things and we want you now, the people of 
Saskatchewan, to pay for the mess we’ve made. That’s what the 
government is saying in this budget, because the government’s 
budget reflects very accurately their very bad decision making, 
their incompetence and their waste in the last number of years. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now I suppose if that’s all the budget said, or if that’s all the 
government said, the government might get some support from 
the public, if that’s all they said. But I think that the public of 
Saskatchewan are reluctant to support this government because 
they see the government continuing to waste; they see the 
government continuing to make any number of bad decisions; 
they see a government that seems to have more money for 
political advertising; they see a government that has more money 
for a large and burgeoning political bureaucracy; they see a 
government that has more money to give away to its corporate 
friends. And notwithstanding the past, when people look at the 
present, and the decisions that you’re making, and when they see 
the budget and the kinds of choices that you’re making in this 
budget, they say that the government is wrong, the government 
cannot be supported. They can’t support a government and a 
budget as long as that government makes dumb, stupid decisions 
— dumb, stupid decisions, as in the case of the SaskPower 
Building in Moose Jaw. 
 
Now this is a case, Mr. Chairman, where the government decides 
to sell a building for $280,000 — sells the building to a friend of 
theirs for $280,000 — sells it to a long-time Tory supporter for 
$280,000. And I won’t get into the fact that the person they sold 
it to is a well-known Tory, or the fact that the building was listed 
for sale only with that person’s spouse. And I won’t get into that; 
that’s beside the point. But the point is, they sell a building for 
$280,000 then they enter into a lease arrangement with the person 
they sold it to, to rent half of the building — half of the building 
— not the whole building, but only half of the building — back 
for $37,000 a year for 10 years, plus one-half of the operating 
costs. 
 
Now I’ve knocked on doors in Elphinstone and I’ve knocked on 
some doors in Saskatoon Eastview and I asked the people that I 
go to; how do you explain this decision of the government? How 
does it make sense to you? And I can’t find one person — one 
person, Mr. Chairman — who says that’s a sound decision; that’s 
a good decision for the people of Saskatchewan; that  

decision reflects fiscal responsibility; that decision reflects 
competence. I can’t find one person — one person — who will 
say to me any of those things. 
 
I don’t think that there is one person in Saskatchewan, I don’t 
think there is one business in Saskatchewan, that would act as the 
government did in that particular instance, because it makes no 
sense. It makes no sense from a business point of view. It makes 
no sense from anyone’s personal point of view to do that. It only 
seems to make sense to a government that has its ideological 
blinkers firmly on, can only see ideology, cannot see straight 
business sense, and is willing to make those decisions. 
 
It’s also a government that sees that it makes sense to favour your 
corporate friends, and it makes sense to favour your political 
cronies, as they did in this case. But again the people of 
Saskatchewan do not see any sense in that particular decision. 
They cannot believe the Deputy Premier when he stands in his 
place in the legislature during question period and says, well 
there’s some advantage to having the cash up front. Pray tell, 
what is the advantage of having the cash up front when you’re 
committed to paying far more than that in the long run? Pray tell, 
what is the advantage? 
 
There is another reason that the people of Saskatchewan cannot 
support this government, and do not support the budget, and 
simply put, Mr. Chairman, it revolves around the question of 
openness and honesty. They see this government as being not 
open and not honest. 
 
In my view and the view of the people of Saskatchewan, if you 
want the support of the people in difficult economic times; if you 
want the support of the people in the face of a crisis such as we 
have in this province when you look at agriculture; if you want 
the support of the people in those kinds of conditions, you must 
show firm, resolute, open, honest leadership. And one of the 
important qualities of leadership is that you’re open and honest 
with those that you attempt to lead. 
 
And that’s what people believe. People will say that we recognize 
there are problems; we recognize and are willing to forgive 
perhaps, at times, bad decisions that you’ve made in the past, but 
only if you level with us now. Tell us the full facts; tell us 
everything that’s going on. Don’t deceive us; don’t lead us on; 
don’t lead us down the garden path. Be open, be honest, let us 
know what’s going on, and in those kinds of conditions we might 
be prepared to follow your leadership because we recognize that 
firm and resolute leadership is necessary in the midst of a crisis. 
It’s necessary in the face of the difficult economic conditions that 
face Saskatchewan. 
 
They do not see that with this government. They do not see a 
government that’s open and honest about all the things they do. 
They see, and they look at question period, and some of the 
public views in to question period. They see a Premier; they see 
ministers that evade, avoid, duck, “filibuster” — well, that’s my 
term for when the Deputy Premier gets up and makes his inane 
comments during question period. It’s nothing short of 
blustering, and he’s trying to filibuster at the same time if you 
look at the fact that he attempts to answer questions,  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

574 
 
 

then says he’ll take notice, gets up the next day and answers the 
question again. It’s a filibuster, and all the time he’s blustering, 
so it’s a combination of the two. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan see a Premier and cabinet 
ministers evading, avoiding, ducking responsibility, and they see 
a government that somehow gives the impression that this is all 
a big joke, that this is the thing to do. These people, this PC 
Government, are settling a new standard for legislative 
responsibility — a new standard. 
 
No longer do you ask a question and expect to get an answer. No, 
the new standard is that if the question’s asked, you find artful 
ways to avoid answering the question in any way, shape, or form. 
That’s the new standard they set — and a standard that’s 
supported by their cronies in the media outlets in this province. 
Because if we look at the reportage of these things, we get a very 
clear impression that that’s fine with the media. They don’t much 
care what the government does, and they seem to support the fact 
that the government tries to avoid and evade and duck 
responsibility. And the media seems to accept this new standard 
of legislative responsibility and accountability. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan know, through watching the 
question period, through watching the proceedings, they know 
that this government is being less than open and honest. And they 
ask: what kind of leadership is that? What kind of leadership is it 
for a premier to be asked a question, to avoid answering the 
question, to evade the question, to make unwarranted attacks on 
others? They say, what kind of leadership is that? Leadership 
that’s required in the light of the crisis that we have in agriculture; 
leadership that’s required in light of the economic conditions that 
face this province. And they say, just what kind of leadership is 
that? 
 
And they ask: what kind of openness and what kind of honesty? 
And I guess the question is: how can the people of Saskatchewan 
have confidence in that type of leadership, Mr. Chairman? — a 
leadership that certainly is not displayed during question period. 
 
And the government members may laugh. They may laugh about 
how artfully they can avoid answering questions. They may 
laugh about that. But let me tell you, the people of Saskatchewan 
will have the last laugh in this matter, and the first chuckle in this 
will be in the by-elections. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Question period, Mr. Chairman, is not the 
only place where this paucity of openness and honesty reveals 
itself. 
 
When you see the record of this Finance minister when it comes 
to tabling Public Accounts, we again see secrecy and a lack of 
honesty. 
 
I might explain that the Public Accounts are a record of the 
government’s spending of the preceding year. It lists all the 
government’s expenditures, and this record is produced to help 
the Assembly to review the spending of  

the government on behalf of the people of the province. That is 
one of the primary functions of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Our job, both sides of the House, is to take those expenditures 
and to ask some questions about whether or not the government 
spent the money of the taxpayers wisely, competently. That’s one 
of the primary functions of this Assembly. 
 
Towards that end, it’s normal, it’s been traditional for Finance 
ministers to table those Public Accounts in good time so that, 
when these records of spending are considered, they might be 
considered in a timely way, that we’re not dealing with records 
of some number of years past, but hopefully, only of a year past. 
That has been the record in this province. 
 
There is a very strong tradition, if you go back the last 40-45 
years, of Finance ministers tabling these Public Accounts with 
the Legislative Assembly so that the Legislative Assembly, 
through the Public Accounts Committee, can get on with the 
business of examining those Public Accounts. There is a record 
of Finance Ministers tabling those Public Accounts before March 
31 of every year; that is, until the current Minister of Finance. 
 
The current Minister of Finance has taken the position that: I 
really don’t care about the traditions of this province; I don’t care 
about the tradition of tabling those Public Accounts on time. And 
what he, in effect, is saying, that I don’t frankly care about the 
public’s right to know how my government spends their 
taxpayers’ dollars; that is what he is, in effect, saying. 
 
This Finance minister last year waited until June to provide the 
Public Accounts. This year — it’s already the middle of May — 
the Finance minister still has not tabled the Public Accounts, and 
there is no reason for that. 
 
People might think, well perhaps they’re still at the printers. 
Perhaps they’re not ready. Well that’s not fact. These Public 
Accounts were printed, they were completed, they were presented 
to the Minister of Finance within the last week. There is no 
reason, there is no excuse that those Public Accounts should not 
be tabled with this Assembly so that the Assembly can do one of 
its major jobs, which is to peruse those accounts, which is to 
peruse this government’s spending. And that has not happened. 
Perhaps this year we’re aiming for another record. 
 
A fine tradition, a fine tradition of accountability through tabling 
the Public Accounts on time has again been sacrificed to meet the 
cynical and political agenda of the Minister of Finance. That is 
what is happening in this province. What the government is in 
effect saying to taking that attitude, by saying that we can table 
the Public Accounts when it suits our purposes, what they are 
saying is that they oppose the right of the public to know, that 
they oppose the right of the public to know how their money has 
been spent, and that they will do everything, everything, throw 
up every conceivable road-block to make it difficult for the 
public to know how their money has been spent. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

575 
 
 

And I say, shame on them, and I think that the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying, shame on them. They say, shame, have 
you no respect at all for the traditions of this Legislative 
Assembly? Have you no respect at all for the traditions of this 
province? Have you no respect for the public’s right to know, and 
have you no respect at all for openness and honesty? Have you 
no respect? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I say that the people of Saskatchewan will 
no longer support your sorry, incompetent display of power; that 
they will no longer support your sorry, incompetent government. 
They cannot support your devious dealings. They can not support 
your sheer cynicism, and they can not support your lack of 
openness and honesty. 
 
We cannot support the budget. We did not support the budget. 
And the reason for that is not only has the government made a 
very great mess of things, and for us to support the budget would 
be to say that we agree with what you’ve done, but 
notwithstanding that, the government continues to act in a silly, 
stupid fashion making stupid decisions, displaying its 
competence and waste every day, displaying every day its 
favouritism for a favoured few. They continue to do that. 
 
(1615) 
 
But I think most importantly of all, and a primary reason why the 
public of Saskatchewan is fed up with this government, is that 
notwithstanding that and notwithstanding a need for firm, 
resolute leadership, this government continues to act as if it does 
not care about openness, does not care about honesty, has no 
regard for the public’s right to know. 
 
And it’s for all those reasons that we have spoken against the 
budget, and we want to make it clear that even if we do supply 
the interim supply Bill, we cannot in any way support the 
financial plan that supports that interim supply, that is to say, the 
budget of the day. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman  (inaudible interjection)  
Mr. Chairman, I hardly had a word out of my mouth when we 
heard from the member from Weyburn. 
 
Now the member for Weyburn, Mr. Chairman, is a closet 
celebrity — he’s a closet celebrity. He’s a person who likes to 
get on the fashion pages of the newspaper. And I see that he’s 
very interested in fashion design, fashion outfit, fashion 
weakness — well I’ve noticed he has a few fashion weaknesses 
— and whose style do you admire, fashion philosophy, and what 
can’t you throw out. This is the fashion summary of the member 
for Weyburn, who before I could get on my feet was beginning 
to respond from his seat. Now I agree, some of his best speeches, 
Mr. Chairman, come from his seat. 
 
Now if the member for Weyburn, who’s the Minister of 
Education, was paying attention to his portfolio, which is  

Education, then he would be doing something about a problem 
that exists in Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
That problem has to do with the technical institute. Just last year 
this minister slashed out of the budget whole sections of that 
technical institute. He slashed out courses where there were 
people lined up and waiting. 
 
And I ask the member for Weyburn, don’t leave the Chamber, 
because I’m going to give you some good advice now. Just hang 
around. You wanted to speak from your seat, and now he’s 
running for cover. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member is not to make reference 
to anyone being in or out of the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I make no reference to 
anybody being in or out of the Chamber. I said the member from 
Weyburn is running for cover, and that’s what he was doing. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order! Is the member 
challenging the Chair? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No. 
 
Mr. Chairman, had the member for Weyburn been paying 
attention to his portfolio, which includes the technical institute in 
Saskatoon Westmount, he would be doing something about 
supporting that institute. However, he’s not. 
 
And as I was saying, he cut large sections out of that technical 
institute last year, as he did all technical institutes in the province, 
when there were waiting lists, long waiting lists of students 
wanting to get into courses in that technical institute. 
 
I have the most recent example, and it’s too bad that the member 
for Weyburn won’t hear this. But here is an ad in the 
Star-Phoenix that appeared on March 26, and this was the fall 
program registration at Kelsey, and it lists a number of courses 
in technologies that students might wish to apply for. 
 
I want to give you some examples, Mr. Chairman, to prove my 
point about the Minister of Education, who is letting the students 
of this province down. I’ll give you three examples: early 
childhood development — there is a room for 20 students in that 
course, an intake of 20 students. There are applications of 130, 
Mr. Chairman — 130 students. Hotel and restaurant 
administration — there is room for 30 students in that course, an 
intake of 30 students. Mr. Chairman, there were 105 applications 
for 30 positions. Personal development worker — there’s room 
for an intake of 20 students in that course and there were 
applications of 75, Mr. Chairman. I suggest to you that that 
member who is always volunteering information from his seat 
would be better advised to pay more attention to the department 
he’s running and not let down the young people of this province. 
 
Not only that, and the early childhood development program, I 
want to say something further about this for the Minister of 
Education’s edification. The early childhood development 
program in year two has a similar low  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

576 
 
 

opportunity for enrolment for second year students, and students 
from all over the province have to travel to one technical institute 
to obtain their second year. They can’t take it in Regina. And the 
second year, Mr. Chairman, as in the first, is over-subscribed. 
 
Now had the member for Weyburn not interfered, as I rose to my 
feet, to make his comments — although he appears more 
interested in coming out of the celebrity closet in fashion — I 
would be saying, Mr. Speaker, and have started off my remarks 
in a general and non-argumentative fashion, as I usually do, to 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, it’s spring, it’s spring again  or Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Spring in Saskatchewan is a very important time. It’s a time of 
hope. It’s a time of new growth. Spring is my most favourite time 
of the year, Mr. Chairman. And as we stand here today discussing 
this interim supply Bill, which is the first one-twelfth of this 
massive budget this government has brought before us, I can’t 
help but think, spring is the most important time of the year to 
me and I know it is to many Saskatchewan people. 
 
I grew up, Mr. Chairman, in rural Saskatchewan; lived on a farm. 
In the spring, on that farm, the first signs were the crows came 
back and there were new green leaves on the trees, new green 
grass and spring flowers. It was a time of hope, Mr. Chairman. 
The birds were returning; there were new kittens and calves and 
colts and lambs on that farm, and it was a great time of the year 
to be there. And best of all, in the spring we drafted the plans on 
our farm — and I know many farmers do in Saskatchewan — for 
the spring, the summer and the fall. 
 
It’s spring in Saskatchewan once more, but in contrast here in 
this legislature, this budget and the interim supply, which we are 
dealing with today, offers no hope and no growth — no hope and 
no growth. And that’s sad for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the first things I noticed about this particular budget is the 
flat tax, the increase in the flat tax, Mr. Chairman. I was looking 
at flat taxes in other provinces, and we have the province of 
Alberta, right next door to Saskatchewan. They have a flat tax in 
the province of Alberta, but it’s not a flat tax on your net income; 
it’s a flat tax on your taxable income. And the consequence of 
that, Mr. Chairman, is that it’s a much fairer tax — if you have 
to make a decision between Saskatchewan’s flat tax by the Tories 
or Alberta’s flat tax by the Tories. 
 
Now what is the Government of Alberta doing this year? Well 
they are cutting their flat tax in half, Mr. Chairman. They’re 
cutting their 1 per cent flat tax in half. What are we  What is the 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan doing? It’s boosting 
their flat tax up to 2 per cent of net income, so that person with a  
people with a family income of $25,000 will now be paying $500 
of flat tax that they weren’t paying under a New Democratic 
government a few short years ago. 
 
And if a person has a little higher income, middle income, 
earning $35,000 a year, they will be paying $700 a year more, 
Mr. Chairman, in flat tax which they didn’t pay under a New 
Democratic government. 
 

Here, right before our eyes, the clipping from the Star-Phoenix, 
March 25, ’88 says: “The province of Alberta is cutting its flat 
tax in half.” Their flat tax was $411 last year for this family of 
four with $40,000-a-year income; they’re cutting that in half. 
 
I never thought, Mr. Chairman in my life in this legislature that I 
would ever look to the province of Alberta for a more liberal 
approach to taxation than this province. But here it’s happened 
— the province of Alberta cutting their flat tax in half; 
Saskatchewan jacking their flat tax up every single year since it 
was introduced, Mr. Chairman, a half a per cent every year, going 
from one-half of 1 per cent to 2 per cent every year, and every 
year this government, through its mismanagement and waste, 
getting deeper and deeper in debt. 
 
This spells mismanagement on a colossal scale to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to see through this flimflam of 
government advertising that we were subjected to this winter and 
spring about how well they’re doing running the province. 
They’re going to see through that, and in the by-election in 
Saskatoon and Regina they’re going to send this Minister of 
Finance and this Premier a message that they’re dissatisfied with 
that performance. 
 
I said that there is no hope and no growth in this particular 
budget. Well one of the areas that there is growth in the province 
of Saskatchewan, even though I said there is no hope and no 
growth, is the area of food banks. In this area this government 
has been a very successful government, in a negative sense. 
 
Where we had no food banks since we had the last Conservative 
government, over 50 years ago, Mr. Chairman — the last food 
lines were under a Conservative government over 50 years ago 
— this government has turned the clock back successfully. So 
now we have food lines again. 
 
And the Minister of Social Services, labour, women, native 
affairs, etc. etc., stands in this House and suggests there is no 
problem. He says, show me your hungry and I’ll feed them. Well 
there’s a school lunch program in the inner schools in Saskatoon, 
and all we need to do is send the minister to that program and 
say, get the names of those children that are on that school lunch 
program. All we need to do is get the names of the people at the 
four food banks in Saskatchewan, send them to the Minister of 
Social Services, and tell him: there’s your names and addresses; 
deal with the problem. But no, the Minister of Social Services 
talks around it in a technical manner so that he ignores, he is able 
to ignore in his mind that there is a problem existing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well even the food banks, even the food banks under the 
government are having some problem, because the lines are 
getting unmanageable. The long lines at the food banks are 
becoming unmanageable because there is not enough supply 
there to address the problem. And yet our Minister of Social 
Services has his head in the sand; he can’t see that there is a 
problem. 
 
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

577 
 
 

I mentioned at another time in this House, Mr. Chairman, that the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the first time in my lifetime in 
Saskatoon, did a feature story several pages long on hunger — 
hunger in Saskatoon. They know the problems there. The 
reporters of the Star-Phoenix know the problems there. But 
somehow or other, the Minister of Social Services cannot get 
through his head that there’s a problem. 
 
(1630) 
 
Unemployment. Well the Minister of Labour also attempts at all 
times to gloss around the problem of unemployment. 
Unemployment in Saskatoon city is a very serious problem. It’s 
still  the province has about 41,000 people unemployed. 
Saskatoon  
 
An Hon. Member: — Forty-five thousand. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It’s probably risen. Saskatoon, 12 per cent 
unemployment — one of the highest of major cities in Canada. 
And the minister has an interesting explanation for that. He says, 
well, the people are flooding in from all over Canada, and they’re 
filling up the city with unemployed people. Well that may wash 
with some people, but it’s not going to wash with the people in 
Saskatoon, because they’re catching on to this Minister of 
Labour. They’re catching on to him. 
 
Something that is growing in the province of Saskatchewan are 
deficits, and these have been growing for some time in 
Saskatchewan, and they continue to grow — $328 million in this 
particular budget. And the debt, the consequences of that, is an 
accumulated government debt of $3.7 billion. 
 
Despair, despair is growing vigorously in this province, and this 
PC government, Mr. Chairman, this PC government has this 
province frozen in a progressively more conservative winter of 
despair with each new budget. Seven times they tried, Mr. 
Chairman, and seven times they’ve failed. 
 
Remember, Mr. Chairman, before 1982 there were 11 successive 
budget surpluses under a New Democratic government, a record 
of management of the resources of this province which is 
unequalled — unequalled in the history of this province. Does 
that concern the government, that the deficit has risen to $3.7 
billion? It does not seem to, but it certainly concerns me, Mr. 
Chairman, and it concerns some of the people that I’ve had the 
opportunity to talk to in Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
But the Premier has other priorities. He has his own set of 
priorities, and the deficit and the budget debt is not part of his 
problem, doesn’t seem to faze him at all. His priorities are 
appointing 11 legislative secretaries in the government back 
benches who obtain $7,000 a year each plus expenses over and 
above what they receive as an MLA. There’s no necessity 
whatsoever for 11 legislative secretaries on the government side. 
As a matter of fact, if the Premier had a free hand of it, he’d 
probably appoint them all legislative secretaries, but I must admit 
he’s controlled himself a bit. 
 
There are actually six people on the government side that  

aren’t receiving remuneration in excess of their MLA pay; there 
are actually six left there that the Premier hasn’t got to. Now the 
Premier backed off on legislative secretaries; I’ll be fair to him. 
It was up to 15, the most that anybody had ever had in the 
province of Saskatchewan. But the Premier was leading into 
election, and he said, look we’ve got to show some restraint here, 
we’ve got to make a public example. So he slashed out some of 
the legislative secretaries; you know, get rid of the waste and fat 
on the back benches. And that was before the election. After the 
election it was up to nine again, and then up to 10, and now it’s 
up to 11. With any kind of adherence to the priorities that the 
Premier has, soon he’ll have those other six on the government 
side appointed as legislative secretaries. However, I suspect that 
he’ll hold off the appointment of any further legislative 
secretaries until after the May 4 date when the by-elections are 
over, because he wouldn’t want to have that interfere with his 
election campaign. 
 
And the Premier has some other priorities as well; he has put 11, 
at least 11 former MLAs, most of them being defeated cabinet 
ministers, on the government payroll at high rates — on the 
government payroll. 
 
At the same time, the Premier’s saying to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, pull in your belts, the tough times are ahead, 
we’ve all got to sacrifice. But he’s managed to put at least 11 
defeated MLAs, most of them cabinet ministers, on the payroll. 
And you’ll recognize their names, they’re household words 
around Saskatchewan: Schoenhals, Sandberg, Katzman, Currie, 
Domotor, Embury, Dirks, and the list goes on. I haven’t named 
them all — the list goes on. 
 
This government, who’s asking us for interim supply of over 
$350 million right on this Bill that’s before us now, Mr. 
Chairman continues to spend millions of taxpayers’ dollars on 
wasteful, self-congratulatory media ads. This government is 
wasting, in addition to that, $34,000 a day on unleased  or leased, 
unused office space. Right in Saskatoon, Mr. Chairman, the 
Premier, while he was on this public appeal to the public of 
Saskatchewan to support him in this time of restraint, increased 
the size of the cabinet office in Saskatoon by 50 per cent — 50 
per cent increase in the cabinet office. The Premier says, do as I 
say, don’t do as I do, and that’s not good enough for the people 
in Saskatoon and Regina and elsewhere in this province. 
 
I want to know why, why this government has that kind of 
extravagance, why they’re increasing taxes. They’re increasing 
taxes, the flat tax being one of them, because they want to 
continue this extravagance, which they initiated a number of 
years ago, on into the future, regardless of the by-elections. They 
want to have the money there so that they can spend it — your 
taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How will these excesses of this government be paid for? Well the 
flat tax — that’s going to pay for some of it — that’s $500 people 
aren’t paying now, or are paying now that they weren’t paying a 
few short years ago; the sales tax, last year boosted from 5 to 7 
per cent; the new gasoline tax, which has heaped untold burdens 
on municipal governments and school boards in this  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

578 
 
 

province — untold burdens of taxation — which they in turn, of 
course, Mr. Chairman, shift to the municipal taxpayer. And the 
municipal government gets the name of the bad boy for raising 
taxes, and this government attempts to get off scot-free because 
they didn’t raise the tax. They let the municipal government do 
it. 
 
This government, at the same time, has increased at least 234 
other fees and charges. Good examples would be birth and 
marriage and death certificates; all increased 50 per cent by this 
government. 
 
And I see by the paper here, a discussion  a report on — this is 
yesterday’s Leader-Post — a report on the discussion of the 
possible increase to Saskatchewan Government Insurance rates, 
which the minister says: 
 

Might be necessary and are under consideration, (said the) 
minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). 

 
Now the minister waffles on the subject in the question period, 
suggests that, well, yes, it’s under consideration, but we really 
haven’t decided anything yet. 
 
Well the people are not so naïve as that, Mr. Minister. They know 
there was a leaked cabinet document last winter which says the 
surcharge on SGI rates is going to be $25 a person — $25 
surcharge. And all the minister in charge of SGI, in the question 
period yesterday, was doing was attempting to divert the 
attention of the taxpayers of this province from the fact that he’s 
going to put a $25 surcharge on SGI. But he’s going to hold off 
until May 4 — until May 4. And that’s not good enough. 
 
While these cuts are being made and these increases have been 
made in these taxation fields and fees that the government 
charges, cuts are being made in worthwhile programs, such as the 
school-based dental program for children and the prescription 
drug plan. 
 
The prescription drug plan tax is a sick tax. It is only paid by sick 
people. No one else pays it; just the sick pay that tax. That is a 
sick tax which has an annual $125 a person deductible, which 
they must pay before they get anything returned from the 
purchase of prescription drugs, and thereafter there is a 20 per 
cent deterrent fee on all prescriptions — all from a government 
who took the pledge, who took the pledge that they would take 
any kind of deterrent or fee off the prescription drug plan a few 
short years ago. They took the pledge and they put it in writing 
and it was signed, ironically enough, by the Minister of Finance, 
the person who’s now the Minister of Finance. But they’ve 
forgotten about that pledge, and they have put the deterrent fee 
on the prescription drug plan. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Finance, when he’s asking us for 
interim supply, that we’re not happy, we’re not happy with the 
fact that he has this deterrent fee on the people of Saskatchewan. 
I know it is a burden to the people of Saskatoon Westmount. 
There is no doubt about it, because I get their complaints in my 
MLA office all the time, regularly. 
 
They’re having  and the people in Saskatoon  

Westmount are really excited about that coloured envelope they 
have in the prescription drug plan that puts them in the fast lane 
to get their 80 per cent back after they’ve paid their 125 
deductible. 
 
And the people I’m concerned about in Westmount, Mr. 
Chairman, are the people that are on low income and middle 
income who have serious medical problems for which drugs have 
to be prescribed. And it’s not as if these people sort of pluck this 
prescription out of mid-air and say, I must have that. What 
happens is they go to a professional person, a doctor; the doctor 
prescribes a certain drug. They go to another professional person, 
the pharmacist, and the pharmacist fills the prescription. So these 
people have nothing to do with generating this sick tax they have 
to pay. 
 
It’s a fact of life that some people have medical problems that 
require prescription drugs. And I say to the government of this 
province that the health of all the people is important. We should 
keep the standard of health care up in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Once you let that standard slip, the whole health 
care system slips as this government has allowed. 
 
I say to this government, on the request for interim supply of 
$350 million, that this government has to change its priorities. I 
don’t think we’re going to get an overnight conversion; I think it 
will come slowly as we move towards the next provincial 
election. 
 
And there’ll be a perceptible change in their attitude after the 
by-elections are out of the way. I saw it in Regina North East. 
After the by-election was out of the way, but before the 
provincial election, the New Democrats won a resounding 
victory in Regina North East, and the Premier stood up and he 
was repentant; he was repentant and sad. And he said, I’ve heard 
the message. I’m listening, he said. And he made some changes; 
he made a few cosmetic changes. But after the election was over, 
the Premier forgot his repentance and he was back at it again. He 
was back at doing what he knows best, and that’s socking it to 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has to change its priorities, slash its patronage, 
cease renting excess office space from their friends, stop 
give-aways to outside corporations. None of the suggestions are 
about to be implemented by this government at this time. They 
have a blind commitment to an outdated ideology which is 
wrecking Saskatchewan’s economy and wrecking 
Saskatchewan’s social programs. That’s not good enough for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to speak a bit more about the 
economy of Saskatchewan, because I’m concerned about what 
this government is or isn’t doing. I’d take a look at housing starts, 
and never has a government spent more advertising dollar, 
taxpayers’ dollar, on advertising a program than the housing 
program, the home program. 
 
They got so excited about the possibility of having a by-election 
in Saskatoon Eastview that they started running the home ad in 
the Saskatoon newspapers, on the  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

579 
 
 

radio, and on the television. It was on television ad nauseam. It 
was on the radio all the time, and it was in the paper on an almost 
daily basis for at least a month. This is a home ad. And I suggest 
to you that they were feeling sensitive about the fact that they had 
no winter works program. 
 
So they did lots of advertising. Now that has some benefit for the 
media people who receive a fee for doing the advertising. It 
doesn’t have any benefit for the taxpayers who have to foot the 
bill for this government’s advertising. 
 
And you know, they might have got away with it — they might 
have got away with this advertising, but the fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Chairman, they only did the radio ads, the newspaper ads, 
and the television ads in Saskatoon — in Saskatoon — because 
they suspected the by-election was coming and they wanted to 
tell the people what a great winter works program they had — 
the home program. Well that kind of duplicity and waste of 
taxpayers’ dollars becomes nauseous to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
How are they doing at housing starts? Well I have the housing 
starts figures here from CMHC, Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation, and these figures go back to 1977 and come up to 
1987, so it covers a 10-year period. And just by way of 
calculation, Mr. Chairman, I took the last three years of a New 
Democratic government, ’79, ’80, and ’81, and I added up the 
figures for housing starts, and I averaged it out for those three 
years. And I did the same for the last three years of this 
Conservative government, for a comparison sake, and this is 
what I found out. 
 
The last three years of the New Democratic government, the 
housing starts  (inaudible interjection)  There’s the member for 
Weyburn chirping from his feet this time. He’s standing in the 
back, and the people of Saskatchewan  I wonder if he went out to 
check on what’s happening at Kelsey Institute, because the 
member for Weyburn has certainly let the people of Saskatoon 
down in Kelsey Institute, and every place in Saskatchewan that 
has a technical institute. He’s slashed programs out of there that 
were good programs for Saskatchewan people and meant 
something, not only to urban areas, but to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m glad to see that the member for Weyburn, from his 
position, whatever it may be at this time, has apparently looked 
into this and wants to report to the House. And I’ll look forward 
to his comments on this interim supply Bill after I sit down. But 
unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to listen to his 
comments in the middle of my speech. 
 
I was talking before I was interrupted, Mr. Chairman, about the 
housing starts in the province of Saskatchewan. This 
government’s been going around the province all over saying 
what a great job they’re doing on housing starts. Well, the last 
three years of New Democratic government in this province the 
housing starts averaged 7,988 housing starts a year, per year; the 
last three years of the Conservative government they averaged 
5,253.  

Now that is a difference of 2,735 housing starts less in the 
average of the last three years of our government and the last 
three years of this government. 
 
This government has fallen down miserably on housing and 
housing starts in the province of Saskatchewan. But the costs go 
marching on; the costs go marching on, yes, sir. 
 
Inflation in Saskatoon is tops in Canada: power rates increased 
January 1; gas and electricity to cost more; basic telephone rates 
hiked; housing starts down 69 per cent. This is a clipping from 
the Star-Phoenix, February 13, ’88; this is not my report. It says: 
“Urban housing starts in Saskatchewan were down 69 per cent in 
January compared to the same month a year ago.” So it’s not as 
if we’re comparing apples to oranges. We’re comparing lemons 
to lemons here. The government’s housing policy the previous 
year, which was a lemon, and the government’s housing starts 
this year, which is another lemon — down 69 per cent in January 
of this year compared to January of the previous year. 
 
And this government has the audacity, in its advertising which 
the taxpayers are paying for, to tell them that they’ve got a 
vibrant housing industry in Saskatchewan. Not true, not true, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I want to touch on another area, the unemployment area, which 
is a direct consequence of some of the folly of this government. 
The unemployment situation in Canada is 7.8 per cent 
unemployed; in Saskatchewan, 7.9 — higher than the national 
average; Saskatoon, 12 per cent, Saskatoon, 12 per cent — a 
dismal performance by this government. 
 
Now the government had said: we’re doing a great job; we’re 
doing a great job in the economy of the province — industry, 
development of different plants in the province. Well there is 
perceptible movement there, Mr. Chairman, but unfortunately 
the perceptible movement is in the downward fashion. 
 
And I just got a few clippings here. And this starts in January — 
these are all this year, Mr. Chairman — January 2, ’88: “Regina 
paper bag plant to close.” And that particular plant would put a 
number of people on the unemployment line — 43 people, 43 
people. That’s January. March: “Westeel laying off 27 
employees” — March 2, ’88, Star-Phoenix. Again, April 4, ’88: 
“Stores closing. Buy-Rite Furniture will close its Regina and 
Moose Jaw stores.” It’s all going in the wrong direction: I speak 
to the appropriate ministers in charge of the economy and 
industrial development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Another clipping, April 2, 1988: “Eaton’s closing store, ending a 
45-year run.” You know, some of the greatest years that Eaton’s 
had in those stores in this province were under a New Democratic 
government — some of the greatest years that Eaton’s ever had. 
And not only that, not only that — Mr. Chairman, I want you to 
hear this — last year Eaton’s closed similar outlets in Weyburn 
and Swift Current. 
 
And I wonder what the vocal member for Swift Current has got 
to say about Eaton’s closing their store in  
  



 
April 14,1988 

 

580 
 
 

Weyburn? Maybe I can hear from the member for Weyburn when 
he rises to speak in this debate, as I’m sure he will. 
 
Well I have some more things that I want to report, that I want to 
report on to the member for Weyburn, and I should take a few 
more minutes to do it. 
 
There is some growth in the economy of Saskatchewan. I 
mentioned before the food banks. And another one is the 
liquidators. Now the liquidators are having a field day out there. 
And I have a liquidator ad here. I could have had a stack of 
advertisements for liquidators several inches high, Mr. 
Chairman. But this is a bankruptcy liquidation, and there’s been 
many of them, just in Westmount constituency — many 
liquidations in Westmount constituency. This particular one is in 
Westmount constituency and it’s in Westgate Plaza on 22nd Street 
West. So you can see, Mr. Chairman, that the government, with 
its policies, and with the attention it pays to development in the 
province, has a lot of the economy going in the wrong direction. 
 
But people in Saskatchewan are going to get a chance to direct 
their attention to that very shortly when the by-elections occur, 
and the government will get a report on the situation at that time. 
 
I mentioned earlier some of the fees and charges that have 
increased. I have my tax bill here for my residence in Saskatoon, 
Mr. Chairman. And I also have here a photocopy of the last 
property improvement grant I got, and that was in 1983 — the 
last property improvement grant — for $230. And that’s gone, 
Mr. Chairman, and in its place we have here, I have my actual 
tax bills here, 1986 and 1987, the increase was — no change in 
the assessment; the land, the buildings were assessed the same, 
were the same both years — between ’86 and ’87 the taxes rose 
about $80 — about $80. 
 
And I suspect, Mr. Chairman, when the city of Saskatoon gets 
through the ringer that this government’s putting them through 
with this budget, that the tax increase will be at least that much 
for this residence again, with no change in assessment, and that’s 
unfortunate. 
 
The government makes its choices, and we’ll take the penalty if 
there is a penalty to be invoked on them. But when they make 
their choices, I wish they’d make them for people inside the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve been looking at the situation with regard to one Peter 
Pocklington. Peter Pocklington  It’s always interesting, Mr. 
Chairman, because he must be a special friend of the member for 
Souris-Cannington, because every time Peter Pocklington’s 
name is mentioned in this House, it brings an immediate response 
from the member from Souris-Cannington. And I can understand 
that. I can understand that when you get near the nerve it gets 
more sensitive, and we’re near the nerve with this one. 
 
And this clipping, Mr. Chairman, was March 28, 1988, which is 
a very recent clipping, and it’s about Mr. Pocklington receiving 
a loan or a line of credit from the treasury branches in Alberta — 
$100 million line of credit. Now this is one pretty smart private 
enterpriser;  

this is one pretty smart private enterpriser. 
 
I’ve got to hand it to Peter Pocklington. He comes into 
Saskatchewan, and he talks the Premier of Saskatchewan into 
giving him a $20 million hand-out. He’s a private enterpriser, but 
he’s always with his hand out, always with his hand out for public 
taxpayers’ money. He gets 20 million from Saskatchewan; he 
goes to Alberta, he gets $100 million line of credit, but the  from 
the treasury branches. But the provincial treasurer says, well 
that’s not really that bad, because it’s only $52 million — $52.5 
million of credit is all he got. So he really only got $52.5 million, 
although the superintendent of the treasury branch goes on to say 
later, maybe it was a little more, and it got bumped up to $55 
million. 
 
Now this is very important because this person has a skill which 
you rarely see in our society, or is rarely exposed in our society. 
It is seen occasionally, but rarely exposed. He’s able to get $20 
million in Saskatchewan, an Alberta entrepreneur. Then he goes 
back to Alberta and he gets a hundred million dollar line of credit 
which results in a 52.5 or $55 million loan. And the suggestion 
was that the reason it was recorded at a hundred million dollars 
was it was because if he needed more money he could get it. If 
he needed up to a hundred million dollars, he could get it. And 
the treasurer of Alberta says, no, no  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Being 5 o’clock, I now leave 
the Chair until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Property Tax Burden
	Alleged Mismanagement of STC
	MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
	Formation of Telephone Directly Review Committee in SaskTel
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Motions for Interim Supply

