


















































April 25, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 25, 1988 
 
 

825 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Development and Tourism 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Before we broke for supper, I was asking 
some questions on Tourism, and I’d like to continue along that 
line if I might. 
 
Madam Minister, as you’re aware the Canada-Saskatchewan 
tourism agreement that was signed in 1984 is well into its 
five-year term. And in questioning the minister last round of 
estimates we were given the figures in terms of provincial and 
federal expenditure for the years ’85-86, ’86-87, and for the 
partial year of ’87-88. I’m wondering if you could update us in 
terms of the expenditures made by your government to this 
point. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes. In response to the member’s 
question, that was the $30 million subagreement signed with the 
federal government. To date we have $13,799,136 committed, 
or approved I suppose; and to date of that commitment, 
$6,016,757 has been expended. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  That would suggest to me, Madam 
Minister, that you’re going to have to make a major financial 
commitment in the next little while in order to come up with 
your 50 per cent of that $30 million. I’m wondering what your 
target date is for committing or for expending that total amount, 
the total 50 per cent of the 30 million. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  In response to your question, presently 
we are under negotiations with the federal government to 
extend the March 31, 1989 deadline for the expenditure of that 
30 million. 
 
I should point out that this agreement that was signed was the 
first tourism subagreement signed by the provincial government 
and the federal government. Most other provinces are already 
on their second or third subagreements on tourism. 
 
Unfortunately, the previous government had never negotiated 
an agreement of this type with the federal government. So in 
our first start-up years under this present agreement  the first 
agreement signed by the government  we are in the process of 
negotiating with the private sector on coming up with projects 
to promote tourism in the province. As I say, we are having 
discussions with Ottawa to extend the deadline for the first 
agreement, and hopefully we can get that extension, plus 
negotiate a second subagreement, given the things that we’re 
looking at in the tourism sector. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, what was at one time a 
$15 million commitment then is considerably less, and I’m 
wondering what has happened between the  

estimates that we did in the last session and now  the 
commitment. And I was told, and I maybe want to . . . I will 
quote the minister’s statement to me. He indicates that it’s 
rather a curve that would peak towards the end of the 
agreement, and what he was indicating to the people of this 
province was that there was going to be a financial commitment 
to the $15 million peak. Now you tell us today that in actual 
fact that’s not the case. 
 
I would ask, Madam Minister, in terms of negotiating a 
subagreement, you maybe want to do a little planning in terms 
of whether or not it’s a five-year agreement that you can keep 
 unlike this one. What I’m asking you, at the end of this five 
years now, then what is the balance of your expenditure going 
to be? What is your government’s commitment to tourism? 
What is your financial commitment to tourism in dollars and 
cents by the end of this five-year agreement? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well this subagreement with the federal 
government is 50-50 cost sharing  the federal government 
puts up 15; we put up 15. And you may shake your head like 
this is a boring subject. However, I can point out again, that this 
is the first agreement of this type ever negotiated on behalf of 
the citizens of our province, on behalf of the business people of 
our province. Other provinces are already on their second and 
third agreements of this type. 
 
Previous government, I would point out, never did put much 
emphasis on tourism and attracting that value-added tourist 
dollar to our province. So in essence we are playing catch up, 
and we respond to private sector proposals, proposals that are 
brought forward by either individuals or groups of people. We 
assess them and enter into agreements with them. And I think 
the strategy that we are developing right now for Saskatchewan 
will go a long way in promoting Saskatchewan as a major 
destination point. I can only reiterate that we are  under this 
agreement, which ends in March of 1989  still in the process 
of getting the private sector involved. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, my question wasn’t 
whether it was going to be private or public expenditure or 
through co-operatives. I guess what my question was, was what 
your financial commitment to tourism is in this province, or are 
we looking at another example of a program announced that 
you have absolutely no intentions of keeping the commitment 
to? 
 
You will have had, at the end of the 1989 deadline, five years in 
which to determine how you would want to make these 
expenditures. You had five years in order to make a longer-term 
plan as to how you’re going to commit your government’s 
tourism dollars to the province of Saskatchewan. And what 
you’re showing me this evening is another example of your 
government’s incompetence. The lack of ability to plan for $15 
million of expenditures so that you can receive another $15 
million from the federal government tells me that you still have 
a problem and you’re not willing to admit the fact that you’ve 
got the problem of planning for the future and making a 
long-term plan. 
 
You tell me in 1988, four years into the term now, that you  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

826 
 

simply can’t find the money to commit to tourism in the 
province  the $15 million that the federal government 
committed to you on a 50-50 cost-sharing basis, and we all 
understand how the agreement reads. Its not a secret. 
 
What it says is that you haven’t been able to plan, and you don’t 
in fact have the dollar-and-cents commitment. You’ve got the 
media-hype commitment to tourism, just like you had open for 
business and Saskatchewan Builds and every other slogan you 
guys have ever pulled. What it says to me is, you don’t have the 
financial commitment, and how are you going to build tourism 
in this province this your new flagship  when you’re not 
committing your 50 per cent of that $30 million, and you’re not 
willing to commit it? Are you waiting for the federal 
government to say, yes, province of Saskatchewan, we’ll put in 
$3 to your 1? What are you waiting for? Why don’t you make 
commitments and plans to spend the 15 million that you 
committed yourself to in ’84? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well obviously, Mr. Chairman, the 
member does not understand how the process works. The 
provincial government, for the first time ever in the history of 
our province, committed to spend $15 million on the 
development of tourism, tourism destination points, tourism 
entities. That agreement called for the federal government to 
also kick in $15 million. Now he, the member, wants a 
definitive, precise amount that we’re going to spend by the end 
of the agreement. Hopefully the $15 million will be expended 
by the end of the program. To date we have committed 
approximately $7 million to . . . which is the province’s portion 
of that. What the member doesn’t understand is that we respond 
to private sector initiatives in the area of tourism development. 
 
We still have till the end of this year to accept proposals from 
the public, so hopefully by the termination of this program, or 
the present program, that $15 million of Saskatchewan money 
will have been spent. We still have quite a number of months 
for the private sector to put in proposals. 
 
And I would point out again that this is the first of such 
agreement that has been signed. And I see the former member 
. . . the former minister of Finance shaking his head. The 
previous government had 11 years  had 11 years to negotiate 
a tourism subagreement and they failed to do so. This 
administration, in their first term, 1982 to 1986, negotiated, on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, a $30 million tourism 
subagreement, 50-50 cost shared by the provincial government 
and the federal government. We are still receiving proposals, 
and hopefully we will continue to receive proposals, until the 
end of this year so that that spending will still go on for two 
years after the close of the agreement. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, don’t tell me that I 
don’t understand. I understand clearly. I understand that you 
haven’t been able to find the money to put into tourism 
development that you committed yourself to in ‘84  that I 
understand. We all understand the 50 per cent formula, so you 
don’t need to drag that out. 
 
And what you’re doing again is smoke, and mirrors, and  

hype, and maybe, and I think, and maybe, and hopefully. Well 
that’s not good enough, Madam Minister. I want to know what 
specific plans you have, in terms of the expenditure, of the 
remaining dollars from 6 million whatever it was, to the $15 
million. I want to know where you’re going to commit that 
money. I want to know what programs or what developments 
you are going to commit your government to And I’d like to 
know tonight because we didn’t get good enough answers from 
your administration in the last set of estimates that we had. 
 
And the people of this province have a right to know. They 
have a right to know whether you’re just talking a $30,000 
figure or whether you’re serious about spending your half of 
that 30 million. And I’m asking you tonight: what specific plans 
you have, what proposals. Tell the people of this province 
where you’re going to spend the rest of that money, if you’re 
going to spend it. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well I can inform the uninformed 
member that no eligible project, no eligible project, under this 
agreement has been turned down because of lack of funds. The 
funds are there, and all you have to do is look at the tourism 
strategy which involves the Duck Lake, Fort Carlton, Batoche 
area in North Battleford. We would hope, we would hope that 
when that proposal is shared with the public that we will have 
more than enough applications under the subagreement. 
 
We expect that that tourism strategy will generate enough 
proposals to take up the remaining portion of this agreement. 
But I say again, and don’t distort the facts  deal in fact, not 
fiction  no project, proposed by the private sector, has been 
turned down because the funds weren’t there. The funds are 
there. We respond to the private sector, not the other way 
around. We as a government aren’t going to go out and initiate 
a project. We respond  very effectively I might add  to the 
proponents that come forward. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Well then clearly, Madam Minister, what 
you’re saying is that the private sector has little confidence in 
the economy of this province, that they’re not willing to invest 
in tourism and don’t believe that you’re going to carry through 
with your media advertising and your hype and if there are 
dollars available. They’re not willing to invest their time and 
their efforts in . . . is that what you’re telling me? 
 
And, Madam Minister, what I would like as well, I’d like you to 
send over a list of the projects that have happened so far under 
this program. I’d like to know where the 6 million  I believe 
6,160,000 you were telling me. I’d like to know where that has 
been spent to this point in time. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I will endeavour to give . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Go slow Joanie for me. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, I will. I’ll probably have to repeat 
it several times until it sinks in. 
 
An Hon. Member:  You can just send it over if you’d  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

827 
 

like. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  No, I won’t send it over. I’ll read it into 
the record, so that when you go out door knocking and 
whatever, it’s not distorted. How’s that? 
 
This agreement ends in 1989  that is for approval of projects. 
After that we have two years to spend the remaining funds. At 
this point in time, with $7 million approximately expended, we 
are on target actually. But some of the tourism agreement 
projects, I’ll list them off: the Duck Lake museum orientation 
centre plans and community strategy plans; the Canadian 
Western Agribition; Northern Lights Resort Incorporated; the 
Centre Culturel Maillard; the Moose Jaw tourist destination 
study; the White Bear tourist and development study; the 
Nipawin area tourist and destination study; the Big Valley 
development; the Northern Lights lodge; Armstrong Hillcrest 
Cabins study; Youth Unlimited Wascana Marina Restaurant; 
New Era Holdings; Kenosee Garden; Gopherville tourist 
attraction. 
 
And there’s the member from Quill Lakes just chipping and 
chirping from his seat about studies. Yes, because the normal, 
intelligent business men  who is Tory, not NDP do 
marketing studies, do business projections and whatever, before 
they jump in. I know that if 2 cents was available to the member 
from Quill Lakes, he’d jump in there not even asking what he 
had to do or whether it was viable or whatever. But the good, 
solid business men, of which we have literally tens of thousands 
in Saskatchewan, do things in such a way, come up with an 
idea, and then develop that idea before they proceed. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, I guess we’ve clearly 
established the fact that the $30 million  and your share, the 
$15 million commitment  is another example of an 
advertising scheme and a program announced with little behind 
it. 
 
Let’s move on to another one. I want to speak about the tourism 
institute, the hospitality institute, that the former minister 
indicated would not be brick and mortar. And that’s very clear 
 it’s not brick and mortar. If it is around, I don’t know where 
it’s housed or what it is. It sounds to me like feathers in the 
wind. But anyway, I would ask, Madam Minister, what kind of 
progress has been made in terms of that hospitality institute. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The hospitality institute was initiated in 
July of 1987 and it was established as a tourism hospitality 
institute following consultation with the industry. Subsequent to 
that a steering committee was appointed in November of ‘87 
and they went out and met with various groups throughout the 
province. Two weeks ago officials from my department and 
myself met with them and they made their final 
recommendations to government. Right now we are assessing 
those recommendations and will be considering them, 
presenting them to Cabinet, and an announcement will be made 
after that. 
 
I think this particular steering committee really points out the 
difference between a Tory government and a socialist 
government. Socialist Governments are so elitist and  

impose us that they feel that they know what’s best for the 
masses of people. 
 
When you look at something like the hospitality, tourism 
industry, it impacts on probably every person in Saskatchewan. 
And we took the view that rather than imposing, imposing a 
regime upon the total industry, because this industry had been 
ignored for 11 years previous to 1982, we decided that this 
institute would, or could, be created but we wanted input from 
the public, from the private sector, from those people that 
deliver the services in this area. 
 
And as I said, the steering committee was appointed in 
November or ’87, and they actually recommended the creation 
of a Saskatchewan hospitality council as a training, 
co-ordinating body as opposed to a mortar and brick thing that 
you could put E.I. Wood or McIntosh or C.M. Fines. You 
know, they don’t believe that building a government building 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that’s right Kuziak, all those 
lovely ones, Kramer, I mean, there must be one in every town 
over 1,000. But their recommendation was not a mortar and 
brick institution, as opposed to a council that could co-ordinate 
all the various components, so that when a person needed 
information, they could be directed immediately as to where to 
go. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, let me take you back 
through the history, as we see it from this side. In 1986, prior to 
an election, you make an announcement of a tourism, 
hospitality institute. After the election is out of the way and 
gone, you can get on with your real agenda. You set up a study 
group in November of ’87, and then in April of ’88 when we 
ask you about your hospitality institute, you tell us that you’ve 
been busy consulting. You’ve had two years, and you’re still 
deciding what you might do with this hospitality institute that 
you announced with great fanfare in ’86. 
 
And I ask you, Madam Minister, when could we expect specific 
proposals for the mandate, the structure, and the programming 
of the new institute? I’d like to know what the projected cost of 
the institute is, where in the department’s budget are the 
funding for this institute, or are we to wait till 1990 or ’91 when 
you can reannounce this phantom institute? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It’s under vote 66  $400,000; it is 
under economic diversification. But I must point out again, this 
is where the philosophical differences are. We believe that an 
institute such as this must be industry-driven, and we are there 
to help the industry help itself, not impose on industry  any 
industry  such as the NDP would. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  I don’t know, Madam Minister, where 
you’re going. Like you want to talk . . . you want to talk 
philosophy and implementation of a phantom, because it’s not 
there. And I asked you, and I’ll ask you again, I want to know 
specifically what your proposals are for the mandate, the 
structure in the programming of the institute. I want to know 
when it’s going to happen. And that’s what we’re asking over 
here. We’re not talking here about how you would decide, as a 
government, to implement a program, or how this side might 
act. What  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

828 
 

we’re asking you is what you’re doing now with an 
announcement that you made in 1986 prior to an election. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Obviously you don’t listen. I told you 
in my last answer it is vote 66. If you would care to open your 
Estimates book under Tourism development grants, $400,000 of 
that 2 million-plus is earmarked for the hospitality council. 
Okay? And as I say, the first recommendation of the steering 
committee was not to create a mortars and brick institution, but 
there are better ways of delivering services rather than through a 
mortar and bricks institution. They, two weeks ago, presented 
their final report to my department. We are now in the process 
of developing a cabinet submission item, and after cabinet 
decides on how to deal with it, I can promise you, you would be 
the fifth one to know. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  One, two, three, four, five  not bad. I 
still haven’t had my answer, but I’m still asking about the 
mandate and the programming for the institute. Surely you must 
have something in mind in terms of that. You’re going to make 
a proposal to cabinet. Surely to goodness you’re not going to 
walk in there with an empty piece of paper saying, well we’ve 
still got this idea about a hospitality institute. Tell me about the 
programming and the structure. How is it going to be delivered? 
Through . . . Where is it going to be delivered? By whom is it 
going to be delivered? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I would reiterate that two weeks ago the 
final recommendations of the steering committee were 
presented to us. We are now in the midst of developing a 
cabinet agenda item. It will go to cabinet shortly. Cabinet will 
decide how to deal with the multitude of recommendations. I 
might say that the recommendations were well thought out; they 
were proposed by people who have hands-on experience in this 
particular sector, made a very valued contribution to the 
direction that the hospitality institute or council should go. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, if you would, I’d like to 
know who is on the committee, who was on your 
recommendation team, and I’d like to know what the cost of 
that particular committee has been. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I do have the names of the members of 
the steering committee. 
 
However, before that, I would like to indicate that during the 11 
years of an NDP administration in this province, studies were 
undertaken to address the tourism hospitality training needs and 
nothing happened  absolutely nothing happened. Under this 
current administration, for one, there is a council made up of 
industry representatives, there are negotiations with other 
departments and the federal government on hospitality training 
needs and the costs that are associated with that. There is a 
provincial strategy addressing tourism and hospitality. There is 
a budget to address these issues. There is a budget  a 
$400,000 budget in the hospitality area alone, let alone what’s 
available in the area of tourism. And, as I said, it is industry 
initiated. 
 

Now, you want the names of the board members of the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Now there, the former minister of 
Finance who couldn’t add one and one throws up his hands. 
The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake asked me for the 
names of the people on the committee. Now I will give them. 
And I also will give you a bit of their background so you know 
how competent this committee is. 
 
Okay. The steering hospitality institute steering committee 
initially appointed November 3, 1987: John Remai, owner of 
the Ramada Renaissance, Okay, a very valued . . . Yes, and they 
laugh about the accomplishments of John Remai; Elizabeth 
Crosthwaite, assistant deputy minister, training division, 
Department of Education, because if the institute gets up and 
running and some of the recommendations come to fruition, 
education will play a large part in this industry; John Spicer, 
director of tourism development branch in my department  
John Spicer. John Spicer is no longer with our department; he 
has taken a position in the Yukon and left about . . . In fact the 
last day at work was the day that the institute made their 
recommendations to us. 
 
We also have Adrie Susette, Chairman of TISASK (Tourism 
Industry Association of Saskatchewan) training committee  
also is a business person in Saskatoon; Peter Williamson, 
executive director of the hotels association, an industry that has 
a big impact on hospitality in the province; Mrs. Peggy 
Takashima from Yorkton, she is the manager of the Yorkton 
Convention & Visitors Bureau. We also had Farouk Saleh from 
the college of Commerce, professor of marketing at the College 
of commerce, University of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member:  All Tories. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Probably. Bob Davison, just a private 
business man who has business interests in Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan; Kathy Dawson, president of the Weyburn 
Chamber of Commerce, and also a business woman in that city; 
Voule Danakas, I’m sure you are familiar with the Danakas 
name her in Regina  this particular family has been deeply 
involved in the hospitality sector in the province for many, 
many years  Mrs. Dorothy Thomas, manager of Qu’Appelle 
Crafts Limited brought great insights to the steering committee; 
Mrs. Ev Mackay from La Ronge, the northern part of our 
province plays a key part in the hospitality sector. We had Ron 
Pareau, a member from Cochin, Saskatchewan, a 
small-business man who also brought a good insight to the 
committee from his point of view; Donna Braham from Tisdale, 
another up-and-coming business woman in Saskatchewan. 
 
So as you can see, the make-up of the committee was very 
broad. We tried to hit on as many sectors as possible and from 
as many areas of the province as possible. I believe they met 
about eight or nine times as a committee and to draft the final 
recommendation to the department, and once we decide at 
cabinet what to do with the proposals, I think you will see some 
great things in the province. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, what did that 
committee cost in actual dollars and cents? 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

829 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  My deputy informs me that because the 
final report has just been tabled with us, we don’t have the final 
cost from the last meeting. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Can you give me the costs up until this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We will provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  When? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We could have it to you tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Will you have it to me tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I said, we will give them to you 
tomorrow. Obviously you are also suffering from a hearing 
disability. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Madam Minister, I want to suggest 
to you that I’m not suffering from a hearing problem, and I 
want to as well tell you, if you want to be talking about former 
administrations  which frankly I haven’t got an awful lot of 
interest in  I’m more interested in what is going to be 
happening in this province in the future. And I want to tell you 
that I’m very concerned, when I see the kind of administration 
and the kind of government that you’ve been delivering, that the 
future may look awful bleak if you’re in power much longer. 
We can go back to the 1930s and talk about your political party 
and their former record and draw parallels to your 
administration now, but I don’t think that’s what we’re here for 
tonight. 
 
I’d like to move on, if I could, to your . . . What I see, and what 
you were telling me before supper, was that there is no new 
initiatives in terms of economic development. What you have 
done is condoned everything that’s happened prior to your 
taking over this particular department. You talked in glowing 
terms of the low unemployment rate in Saskatchewan, 
neglecting to talk about the 45,000 people who are looking for 
work or the numbers who have left this province because they 
can’t find any employment opportunities here in Saskatchewan 
under your administration. 
 
And if I could, I’d like to take you back, Madam Minister, to 
the opportunities ’87 conference in Saskatchewan. I would like 
to know what they cost the department; and I would like to 
know what the immediate results might be of that particular 
conference. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  You asked: what is the cost to the 
department sponsoring the Business Opportunities 
Saskatchewan show in 1987. My department was the organizer 
and sponsor, as you probably know, of this show held in 
Saskatoon in September of ’87. The total cost of the show was 
$25,000. That’s net cost, by the way. 
 
I might say that 6,300 people participated; 85 per cent of those 
attending the show indicted that they would attend another one; 
and the show is rally organized in response to activity that we 
see generated in the 36,000 calls to the business centres 
scattered throughout the  

province. 
 
This particular show had 124 exhibitors offering a broad range 
of franchise, dealer, distributor, retail, manufacturing 
opportunities. And there were also a few exhibitors who offer a 
service to business, as well as a number of representatives from 
several communities throughout the province who were 
looking, you know, coming to see what areas may expand into 
their communities. 
 
So when you have a show costing $25,000 and attracting 6,300 
people and 124 exhibitors, I think you would have to say it’s a 
resounding success. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, can you tell me how 
many new businesses and how many new job opportunities 
were created as a result of that conference. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I couldn’t give you the job figure, but I 
could say that approximately 200 new businesses have already 
been started as of December of ’87. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  As a direct result of that conference, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Could you give me a list of the 
businesses that have started as a result of that? Could you send 
that along to us? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay. The follow-up that was done to 
that show was in contact with the 124 exhibitors, and my 
associate deputy tells me that we can pull that information 
together. However, we can’t give it to you tomorrow, but we 
can get you that information as to the approximately 200 
businesses that started up as a result of the show. I couldn’t give 
you a definite time because it will take some time to pull that 
together. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, are you saying that you 
can definitively tell me that there were, as a result of that 
conference, 200 brand-new businesses that have started since 
that conference was held? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We will send you over the . . . a list of 
the 124 exhibitors who in turn were contacted by an individual 
or a group of individuals pursuing a business in that area. 
Okay? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Pursuing? You said started. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Started or pursuing in that particular 
area. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, now, you . . . A couple of minutes 
ago you tell me that there 200 businesses started and now you 
tell me started or pursuing. Can you give me the numbers of 
started and the numbers of pursuing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I can say that as a result of the show, 
approximately 200 businesses are being established or have 
been established in the province.  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

830 
 

Some are pursuing it because they are pursuing financial 
arrangements to list that . . . start those businesses. That 
information we can give you. Okay? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Madam Minister, I would suggest 
to you that there is an awful difference between those pursuing 
the opportunity to open a business and those that actually have. 
And what we’re seeing here is just a record, everything we talk 
about, the hospitality institute, every other program you’ve 
announced, every conference you’ve had, is nothing but smoke 
and mirrors. 
 
And I want to read to you, Madam Minister, what the real facts 
are. And I also want to suggest to you, if for a cost of 25,000 
you can create 200 new businesses in this province, that you 
should be holding them on a weekly basis. And let me tell you 
why I suggest you should be holding them on a weekly basis. 
Because in 1986 we lost 2,234 businesses in this province that 
just disappeared, and we had 351 bankruptcies. In 1985, under 
your administration, we had 2,210 businesses close down and 
just disappear, and we had 302 bankruptcies. And in 1984, we 
had 2,045 businesses disappear and 309 bankruptcies. And in 
1983, we lost 2,084 businesses and had 314 bankruptcies. 
 
Madam Minister, that’s the legacy, and that’s the truth, and 
that’s exactly what’s been happening in this province under 
your administration. We’re losing hundreds and hundreds of 
businesses, and you’ve got the audacity to stand up in this 
House and try and make people in this province believe that for 
a cost of $25,000 for a conference you’ve started 200 
businesses. 
 
Madam Minister, you want to be honest with the people of this 
province. You want to come clean and . . . People out there 
know what the real record is. Those small family businesses 
that have locked their doors because of your administration 
know full well that that $25,000 conference didn’t create any 
200 new businesses. And I tell you, if you’ve got a map of 
Saskatchewan, you take some blue Tory pins and you stick 
them on the places where these businesses have been started, 
and I’ll want to tell you that I don’t believe that there is any 200 
pins sticking on that kind of a map, and I don’t think even you 
believe that that’s the case. 
 
Madam Minister, your government has created a legacy that has 
been unparalleled in this province since the 1930s. And I’m 
thinking the people of this province hope it will never be 
repeated again. 
 
I want to talk tonight about some of the figures and some of the 
problems that there are in this province in terms of business and 
the small-business community. When you start looking at the 
list of bankruptcies since your government took office in 1982, 
it’s a startling condemnation of your economic policies. And 
you stand in this House and indicate to the people of the 
province that as the new minister, someone who has an 
opportunity to turn things around and change things, that you 
aren’t going to do that because you’re still of the old order, 
those that believe in the smoke and mirrors type programs and 
who rally don’t care about the business community in this 
province. 
 

You know, in 1982 we lost 280 businesses; in ’83 we had 314 
bankruptcies; in ’84 we had 309 bankruptcies  and that’s not 
even counting, Madam Minister, those that just closed their 
doors and took off to other parts of Canada and to United States 
because you haven’t created a climate where they can make a 
living for their families. That’s the true legacy. 
 
I want to know: in light of these figures, in light of the number 
of disappearances of businesses that have been operating in this 
province, some of them for many decades  how does that fit 
in with your rhetoric and your hype and your open for business 
and your economic diversification and telling us prior to supper 
that the economy in Saskatchewan in 1987 was strong? 
 
In 1987 we had 361 business bankruptcies, and we had . . . I 
haven’t got the figure before me, but I’m sure we had a couple 
of thousand that just disappeared out of the province. I want to 
know: how does that square with your statements prior to 
supper, prior to the break, that the economy in Saskatchewan is 
strong? 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well obviously this type of rhetoric, 
which is totally baseless, based on fiction rather than fact, has 
permeated this House since the last election. Now I will deal in 
fact rather than fiction. 
 
And 1987 was a good year for economic performance in 
Saskatchewan. Unemployment rate fell from 7.3 per cent to 7.7 
per cent. New capital investment in the province, one of the 
highest levels of capital investment in the province in the 1980s 
 $4.324 billion was invested in the province in 1987. Now 
that isn’t small change by anyone’s imagination. 
 
We find that the number of Saskatchewan-based corporations 
increased from 30,653 in 1986 to 31,293 in ’87. We also find 
that the number of employer businesses registered with the 
workmen’s compensation increased from 37,708 in 1986 to 
38,081 in 1987. 
 
Now those are facts. That’s not a figment of my imagination. 
That is a fact. so overall, the economic performance of the 
province last year was fairly good. 
 
The value of building permits in the commercial sector only, in 
1987, rose by 70 per cent. We have seen major new investment 
in the province or major investment in expansions and 
corporations that are already here in the province. And to me 
that is a measure of the confidence in our province, and in the 
people of our province, to overcome some of the more adverse 
conditions that our farmers find themselves in. 
 
And I will just list again the industrial projects that went on in 
1987, in case you forgot them before . . . or after supper. We see 
the Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford  a couple of 
hundred jobs. We see a Canada Packers poultry processing 
plant in Moose Jaw . . . or in Saskatoon. we have seen 
expansions of Thomson Meats in Melfort; of Canada Packers in 
Moose Jaw. Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon have 
announced, or did announce in 1987, a major, major expansion 
of their facility in Saskatoon. We say a Vanguard recreational 
vehicles plant built in North Battleford. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

831 
 

We’ve seen a liquid phosphate fertilizer plant go up in Moose 
Jaw. And I need not mention the largest project ever in the 
history of our province, the largest project in the history of 
western Canada, the Co-op heavy oil upgrader being built right 
here in Regina. we’ve seen expansion of the pulp mill in Prince 
Albert and we’ve seen the construction of a paper plant in 
Prince Albert. That is just part of the 4-plus-billion-dollar new 
capital investment in our province last year. 
 
So there are ways of measuring the economy which we have. 
But you know the diatribe that you and your colleagues go 
through day after day after day  I mean, you are the kind of 
people that go home and pray that people go into bankruptcy. 
Bankruptcy for anyone  whether it’s a person that’s invested 
$500 or $5,000 or $50,000 or $500,000 in a business  
bankruptcies are a tragedy for the people involved, but 
bankruptcies happen and they happen every year. 
 
But we have a net increase in businesses not a net decrease. We 
had a net increase in the number of businesses operating in 
Saskatchewan last year. One of the functions of my department 
is to help people and advise people through the formation of 
business plans to help them get over the one- or two- or 
three-year hurdle that a new business may have. 
 
No government, whether it’s our government or whether it was 
your, likes to see bankruptcies but it just makes me ill to see 
how you relish and wallow in other people’s misery. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, with leave of the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It gives me great 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
assembly, 11 young men ages 11 to 14 as well as their leaders. 
these young men seated in the Speaker’s gallery are from St. 
Timothy 49th Scout Troup here in Regina. I’m introducing 
them on behalf of John Solomon, the MLA for Regina North, 
but unfortunately Mr. Solomon is out of town this evening and 
asked me to sit. I’m sorry, I forgot the names. My apologies. 
 
I’d like to point out the leaders are Jack Zess, Ralph Latta, Stan 
Rowe, and Ed Manz. I will be joining this group shortly for 
pictures as well as drinks in the members’ dining room. Please 
join me in welcoming the group. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Development and Tourism 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, let me assure you  

that nobody wants to wallow in anybody else’s pain. Members 
from this side, I’m sure, are all feeling the same. 
 
What I would suggest to you, Madam Minister, we’re trying to 
do here, is to point out to you the economic realities of this 
province as they are, not as you want to see them  not as you 
want to see them from behind your minister’s desk. And if you 
want to talk numbers and figures let me talk to you about the 
real growth rate  the gross domestic product growth rate, 1.6 
per cent in Saskatchewan in 1987. that’s a record you’re proud 
of? You’re right in line with Nova Scotia, one of the have-not 
provinces of the Maritimes. 
 
And let me talk to you about the number of jobs in 
manufacturing in this province right now. The growth rate of 
this province, the economic growth rate is not one that you 
should be very comfortable with. In terms of manufacturing, 
prior to 1981 there were 21,479 people employed in 
manufacturing in this province, and we sit with 18,166 in 1986. 
I ask you, does that show a healthy economy? And is that a 
record that you are proud of? Is that your brand of economic 
development, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well, you want to talk about a have-not 
province  and yes, this year we are getting a transfer payment 
form Ottawa. But let me point out my dear colleague who keeps 
his head in the sand, it has been 30 years since equalization has 
been introduced by the federal government. In those 30 years 
there was only six occasions when Saskatchewan did not, and I 
repeat, did not  not!  receive a transfer payment from 
Ottawa: once under the Liberals, once under the NDP, and our 
of our seven years in government, under tough economic 
conditions, we have not received a transfer payment. And that 
my friend is the proof in the pudding. We manage well under 
difficult conditions. You didn’t even manage well under good 
conditions. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, let me remind you that 
what you inherited prior to 1982 was eleven balanced budgets 
and an economy that was working. And if you want to listen to 
the percentage of business growths that happened in those 
years: in ’75 the percentage of business growths was 13.3; in 
’76, 14; in ’77, 11.9; in ’78, 10.5; in ’79, 13.2  percentage in 
terms of business growth. And what happened since you were 
in: ’82, 3.2;’83, 4.2; ’84, 3.7; ’85, 3.9; ’86, 4.5; and ’87, 2.1. 
And you want to talk about a government that creates a stable 
economy for business to grow on. 
 
Let me list you what’s happened since you’ve been in 
government. Let me list you some of the business opportunities 
that have been lost in this province and some of the investments 
that have been lost: GWG, 150 employees in Saskatoon gone; 
Swertz Brothers, Weyburn, 52 people gone; Sheldon 
Manufacturing, 15 employees gone; August ’83, Eftoda 
Pontiac, Buick, Yorkton, 25 people gone; September 14, ’83, 
CIT Office Interiors, 14 people gone. 
 
I’ve got pages of this stuff  pages of what’s happened since 
you have been involved. Intercon Packers 1983,  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

832 
 

124 people gone; Moose jaw mall scrapped ’84; Bell’s Dairy, 
Melville, 25 employees gone; Dad’s Cookies  46 years this 
business operated in this province  gone under your 
administration; Vencap Equities, the first VCC (venture Capital 
corporation) in Regina, down the tubes in ’85; Battlefords 
Venture Fund Inc. in ’85, gone; Prairie Industrial chemicals in 
Davidson, gone. 
 
That’s your record, Madam Minister, and that’s what you stand 
up here so proud of and sanctimoniously indicate that you never 
had transfer payments for four years when you first go into 
power. Well, there’s good reason why. Because there was a 
premier, and a cabinet, and an executive council in this province 
that knew how to manage a government, and that knew how to 
deliver balanced budgets. And they knew how to keep people 
employed. And you, Madam Minister, don’t have any of those 
qualities and nor does the Premier that leads you. And I say to 
you that you ought to be ashamed of yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  I want to know, Madam Minister, how 
you explain the business closures that I listed. And if you’d like 
I can add more: Pro-Star Mills in Saskatoon, gone; CSP Foods, 
Nipawin; Looks Manufacturing; Patrick Pipeline; Dominion 
Bridge  how many more do you want? How many more do 
you need? 
 
I mean, when are you going to realize that you haven’t created a 
decent economy, a decent business climate in this province? 
Ask any retailer how much his retail growth has been since you 
guys have been in power. I tell you it’s the lowest in Canada, 
and under your administration, it’ll continue that way because 
what you’ve done is created a litany of people on social 
assistance and 45,000 people unemployed and thousands 
leaving this province to other provinces to find employment that 
you can’t offer here. 
 
If you want to stand up and quote the statistics in terms of the 
numbers of jobs you’ve created, you do it. But you tell those 
part-time employees that are working at $4.50 an hour and 
working 12 and 15 and 16 hours a week that that’s the kind of 
employment you want to see. 
 
Your minister has got to revamp the labour legislation in here to 
cover the number of part-time employees that you’ve created. 
And what do you do in terms of extended store hours? Where 
have you been? You’ve got to know that that’s creating more 
minimum wage and part-time work. And is that the kind of 
society  the kind of province you want? Is that the kind of 
climate you want in this province? Because I tell you that’s 
what you’re creating. 
 
I want to know, Madam Minister, how you explain the number 
of closures of businesses, that have made money and employed 
people, since you guys took power. How can you explain that? I 
want to know, as well, what you’re going to do to change it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well, we’ll deal in facts here. I will 
reiterate that a government’s ability to manage is clearly a 
question here. And I would remind you under the boom times 
of the ’70s when to get balanced budgets, you had  

horrendous rate increases in all utilities including insurances  
rates that have never been matched in the last seven years  
when inflation was running at 15, 14, 16 per cent in constant 
dollars, things looked very, very well here. 
 
You cannot deny that 33,000 new jobs have been created 
between 1982 and 1987. You cannot deny that there has been 
an investment program going on in our province under the 
program initiated by this government, the industrial incentive 
program. That particular program has had a major impact on 
manufacturing and processing. The department has paid out 
$12,585,000 to date on 294 projects representing new 
investment of $84 million. That in itself has created 1,770 new 
jobs. And that’s just in the private sector. Sixty new 
co-operatives were incorporated in the last fiscal year  more 
than ever created under your administration. 
 
You want to know where some of the success stories are? Well 
I will begin to read to you the number of businesses that have 
been created under the industrial incentive program, most of 
them small businesses employing 5, 10, 30 people  solid 
businesses, businesses that wouldn’t have proceeded without an 
industrial incentive. We have AGC Enterprises in North 
Battleford; Ace Fibreglass in Saskatoon; Actionwear, 
Saskatoon; Ad-Ventures Ltd., Saskatoon; AgTech management 
employing 14 people here in Regina; Apex Graphics, 3 people; 
Appel Printing; Armco Holdings; Armco Elevator 
Saskatchewan Limited; B & D Plastics Ltd. Employing 6 
people; Bailey Bros. Seeds. I mean I could go on and on and on. 
These are the success stories. 
 
But there you go dwelling on the failures, and we admit there 
have been bankruptcies in the last six years. There have been 
bankruptcies in the last 20 years; there have been bankruptcies 
in the last 30 years; But you cannot deny the simple fact that 
there are 6,023 more businesses registered with the workmen’s 
compensation at the year end 1987 versus the year end 1982. 
That is a fact. 
 
Our unemployment rate continues to be amongst the lowest in 
Canada. We were first, lowest of all provinces for about five 
years in a row. We were second for two years in a row. This 
past year we’ve dropped to third, but we continually have one 
of the lowest, if not the lowest unemployment rate in all of 
Canada since 1982. And you look at what we’ve gone through 
since 1982  low crop prices, low commodity prices, lower 
resource prices, a crash in oil prices, a drop in potash prices. 
Each one of our sectors . . . And I can go back, and in spite of 
those things  in spite of those things  for years, since we 
have become government we have not got a transfer payment 
from Ottawa, and that is because of good, prudent management. 
 
I would remind you that in 1981 the present member from 
Regina North East, this financial guru that you have on your 
side, when he was minister of Finance, told the international 
investment community  now bearing in mind this is 1981  
that oil revenues in Saskatchewan would increase by almost 180 
per cent by 1986. And what have they done? Have they 
increased by 180 per cent? They have decreased by 60 per cent. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

833 
 

He also told this illustrious group of people that potash 
revenues would increase by almost 220 per cent by 1986. And 
what have they done? Have potash revenues increased in 1986 
by 220 per cent? No, they’ve dropped by 80 per cent. 
 
And he also said that uranium revenues would increase by 350 
per cent. Instead, they’ve declined by 40 per cent. And I could 
go on and on, but these are the type of economic predictions 
being made by your minister of finance and not one of them 
came true  not one of them, but the spending of the 
government were based on those predictions. 
 
I can only reiterate we have more businesses doing business in 
this province than we did in 1982 when we took over. Four out 
of the seven years that we have been in power we have not got a 
transfer payment form Ottawa. Only once in 11 years that you 
were in power, in the supposedly boom times of the ’70s, did 
you not get a transfer payment from Ottawa. And you supported 
huge increases in power, huge increases in SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), huge increases in all utilities, in the 
area of 50, 60 per cent. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, don’t embarrass 
yourself by comparing Finance ministers of the 1970s up until 
1982 with anything you’ve had over there since. Please let’s not 
get into that because I think the people understand the 
difference between a Finance minister who dared to balance a 
budget and finance ministers who dared to balance 11 
consecutive ones, and your administration who hasn’t balanced 
one since you’ve been in power. 
 
And maybe we should be talking about real people here; we 
should be talking about the 41,000 people that are unemployed 
in this province. Maybe we should be talking about the kind of 
employment opportunities you’ve created, and maybe you’d 
want to share with us what the number of people in the labour 
force in Saskatchewan is right now, and how many of those are 
part-time jobs. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  You’ll have to ask the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Oh, that’s not good enough, Madam 
Minister. You’re the Economic Development minister, the guru 
of employment, and the guru of business opportunities. If your 
officials have those figures, would you share them with us. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well, I can tell you that 33,000 new 
jobs have been created in the years between 1981, the end of 
1981, and 1987. I can tell you that we have 6,023 more 
businesses registered with workmen’s compensation at the end 
of 1987 than we did at the end of 1981, and where the jobs have 
come has been through the small-business sector. 
 
Some of the names that I read to you before . . . I don’t know 
how many are on this list but I would imagine it’s in the 
hundreds. I think there’s 500 businesses doing business in this 
province as a direct result of the industrial incentive program, I 
might add, all employing people in  

their businesses, in their communities where there’s large urban 
centres like Saskatoon, Regina, or in the Maple Creeks, or the 
Piapots, or the Podunks of the World. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, you should have been 
an entertainer because I’ll tell you, you’ve pulled more figures 
out of a hat tonight than anyone would have ever believed. 
 
Madam Minister, look at what’s happened with youth 
unemployment in the province. In the past year, youth 
unemployment has increased from 13.4 to 15 per cent while the 
national rate dropped from 16.2 to 13.3. I mean, how do you 
explain this, with all this magnificent industrial and economic 
development that you’ve created? How do you explain the fact 
that young people are leaving this province in hordes because 
they can’t find employment in here? I mean, if you’ve created 
some 33,000 jobs, and if those job opportunities are there and 
they’re all well-paying and full-time employment  you’re not 
willing to discuss whether it’s part time or what kind of work it 
is  how do you explain these figures? 
 
(2015) 
 
And I want to tell you, in terms of the numbers of new 
businesses that have started, I can tell you where an awful lot of 
them came from. They came from employees of businesses that 
went bankrupt, that couldn’t find a decent job and had to start a 
little business of their own and therefore registered a business 
which gives you a number. And I don’t want you to stand in 
this house and deny that that is in fact the case, because my 
riding is no different than any other riding in this province, and 
I can name you dozens from my riding who have had to strike 
out on a small-business venture in order to support their 
families, and part of the reason is because you’re not allowing 
Saskatchewan people to work in Saskatchewan. And I want you 
to explain that. And do you disagree with me that that’s where a 
lot of these business openings came from? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well quite frankly I think that’s good 
when people strike off on their own and start their own 
businesses  businesses that can stay, businesses that can 
flourish, businesses that may start out just with the individual 
but flourish and end up employing 2 or 5 or 6 people. The more 
people we have striking out on their own and setting up 
businesses that provide services that people will purchase, more 
power to them. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Well then you can maybe explain to me, 
as well, why a lot of them have left this province to work in 
other areas. We lost 4,151 in ’85, 7,276 people in ’86, and 
9,185 people in 1987. Maybe you can explain to me why these 
people  if you have created such a wonderful climate in here 
 have had to leave this province for other jurisdictions in 
order to find employment. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well I might, in response to the 
member, say that Saskatchewan as a province has experienced 
many years  many, many years  of out-migration in the 
past. And the current situation, though unfortunate, is not 
entirely new. In fact over the past 30 years, there has only been 
seven years where total  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

834 
 

net migration has been positive as opposed to out-migration. So 
when you look at that you have to come to the conclusion that 
net in-migration is the exception rather than the rule. And I 
might add that even in the resource-boom years of the late ‘70s, 
the province at that time say years of net out-migration, and I 
might say specifically years ’70-81 were a period of net 
interprovincial out-migration. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Madam Minister, your own 
forecasts to Executive Council indicate that we’re going to be 
losing or could stand to lose 85,000 people between now and 
1995. And I would like to know: what’s your vision? What is 
your dream in terms of your department? And what programs 
are you going to implement as Minister of Economic 
Development and Tourism in order to stop this out-migration? 
 
The ball is in your court, and if you have the answers or if you 
think you have the answers, share them with the people in the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well I can tell you one area that I really 
am optimistic is the development that’s going on in northern 
Saskatchewan at this time. I believe very strongly that northern 
Saskatchewan is poised to embark on a major boom. Any time 
you have potential for job creation in the resource areas, you 
always have an in-migration. I recall that when the Husky 
announcement was made some years ago, there were people 
coming from as far away as the Maritimes looking for jobs. 
 
I might say that since 1982 the total labour force in our 
province has increased by 8.5 per cent. Since 1982, total 
employment has increased by about 5 per cent, so . . . You 
know, and here we have members from northern Saskatchewan, 
or near that area, do not even know, Mr. Chairman, what is 
going on in their area. 
 
The exploration for gold, for platinum, for forestry products, is 
ongoing. It’s very, very exciting, and I’ve met with many 
people from that area who are very optimistic about their future 
and would just as soon not listen to the doom and gloom and the 
praying for a failure  actually praying that things don’t turn 
out in that area of our province. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, they will be surprised when 
they see what actually happens in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, you speak in glowing 
terms of northern boom and how those northern citizens of this 
province are experiencing the positive effects of your 
administration. Can I ask you when the last time was that you 
were in the North? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I made a visit up there, I believe it was 
about a month ago. I spent three days on the western side of the 
province, then flew over to La Loche for about a five-hour visit 
there at meetings with the mayors and the councils and the 
economic development committees. And I can tell you that they 
are very optimistic on what is transpiring in northern 
Saskatchewan, not only in the resource sector, but the potential 
for the tourism . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And look at that, 
Mr.  

Chairman, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake sitting in 
his seat chatting with the member from Quill Lakes, making fun 
of people in northern Saskatchewan, making fun of them 
because they see, they see up there the potential that they have, 
not only in the resource sector and the jobs that that we’ll 
create, but they are very, very excited, Mr. Deputy Chairman, as 
to the impact that tourism will have on their areas. And 
everywhere I went, every council that I met with, they all are in 
the process of co-operating with other towns and villages in 
their regions to take advantage of the tourism boom that’s 
coming. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Since the minister was talking about northern 
Saskatchewan, I will ask her a few questions in relation to the 
North. I think she talked about the boom. I think she used the 
word boom in northern Saskatchewan. Of course the Tories 
have been talking about a boom in northern Saskatchewan since 
1982. And like I said last year, the biggest boom was in the area 
of the welfare system, the justice system, and so on. But we 
really haven’t seen a boom in terms of the jobs in the North. 
 
And I’d like to start looking at the facts about the different areas 
of northern Saskatchewan. And maybe the minister who now 
seems to be implying that she knows everything about the 
North after she made one quick little trip into the North a little 
while ago. She seems to be saying that she understands 
everything about the North and knows everything about the 
North, and so on. And there are major development projects in 
regards to northern Saskatchewan. So I would like to ask the 
minister exactly what does she know about the northern 
situation. And I would like to know whether or not she knows 
the legal aspects of agreements in relation to, let’s say, the 
whole area of mining and in relation to even the lease 
agreements that are part and parcel of the economic 
development. 
 
I would like to know from the minister, therefore . . . My first 
question is in relation to the overall aspect of employment. We 
well know that the unemployment rate is about 60 to 80 per 
cent in the different communities of northern Saskatchewan. 
Now it’s a very important question. There are existing aspects 
of economic development that we have looked at in terms of the 
history of northern Saskatchewan, and one of them has been in 
relation to mining. 
 
I would like the minister to tell me, especially in regards to the 
jobs aspect, what the lease agreement has to say in regards to 
jobs for people in northern Saskatchewan. What does the lease 
agreement say on Key Lake mining development corporation 
right now? Could the minister enlighten us about her knowledge 
in regards to the Key Lake lease agreement in regards of what 
the law says about hiring in the area of administration, and the 
hiring of the first-year apprentices, and the hiring of the 
different aspects of the lease agreement. Could the minister 
enlighten us on that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That really indicates to me how your 
party treats women; you hold them in extremely low esteem. 
And the answer to the member from Cumberland  you say, 
well just because I spent three days up there I know everything 
there is about northern Saskatchewan.  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

835 
 

And I would be the first to admit that it’s impossible for any 
individual, including yourself, to know everything there is to 
know about every situation. 
 
We are concerned, however, with the unemployment rate in 
northern Saskatchewan. It’s very apparent that the old DNS 
(department of northern Saskatchewan) really did nothing, did 
nothing to improve the situation in northern Saskatchewan. The 
high unemployment rates in any northern province, whether it’s 
us or Manitoba or Ontario, those are things that have to be 
addressed. But I really believe, I really believe this  I was met 
very graciously. The meetings that I had with the economic 
development committees of the various villages that I stopped 
at, the meetings that I had with the mayors and their councils, 
there was a great deal of optimism, optimism in the sense that 
with some of the programs that we have initiated, with some of 
the strategies that we are working on, these people in northern 
Saskatchewan, these councils, can see the opportunities, the 
potential opportunities that there are for their areas. 
 
You know, I talked to the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake about the tourism strategy. There had never been a 
definitive tourism strategy in our province, but one is being 
developed right now and northern Saskatchewan will have a big 
part to play in that strategy. 
 
(2030) 
 
With regards to the various lease agreement that are signed with 
the companies that are working in northern Saskatchewan, our 
northern affairs secretariat does get involved in the development 
and the drawing up of those leases. And I must say things are 
improving. 
 
The Key Lake surface agreement, I believe, has a 50 per cent 
northern hiring policy as part of the agreement. But those things 
don’t happen overnight. What Key Lake has done . . . And you 
must, as I’m sure you’re aware the Key Lake mine is a 
high-tech mine. They are very intent on committing, making 
that commitment to 50 per cent northern hiring, and they have 
instituted various training programs to upgrade people’s skills 
to enable them to take advantage of being part of that sector. 
They went from a 27 per cent northern part of their force in 
1983, to 1987, they’ve increased that to 29 per cent of their 
work-force are made up of Northerners. And they will continue 
to do the necessary training and upgrading to enable more and 
more people. 
 
When we talked to people from Key Lake, the area that they 
were really concerned about was more in their inability to hire 
Northerners for some of the more specialized jobs. So they are 
instituting raining programs, and they have training programs in 
place that will enable Northerners to take this training so that 
they get those jobs. 
 
When I look at Cluff Lake, the Cluff Lake mine, in 1983, 46 per 
cent of their work-force was made up of Northerners; in 1987, 
it’s 51 per cent. So there is always progress being made in that 
area, and the secretariat at that I’m responsible for will continue 
to work with northern communities with companies, in helping 
develop the necessary programs to allow this development and 
this  

upgrading to go on. 
 
I was very, very impressed when I was in La Loche. And I 
mean, you said it. I mean, we spend massive amounts on social 
welfare, on the justice system. But that’s not the answer. And 
the road building project at La Loche was a indirect result of the 
council coming to government and saying, look, there’s got to 
be a better way. So it’s just working with those communities. A 
simple redirection of funds does a lot of things. 
 
You look at . . . They must have 30 diamond drilling outfits 
exploring northern Saskatchewan. We have three producing 
gold mines who are actually milling and refining gold, and 
that’s only three of many companies that are looking. There’s a 
potential platinum mine scheduled for there. You look at Cigar 
Lake  largest, richest uranium deposit in the world, and 
Northerners should have access to that. 
 
You look at the area of tourism and the potential for up North. 
There are problems involved in it  transportation problems, 
money for people to put together the kind of things that can 
attract people up there  but I must say to the member that I 
was really impressed with the planning that’s going on right 
now, with the optimism that is there, with the confidence that 
things will happen in northern Saskatchewan. A lot of things are 
happening up there. However, we must take a hard look at the 
serious problem of unemployment, but through development 
those things can be overcome. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, in regards to the questions in 
relation to the law, I think you’ve clearly shown that you are not 
following the law in relation to the Key lake agreement. 
 
You mentioned something about the past strategies of the NDP 
government in relation to hiring, specifically in relation to the 
largest mine, which is Key lake. We well know that the figures 
were a lot better, hovering around 40 to 50 per cent to 55, 57 
per cent hiring of people from northern Saskatchewan when the 
NDP government was around. 
 
It started dropping when your government came into power in 
1982. And the reason is very clear. Being a new minister in this 
area, you may not realize that the first thing that the minister of 
northern Saskatchewan did was to do away with the monitoring 
committee that was to check into and to make sure that the 
hiring rates were being followed on the Key Lake agreement 
and the Cluff agreement, as well; and that these affirmative 
action lease agreements were put in law so that there would be a 
commitment by the Saskatchewan government because the 
Saskatchewan government, people thought, would finally 
follow its own laws. But it was very different during the NDP 
era and today. There was a sharp drop from the 40, 50 per cent 
hiring rates. It dropped right down to about 15, 19 per cent, 21 
per cent  all these figures where the law said about 50 per 
cent. You were hovering around 15 to 19 per cent. 
 
In the past while you said there was an improvement. Of course 
there was an improvement. You had to improve from 19 per 
cent, but that doesn’t mean you’re still  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

836 
 

following the law. You’re breaking your own law. The fact is 
that it’s hovering around 26 per cent the last time I checked, and 
it fluctuates in every month from about 25 to 27. 
 
For information to the minister: I would like to provide you, in 
respect to the statement that you said on training, of course we 
need training. That has been clearly expressed. Whether you 
look at the initial studies that were done in relation to the 
mining development right from Cluff lake, from the Cluff Lake 
inquiry and the Key Lake inquiry, people talked about jobs and 
training. It’s an important aspect of the overall development. 
 
But I looked at your statements and you can talk about these 
booms that you’ve talked about since 1982 and I must remind 
the minister, of course people are optimistic. Every year they’ve 
been optimistic and waiting and waiting and waiting and they 
will continually and perpetually be optimistic. I know the 
people of the North. They’re always optimistic about every 
years. But that does not mean that when they show optimism in 
front of you, that the stark reality of you not following the laws 
in regards to the Key Lake agreements and so on, is something 
that is not a bare fact in northern Saskatchewan. They know that 
the hiring that you have done in relation . . . You have not 
wanted to follow the laws. 
 
I would say this in relation to the jobs aspect. You seem to say 
that all of the people that you talk about are either underskilled 
or lower skilled. Well just to give you three cases in regards to 
Key lake this past while. One person with a journeyman in the 
mechanics area was working there right from the beginning of 
the mine, ever since that mine operated. And that person looked 
for a job in a supervisory capacity. And he knew all the 
operations of the mine right throughout. But another person 
who was working in another section of the mine wanted a job, 
the same job. Then this person in the end result got squeezed 
out  a highly qualified person, somebody who got picked up 
by Lynn Lake immediately when he was knocked out of the 
Key Lake system. Somebody who was in high demand and a 
highly paid and skilled person was knocked out by that system. 
He was knocked out by a person, for example, who later on 
hired their own relations to be put into his job later on. To me 
that’s one example of the fact that even the skilled people . . . 
I’ll give you another example, from my own town. There was 
another person that was put into a position where he was at a 
higher level class of equipment operation. He was told to go 
and work in the mill area. He was supposed to improve, but 
later on he got squeezed out again. He needed the law to back 
him up later on, and they had to reinstate him in his previous 
position. 
 
But I guess what I’m trying to show you, Madam Minister, is 
this, that sure, you talk about optimism. I know there’s 
optimism for the Weyerhaeusers and for the top executives and 
so on. Sure there’s optimism for a lot of the leaders that are 
there. You’re not going to see leaders that are going to be 
pessimistic when they meet with you. They’re going to be 
optimistic. They’re going to be wishing and hoping that this 
year, for the first time, you will fight hard to meet up with the 
laws and deal with people fairly in regards to the hiring rates 
and the training  

rates that are in Saskatchewan. 
 
I know I’ve worked in the colleges system. I know the degrees 
of training that we have fought for throughout the years, and I 
know the changes that have taken place, but I also know that 
this problem of training has been well-known for many years. 
 
Now I guess I would like to see the minister follow up on those 
laws, make sure that if the Key Lake agreement says 50 per cent 
in an area, 15 per cent in another area, and 10 per cent in 
another area, that these are met. I would like to hear from the 
minister. What are you going to do? What are your plans for 
1988 in the light of the fact that you did away with the 
monitoring committee? What is the minister going to do to 
make sure that those hiring rates are up to par this coming year 
and that, indeed, the training problem that you have talked 
about . . . Explain to me exactly how you’re going to resolve 
those questions. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Mr. Chairman, I think the member from 
Cumberland is either misinformed or deliberately trying to 
mislead the House and people of Saskatchewan. He refers to the 
fact that under an NDP administration at Key Lake that they 
had 40 to 50 per cent of Northerners working in that mine. 
Now, that’s what he said and I’ll check the record tomorrow. 
But he said after we got in, after your government got in, that 
fell way off. 
 
Well I should tell the member, you’re either taking liberty with 
the truth or you’re misinformed, because Key Lake was never 
in production during the times of the NDP. Key Lake came on 
production late 1983, late 1983 or 1984. 
 
And there he is chirping from his seat saying, yes, there’s a 
Cluff lake agreement. well there is a Cluff Lake agreement. No 
longer are they required by law to hire 50 per cent or 40 per 
cent or whatever of Northerners . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
There you go, he says. Deal with fact and not fiction. You 
people over there continually deal with fiction rather than fact. 
 
In 1983, 46 per cent of the employees at the Cluff Lake mine 
were Northerners  46 per cent, prior to that requirement being 
taken out. Was there a big drop in the number of Northerners 
hired at that mine? No. They went from 46 per cent in 1983 to a 
grand total . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m talking about 
Cluff Lake  you said Cluff Lake  to a grand total of 51 per 
cent. And that is the type of progress that is being made across 
northern Saskatchewan through training programs that are 
instituted not only by the Department of Education or advanced 
education, but by training programs of the companies that are 
up there. 
 
I might say that Star Lake gold mine has no statutory hiring 
policy in place, yet today, 35 per cent of the people working at 
Star Lake are Northerners, and northerners will continue to get 
jobs. You say, what are we going to do, what are we going to 
do. I’ll tell you what we did. We built an institute in Prince 
Albert mainly to serve northern Saskatchewan, the northern 
institute of technology. I believe now it’s called Woodland 
College. And they work closely with industries so that industry 
can tell them the type of skills they need in their workers. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

837 
 

(2045) 
 
You know, when I look at the amount of investment in northern 
Saskatchewan through the northern economic development 
revolving fund  made 87 loans in 1987-88, worth $2.6 
million for northern business development. And these loans 
stimulated $3 million in private investment, created 167 jobs. 
That’s the kind of progress . . . Certainly you’d like to see it go 
faster and quicker, but it’s there, and it will continue to be there 
as long as those opportunities are there. Since 1983, the 
revolving fund has contributed to the creation or maintenance of 
nearly 1,500 jobs  1,500 employment opportunities that are 
new up there. It’s slow, but it’s there. 
 
Two thousand five hundred jobs have been created to date 
under the federal-provincial NEDSA, Northern Economic 
Development Subsidiary Agreement. So progress is being 
made, and progress will continue to be made because we are 
listening to what these people have to say. You know, they are 
banding together into economic development regions and 
looking beyond just their village boundaries. But they are 
getting together and saying, well how can we collectively 
explore avenues for development in our area. And that’s going 
on today, and it’s going to go on tomorrow. 
 
We have the northern advisory council that is invaluable not 
only to the communities of northern Saskatchewan, but 
invaluable to the government of Saskatchewan. So I would only 
say that, though progress is slow, progress is there. When you 
look at some of the things that have been initiated by our 
government in the resource sector, whether it’s mining, forestry 
. . . I believe culture and youth or the department of parks and 
renewable resources are actively discussing with communities 
in the forestry areas how to come up with a forestry agreement 
that’s good for everyone. When I look at the number of 
companies doing exploration in northern Saskatchewan, that 
has a potential for thousands and thousands and thousands of 
jobs  thousands of jobs. 
 
Our tourism strategy has a potential to pump millions of dollars, 
tens of millions of dollars into northern Saskatchewan. And this 
is what the councils and the committees are looking at, ways to 
attract that. So it’s not doom and gloom . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And there’s another little chirpy that came in 
chirp, chirp, chirp from their seat. 
 
There is opportunity, there is planning to be done to see that 
these things come to fruition and they will; I can assure you of 
that. The councils up there are looking with great, great interest 
at the La Loche project and are looking at things that can be 
done in their own areas under the same vein, under the New 
Careers Corporation. 
 
And I tell you, in talking to them, they’d rather work together 
under his administration under the northern affairs secretariat 
than they ever did under the DNS (department of northern 
Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, the point I was making is 
this: you’ve got a law that we abide by . . . You expect  

everybody to abide by the law in this province. The major 
question I’ve been raising this past while is whether or not 
you’re following the law in Key Lake. And the point we can get 
from you  of course you’re not, you’re not, you’re not living 
up to the agreement. And I asked you how you’re going to do it. 
You didn’t give me an answer again. You always go off on a 
tangent. Your government always goes off on a tangent every 
time we want to raise a direct question in regards to how you’re 
going to introduce something very specific and in 
straightforward developmental terms. 
 
You raised the issue of training. Well, Madam Minister, on the 
training dollars, there was over $6 million that was slated for 
having facilities development right here in northern 
Saskatchewan. The former minister, minister of northern 
Saskatchewan, first job was to take that $6 million directly 
slated for northern Saskatchewan and put it into P.A. That’s 
where the training went. We know. I asked questions last year 
into training  how many people were being trained in a 
technical institute?  and nobody knew. Because we knew 
from the history of the past 30 years of training that training 
into the North . . . Moving people from the North to the South 
has had only minimal success. If you want to have training 
strategies that are effective, you have to have them right into the 
north. That’s why we wanted that $6 million that you stole from 
the North to give to the Prince Albert area. Sure, Prince Albert 
benefitted from that, and that’s good. But the fact remains, the 
record remains, and the historic record is that you took from the 
North and you never put it back at a same level. That $6 million 
has disappeared. 
 
When we look now at the overall question, I’m still waiting. 
I’m still waiting because I still don’t know . . . There are so 
many questions I could ask that you’ve really flunked out on in 
regards to tourism. You talk about this tens of millions of 
dollars. Last year you threw around a figure of $60 million. 
How much of it went to the North? Of course it didn’t. We 
haven’t seen it in the North. You put one person in an advisory 
committee from northern Saskatchewan and you call that, you 
know, tourist development in northern Saskatchewan. We 
haven’t seen it. 
 
I’d like to see . . . There’s a lot of people that come up to me 
that want to get into tourist development that do not have the 
dollars to start it up. How much of that tourist dollars I geared 
directly to people right in the north? There’s a lot of people that 
are looking at it. 
 
And let’s look at the question of stats that you throw at me, and 
the question of a Northerner. Well it used to be that the 
northerner definition used to be 15 years or half of your 
lifetime. Later on it was shifted around and of course in a legal 
agreement that still has to be followed. 
 
But there’s been a more recent practice where if you go to the 
North for six months, then you’re considered a Northerner and 
so on. And people then start utilizing and playing around with 
stats from the most modern basis. And I don’t know whether or 
not your stats, when you say Northerner, means 15 years and 
half of your lifetime. I know that was sort of done away with in 
your administration. 
 
So the basis of statistics would not be the same from’82  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

838 
 

to, let’s say, ’87, because you have changed the criteria in terms 
of the definition of Northerner. And besides, the essence of the 
affirmative action lease agreement was looking at the question 
of native Northerner. 
 
Native Northerners compose 70 per cent of the population in 
northern Saskatchewan. And the fact remains, how many of 
those jobs in Key Lake are held by native Northerners? That’s 
the question I would like to ask. And those native Northerners 
that are in each of those situations, from the administration 
level, how many native Northerners are in the administration? 
And how many out of the total percentage  and also in the 
first year apprentices  how many are native Northerners? 
How many are native Northerners in regards to the question of 
the 50 per cent rate? That’s the type of thing that I would like to 
know. 
 
And once you give me the stats, I would like you also to give 
me the information on how you intend to improve it for 1988, 
this coming year. You’ve devastated that monitoring committee 
that was supposed to look after that. You’ve knocked off the 
manpower secretariat that was to look after that. You’ve done 
most of these things. What mechanisms are there to improve the 
situation? And I also want you to tell me the exact situation of 
Key Lake again in regards to especially native Northerners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs Duncan:  Well, I can give you a very tangible 
example of what’s happening. Okay? I’ll start with the training 
programs. You seem to think that the training programs don’t 
work. Well, we know that there’s a lot of mineral exploration 
going on in northern Saskatchewan at this time. The La Ronge 
Community College brought in 30 young men  Northerners 
 from all over northern Saskatchewan to La Ronge to attend a 
diamond drilling course. 
 
Now these 30 young men graduated with a certificate in 
diamond drilling and at their graduation ceremonies Coates 
diamond drilling company made an offer to hire all 30. Now 
that’s one company  one company hired all 30, or made an 
offer to hire all 30. They made an offer. They would have hired 
 now I’m going to have to ask Mr. Keys, but they made an 
offer to hire all 30 of them. 
 
Now if you look across Canada, in talking to rock miners, They 
have a big shortage of these type of skilled technicians. Now 
that’s 30 young men from across northern Saskatchewan who 
took a course, upgraded their skills, received education in a 
course that has very good job opportunities not only in northern 
Saskatchewan but also right across Canada. 
 
With regards to Key Lake, as I said, I mean you made a big 
production when you stood up a while ago and said that, you 
know, when your administration was, in, 40 to 50 per cent of 
the people at Key Lake were Northerners, and as soon as we 
formed government that that dropped right off to zip. And as I 
said, that is not true. You were either misinformed or 
deliberately misleading this House because Key Lake was not 
in production until late ’83, early ’84. And today, as these 
training programs go on, they have gone from 27 per cent of 
their work-force in ’83  

being northerners, to 29 per cent. 
 
And it’s a slow process. There was never opportunities in 
northern Saskatchewan, or very limited opportunities for many 
of the young people there, or even the older people, to upgrade 
their skills. And this is a priority of this government, to work 
together with those communities in providing the necessary 
skills to take advantage of the opportunities that are there today 
and that will be there tomorrow and in the future. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Just one quick question, Madam Minister. You 
said that you hired  30 people were offered. I would like to 
. . . you know I have talked to some of those people that were 
offered, but they said they did not get the jobs. Everybody was 
indeed offered. The question that came up to me was in regards 
to whether or not . . . there was 15 of them that called our office 
and some of them didn’t get paid, weren’t able to come out of 
their community, and we had to make inquiries on their behalf. 
And there is no way that 30 were hired like that as you seem to 
imply. I want to know those names of the 30 and which 
company did they go get hired by  those 30 names of those, 
and which companies were they hired by. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Quite frankly, I don’t believe that 
rhetoric because when I pointed this out to you were unaware of 
this fact. So now you stand there and say, well 15 of them 
phoned me, or 16 or them phoned them. At the graduation class 
of these 30 young men, all of them received a letter, an offer of 
a job. Now whether they took it or not, I don’t know. But I’m 
going to put you on the spot. You send me those 30 names or 
those 15 names of people that phoned you  young men that 
phoned you  and said that they weren’t hired, and we will 
follow that up. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, you’re raising a question in 
regards to calling me in terms of not telling the information 
correctly. I asked you very straightforward, I’m here to ask the 
questions, number one; you’re here as a minister in charge to 
answer them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Goulet:  I would like to know, Madam Minister: of the 
30 names in regards to mining development in northern 
Saskatchewan, I would like the 30 names, and I would like to 
know where they were hired? That’s the question that I ask you; 
could you answer it, yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  you got up and you said 15 of those 30 
young men phoned you and said they didn’t have a job or they 
weren’t paid. So I am going to ask you to send me those 15 
names of those 15 individuals and we will follow it up for you. 
You are very, very good at jumping up, day after day, and 
saying this person, that person; this is happening, that’s 
happening; and you never pass on names. And I’m telling you, 
if you don’t send me those 15 or 16 names it’s a figment of 
your imagination. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, you still haven’t  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

839 
 

answered my question. This is the third time I will ask you. 
There were 30 names that you implied were hired, and the 
letters were there. I would like to know what the names of those 
30 people were and which companies they were hired by? 
That’s the question that I’m asking you. And you’re the 
minister responsible for it. What is the answer to this question? 
What is the answer to this question, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Thirty young men from across northern 
Saskatchewan were chosen to attend the La Ronge Community 
College which put on a diamond drilling class, a class that they 
got a credit for. These 30 young men came from all across 
northern Saskatchewan; they were housed at the friendship 
centre; they all received a certificate in hard-rock diamond 
drilling; and at their graduation all 30 of them received an offer 
. . . Listen to me, listen, please listen! All 30 of them received 
an offer of employment from one company; that company was 
Coates diamond drilling company. Now when I first brought 
that up, you were unaware of it, but you jump right up and say, 
well, 15 or them phoned me and said they don’t have a job. So 
it’s either a figment of your imagination, or you are again 
deliberately misleading this Assembly. 
 
So I will tell you, tomorrow you send me the 15 names of 
young people that phoned you, and when I receive that I well 
send you the list of 30 names with addresses, with addresses of 
the 30 young men who took this course and were offered a job. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, there is . . . every time that 
we raise a question from this side of the House, you seem to be 
on the questioning trip. You’re always wanting to find out what 
information in regards that we do have. Our job is not that. Our 
job here is to question you, Madam Minister. 
 
You’re making assumptions that I do not know, but if I give 
you a name, if any connection, any name from this side of the 
House is given to you, they will never be hired  and that’s a 
simple fact. You knocked off a hundred people in terms of the 
department of northern Saskatchewan; you have knocked off 
everybody. 
 
In many cases if people provide you with names from this side 
of the House, the worst happens to them. And there is no way 
that we would present you with any names from this side of the 
House, because every time that happens, they lose their jobs. 
There is enough jobs lost in northern Saskatchewan from your 
administration than for me to ever offer to give you any jobs. 
 
That in fact I still want the answer to the question: how many 
people of those 30 were actually hired? I’m not talking about 
job offers. Job offers can happen to anybody any day of the 
week. The question is: how many were hired? How many were 
actually hired by the company that you say offered them a job? 
Although you said Coates offered them 30 jobs, how many did 
Coates actually hire? Tell me that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Coates wanted to hire all 30 of them. 
They made a job offer to all 30 individuals to work for their 
company. 
 

An Hon. Member:  We want an answer. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That is the answer, but you, you, 
member from Cumberland, stood up and made an allegation, 
receiving phone calls . . . now either these 15 people are real or 
they’re fictitious, and I can tell you, if the member from 
Athabasca raises a concern on behalf of an individual or a group 
of individuals, he passes the names on so it’s dealt with. 
 
So I again say to you: this is a fact. All 30 of those young men 
who graduated from that course were offered employment with 
the Coates diamond drilling company. Now you send me the 15 
names of young men who are concerned, who have raised 
concerns with you. I will send you the list of 30 names of kids 
or young men that attended this course and graduated from this 
course. We will follow up on the 15. And if you don’t, it’s 
empty rhetoric, empty allegation, typical of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, this is very typical of your 
government. Every time that we want to have a question, you 
never, ever, ever give us a straight answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet:  I want the answer to the simple question I raise 
to you for the umpteenth time. Of those 30 people that Coates 
offered a job, how many of them were hired by Coates? I’m 
asking you a very simple, straightforward question. Do you 
know, or do you not know? As a minister you are supposed to 
know  I don’t think you know. You either know or you don’t 
know. Just give it to us straight there, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Look it, you’re not going to worm your 
way out of this one. You either send me the names of those 15 
people that you allege phoned you saying they couldn’t get a 
job  I will follow up on each individual name. I do know that 
Coates diamond drilling company gave a letter of offer to every 
one of those 30 individuals who graduated from the La Ronge 
Community College after they had upgraded their skills. You 
send me those 15 names and I will send you the 30 that attended 
that college and upgraded their skills and had a job offer. But I 
would say, member, you didn’t have one phone call. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, for the umpteenth time I’m 
asking you a simple question. You know the names of those 30 
people; why would I want to send you a list of 15 out of 30? 
You already have the names of the 30. Then the thing that I 
want to know from you is whether or not you know your own 
business; whether or not you know that you are responsible for 
economic development; whether or not you know that you are 
responsible for people in terms of hiring in northern 
Saskatchewan. You give me a statistic that 30 people were 
offered a job by Coates. Now all I’m asking you is: how many 
of them were hired by Coates? How many of them were 
actually hired by Coates, that’s what I want. I want to know, 
madam Minister, what it is. Come straight. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I would suggest you come straight, but 
I’m going to reiterate what I said. You asked me for an example 
of how training works. I gave you an example.  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

840 
 

You weren’t aware of this example, but you suddenly jump up 
and allege that you had phone calls from 15 of these young men 
who didn’t receive a job, and I’m telling you that this company 
made an offer to all 30 to hire them in their own company. 
 
You’re saying 15 didn’t get a job . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I will. Oh, and they holler from their seats, because you know 
you’re not winning on this one, because he made a very serious 
statement, allegation, which is not unlike what members across 
do. The member form Saskatoon Centre, I believe, is famous 
for that, bandying about names. 
 
I understand we’re not going to finish tonight, that you want 
this department to come back on Wednesday afternoon. I will 
bring the list of 30 names, and I will pass them to you when you 
send me your list of 15 that you allege . . . You stand up in a 
very sanctimonious way, make wild accusations. I will send you 
the list of names with the date that they were employed, when 
the offer was made, the date of the offer to all 30, who was 
hired, the date that they were hired  but I want that list of 15 
names. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Madam Minister, you talk about sanctimonious. 
I’ve never heard of such a sanctimonious display and lack of 
responsibility since I’ve been here in the legislature for a year 
and a half. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet:  I have been asking you a question. You are 
responsible for jobs; you are responsible for economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan. You made a statement 
and it implied that 30 of those people were hired by Coates. I 
would like to know, madam Minister, how many of those 
people were hired by Coates. I would like to know very 
directly, Madam Minister. Can you be responsible and answer 
that question, because you are . . . You could have answered 
this 10 minutes ago, but you chose not to answer this question 
of which you are responsible for. Why don’t you be responsible 
and give us the answer and that would resolve the issue and we 
would quit spending time on this issue. Why don’t you just . . . 
And I think, Madam Minister, you are trying to bluff your way 
out of it. I think what we are starting to find out is that you 
simply don’t know your own business. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That is so ridiculous, so ridiculous. You 
have got yourself in a box, that you don’t know how to crawl 
out of it. You stood up here and you made an allegation that 15 
young men phoned you, saying they weren’t given a job. Send 
me the list of that 15 and I will . . . I will send it to you. The job 
offer was made at a public graduation ceremony by a Coates 
representative. Each person was given a letter of intent, a letter 
to be hired. This company wanted to hire all 30 of those young 
men to help them in northern Saskatchewan. But I’m just . . . 
You know, every day one of you, or two of you, or three of you, 
pop up usually using a fictitious person as an example. 
 
On Wednesday I will provide you with a list of the 30 names, 
the date that the offer was made to all 30 of them, the date that 
they commenced working. But in exchange I  

want the list of the 15 and if  you know, you’re going to have 
egg on your face  if tomorrow and Wednesday morning that 
28 of them are working, or 29 of them are working, or 27 or 
them are working. Perhaps a few of them didn’t take up the job 
offer. But if there’s 28 or 29 of them working, you should get 
up and apologize for using fictitious people to make a political 
point. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Madam Minister, I would only 
want to say that if the member from Cumberland never shared 
the list with you, it would only be to save them from 
persecution and prosecution, the same as you’ve done to every 
other person in this province who hasn’t totally agreed with 
your particular philosophy. People are scared throughout this 
province and there’s no doubt about it. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to ask you under subvote 12, estimated 
’88-89 payments to the Sask. Property Management 
Corporation, You’ve indicated some $2,092,700  ’87-88, 
about one and one-half million, a difference of some 539 
million. I’d like to know how much of this is going to be in 
empty office space, and if there is, how much it’s costing the 
people of this province. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay, of that extra amount 320,000 of 
that is for the North Portal reception building and that is a  
it’s under construction right now. It should be open the 
beginning of June. That is a one-time cost and that is 
cost-shared 50-50 with the federal government. We do the up 
front funding for that project but then we’re reimbursed. 
Approximately 60,000 of the remaining will be used for 
regional office, upgrading our business resource centres, that 
type of thing. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  How much of that is empty office space, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  None of it is empty, except for the 
North portal that’s under construction. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  A further question regarding the business 
resource centres. I’m rather curious as to what you see for a 
need for the business resource centres at this time in that they 
have no programs to administer or deliver or inform business 
people in this province about. You’ve scrapped every program 
that was available to the business community in the province, 
and I would like to know, you know, what you see for the future 
of the business resource centres? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  There is a great need for the business 
resource centres. They’re particularly popular in centres outside 
of Regina. Last year the 15 regional offices handled 36,000 
inquiries. And some of the things that they do is they provide 
information on any business that a person is either thinking 
about going into to, an existing business they want to know 
what opportunities . . . expansion, whatever. So it’s delivering 
of information. 
 
We do some counselling with businesses. We also . . . Last year 
we developed 5,700 business plans, and these plans are used by 
business people when they’re applying  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

841 
 

to say, the subagreement on tourism, the WDO (western 
diversification office), to the bank, whatever. And really the 
objectives of the regional offices are to ensure that 
Saskatchewan business community is aware of the services 
provided throughout government, not just Economic 
Development and Tourism. And it’s there to ensure that 
information is readily available and usable by small businesses. 
We like to ensure that Saskatchewan businesses have access to 
management counselling and advice, and really to ensure that 
concerns of small businesses are identified and brought to the 
attention of appropriate government officials. 
 
In the regional office we really work as a liaison with 
businesses to access other departments. And I might say that 
since the opening of the business resource centres, activities has 
increased over 300 per cent. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, I have one of your kits 
in terms of information for the business people of 
Saskatchewan, and I note you’ve used a marketing work-book 
here from the Government of Manitoba. I see further 
underneath this $30 package, you’ve got some information that 
you’re will to share with the business community that comes 
from the U.S. small business administration, and are charging 
the people of Saskatchewan. I look on the inside and I see a 
full-blown picture of the former minister and a little message as 
part of the package, and I’m wondering if you think it’s fair to 
be delivering this kind of political rhetoric to the business 
community and then charging them for it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well in response to the member, the kit 
actually contains a lot of useful information, information that’s 
available. It does cost the department money to reproduce that 
type of booklets or pamphlets or whatever you have, and the 
requests for that kit are very high. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, tonight we’ve gone 
through a number of different topics, and we talked about the 
hospitality institute that seems to be a phantom. We talked 
about the Canada-Saskatchewan agreement, of which you’ve 
put only half of what you had committed yourself to in 1984  
and, I might add, a big disappointment to members on this side 
of the house. 
 
There seems to be another bag of feathers here that I’d like to 
try and tie down, and that’s the entrepreneur institute that you 
promised last year, without any details, in last year’s budget 
address. And then five months later . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Another institute. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Oh yes, another institute and yet another 
study. And then in November of ’87, five months later, the 
minister appointed an advisory council to undertake 
development of the institute, another advisory board. I’m 
wondering if you could tell me how much the cost of yet 
another advisory board that you’ve embarked upon  if you 
could tell what the costs of that one and who the members of 
that board might be. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The entrepreneurial institute committee 
is made up of Al Nicholson, Ken McNabb, Elizabeth 
Crosthwaite, Marlow Ross, Pamela Shaheen,  

Brian Larrivee, Eleanor Rock, Constance Young, Wayne 
Steadman, John Lalonde, Murray Hutchings, and Gordon Keats. 
They have had a number of meetings in Saskatoon and Regina 
to date with various business groups such as the chamber of 
commerce. They have met with officials from the University of 
Saskatchewan  I believe the College of Commerce. 
Unfortunately, right now in the province there is no 
entrepreneurial training available. In the area of hospitality, our 
technical schools do have some courses available in that area in 
the hospitality industry, but in the area of entrepreneurial 
training there is really nothing available in the province. 
 
Very shortly the committee will be travelling to about seven 
communities to discuss aspects of the concept of an 
entrepreneurial institute, really to gauge whether the attitudes 
are the same, whether the approach in various parts of the 
province is the same. I would hope to have a final report from 
the committee after their travels, probably mid-June, the latter 
part of June. I can’t give you a cost right now, but we could 
probably provide that tomorrow with the other one that we said 
we would. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As I said 
before, another no bricks and mortar institute, and we’re hoping 
that it will be in place for the 1990 or ’91 election campaign, as 
I have come to believe the hospitality institute will be as well. 
 
I’d like to ask you, Madam Minister, if I might, about the 
industrial incentives program  and you’re now fully 
responsible for that. I’d like to know these questions, and if you 
could have your officials jot them down for you: what 
percentage of the 10.6 million in the diversification and 
investment fund is to be paid out under the industrial incentives 
program? I’d like to know what percentage is earmarked for 
entirely new development programming, and I would like to 
know when we can expect this new programming, if there is 
any in the offing? If you could answer those question, Madam 
Minister. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The officials will break out those 
percentages and we’ll get them to you  you know, it won’t 
take long, like tomorrow or whatever. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, can you tell me, is this 
10.6 million earmarked for large manufacturing, larger 
corporations, or what are the plans for it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It’s a performance-based program, so 
size is not the underlying factor. It’s the number of permanent 
jobs created is really the criteria. And some of the ones that I 
. . . Just a minute. 
 
The program, member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, is clearly 
earmarked for small businesses. And the officials say that at 
least 75 per cent of them, of the businesses that have qualified 
for the IIP (industrial incentive program), would have 10 or less 
employees. So the vast majority of the companies are in that 
small business category  10 or less employees. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, I would ask that you 
would undertake to give us a list of the companies 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

842 
 

that took advantage of the program from its beginning to the 
end. 
 
I’d like to ask you, as well, about the business development 
grants and 3.7 that you’ve got earmarked for what appears, to 
me, small business. Because if my perceptions of these two 
programs are correct, and I believe they are, the industrial 
incentives program dealt more with the larger entities  the 
Pocklingtons of the world. And I would like to know how much 
of this 3.7 is for pay-out under the old small business interest 
reduction program and how much is for new business 
programs? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Approximately two million of that is 
for the small-business interest reduction plan. And I just 
reiterate that about 75 per cent of the companies that have taken 
advantage of the industrial incentive program by far are small 
businesses employing 10 or less people. So it is, basically  
though it’s a performance-driven program  it is targeted to 
the small-business person out there. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, you’re indicating to me 
then that there is, instead of $3.7 million available for business 
development grants, only $1.7 million in this year’s budget. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The 1.7 million is made up of the 
venture capital program, the public issue assistance, northern 
economic development, Big Valley development, the commerce 
student counselling, the entrepreneurial institute. So this 1.7 is 
sort of direct moneys going out. And you have to understand 
that we have the western diversification opportunities. We still 
have the tourism subagreement that go to that type of 
development, too. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  I think, Madam Minister, you’re biting 
off a little more than you can chew. If you figure you can 
deliver realistic programs  all of those programs  with $1.7 
million, what I would say to you is that you don’t have much 
interest in what happens in terms of small business in the 
province. And again, another example of smoke and mirrors. 
You’re cleaning up an old program with $2 million of funding, 
and you indicate in your estimates in the Estimates book that 
you have got $3.7 million for small business, when in fact what 
you’ve got is $1.7 million that you’re going to have to spread as 
thin as silk. 
 
And I say to you, Madam Minister, every question that we’ve 
asked you tonight, every program that you have said you’ve 
delivered . . . that you promised to deliver, has either not come 
in terms of  and I’ll go through them again: the hospitality 
institute that never came, and probably never will; the 
entrepreneur institute that is being studied by another board and 
another commission. And now we look at the business 
development grants, and you’ve already spent $2 million out of 
the $3.7 million. And I ask you: how do you expect to maintain 
any credibility when one simple question will show that more 
than half of that $3.7 million has already been spent, and isn’t 
new money and isn’t a new program and won’t be a new 
program. 
 

And you talk about venture capital corporations and you talk 
about this, that and the other thing. And what I say to you is you 
haven’t got the funds in order to produce the programs and 
deliver the programs. And why, why in your estimates don’t 
you be clean and clear with the people of the province and tell 
them what’s happened to the $2 million, that it’s in a program 
that’s already gone. 
 
And I ask you, Madam Minister: why don’t you be honest with 
the estimates? And why don’t you tell the business community 
that under item 1, business development grants, instead of $3.7 
million you’ve only got $1.7 million to spend? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well, obviously you haven’t gone 
through the total Estimates book because there is a multitude of 
programs government-wide, not only in my department but 
government-wide, that supports small business in the province. 
You’ve got the venture capital program, the stock savings tax 
credit. Science and Technology supports small business through 
various R&D grants out of their department. The agriculture 
diversification fund is another one; SEDCO is another vehicle 
that supports small business and has had 25 successful years. 
Trade and investment has, I believe, 10 million in it that 
supports business. Rural diversification is another program that 
supports small business. So you’re narrowly focusing on one 
vote in my department rather than looking across all of 
government to see what is available. 
 
But I find it rather funny you get up in a tirade on one hand 
and talk about the deficit, and on the other hand there’s never 
enough. But if you look at total government spending, total 
government programs available to support small business, the 
moneys are there. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  I believe, Madam Minister, you’re 
mission the point. The point is that this figure of $3.71 million 
is a deception. And the other point to be made is, if there was a 
department that would look after small business, you would 
have it all itemized where we could question one minister who 
was in charge of one department that dealt with one sector of 
our economy, namely small business. But that, under this 
government, isn’t the case, and I suggest to you that it’s not fair, 
and it’s not the way you should be doing things. 
 
So you’ve got under subheading 1 some $1.7 million. I would 
like to know when we can expect the new programs from this, if 
there are any new programs in the guide-lines, and when there 
will be some application forms out there for the business 
people. And I would like as well to get verbal confirmation of a 
breakdown of the industrial incentives program that you 
indicated with a nod of the head that you would pass on to us. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, we will send you that information 
that you requested previously. 
 
With regards to your last statement, that is really one of the 
functions of the business resource centres of which there are 15 
of them scattered around Saskatchewan, to be able to direct a 
business person to the right department when they are looking 
for support or information. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

843 
 

So that’s really one of the functions. And many of those 36,000 
inquiries that were handled last year was done in that matter, 
you know, telling a person that there was something through the 
agriculture diversification fund, or go see Trade and 
Investment, or go contract SEDCO. So that really is a . . . We 
act as a liaison between all departments that provide economic 
development funding. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, I wasn’t asking about 
the function of the business resource centres, because I 
understand clearly what their function is. What I was suggesting 
is that in your government reorganization, you’re making it 
very difficult for the opposition to scrutinize your spending. 
We’ve just . . . under one subitem here  and if we wanted to 
drag these estimates on for two weeks, we probably could  
but under one subitem we found a deception of some $2 
million. What you’ve put in here in terms of an expenditure, 
under business development grant, is actually money that 
you’ve committed previously. And I say it’s an earmark of this 
government. And tonight, very clearly, it indicated that that’s 
where you were at. 
 
Madam Minister, there are other problems that your department 
hasn’t addressed and that your department hasn’t addressed and 
that your government hasn’t addressed, and I’d like to go 
through a few of them. In terms of expediency, we just don’t 
have the time that I would like to have, but there are some 
problems out there that your department and your government 
hasn’t been addressing. 
 
(2145) 
 
And one of them, I want to suggest to you, is the matter of store 
hours and the effect that extended store hours and going to have 
on rural Saskatchewan and small businesses in small town 
Saskatchewan. And I say to you that you haven’t thought it 
through clearly. Because you, on one hand, talk about keeping 
rural Saskatchewan alive and repopulating rural Saskatchewan, 
and then on the other hand you introduce legislation that will 
give wide open store hours in this province and make no 
doubt about it that’s what’s going to happen  and going to 
make those business people those little grocers, and those 
people that run little confectioneries and restaurants and hotels 
in rural Saskatchewan, you’re going to make them compete on a 
seven-day-a-week basis with urban Saskatchewan. And urban 
Saskatchewan right now is already creating problems for 
small-town Saskatchewan, and I say it’s a problem that your 
government hasn’t been willing to address. 
 
What you’ve done is you’ve shifted your responsibility to the 
municipal Government of Saskatchewan, allowing them to 
dictate their own store hours, and you know full well what’s 
going to happen. One jurisdiction will extend their hours, which 
will mean a neighbouring jurisdiction will have to extend their 
hours, which means you’re going to see seven-day opening and 
extended hours. No matter how you look at it, that’s what the 
end result of the legislation is going to be. And I say, instead of 
you being responsible to the small business community in rural 
Saskatchewan, you’ve thrust that responsibility onto the 
municipal Government of Saskatchewan and clearly abdicated 
your responsibility to make sure that those rural operations 
remain viable. 
 

And while I’m talking about rural Saskatchewan, let me address 
your proposed liquor legislation. What in this proposed liquor 
legislation is going to keep viable rural hotels alive? There are 
dozens of them out there right now that can’t afford insurance. 
And instead of addressing that problem, what you’re hell-bent 
on doing is destroying SGI, the only vehicle that could develop 
an insurance system and an affordable insurance system for 
rural Saskatchewan hoteliers. But what do you do? You’re 
putting them to the whims of the market-place and throwing it 
wide open. And there will be no more comparison between SGI 
and the private companies, and they’ll be held at the whim of 
the market. 
 
And what have you said about that, Madam Minister? What 
have you said to protect those small hoteliers? I tell you, you’ve 
said little or nothing. And what in this new Act will put more 
money into the pockets of rural hoteliers? Again I say, nothing. 
The proposal, as I understand it, is that you’re offering that they 
can sell canned beer at half of the mark-up that they did on their 
bottled beer. But your answer, of course  your government’s 
answer is to tell them that they’re going to increase their growth 
by 100 per cent and pick up that mark-up. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, as minister responsible for Economic 
Development and Tourism, you should hold yourself 
accountable to those small town hotels, but you don’t. You talk 
about pie-in-the-sky hospitality institute and entrepreneurial 
institute  nothing concrete, no bricks and mortars, just more 
promises. And I say to you that it’s not acceptable. 
 
You talk about enhancing tourism and it’s got opportunities to 
bring in tens of millions of dollars in revenue to the people of 
this province and the business community. And what do you 
do? You hold back on the road system dollars that would have 
kept a decent highway system in this province since 1982. And 
there’s holes. And what do you say to your cabinet colleagues 
and to the Premier whom you support? And I tell you, you’re 
missing out on that boat as well, because people aren’t happy 
driving over your pot-holes and watching your red flags as they 
go mile by mile through Saskatchewan roads. 
 
And what have you said to protect the business community 
from the gas tax? What have you said, Madam Minister? I 
haven’t heard a peep from you. I haven’t heard one thing about 
the bureaucracy that your Premier instructed his minister to 
design  not a word. And tell me, Madam Minister, are you 
convinced in your mind that the truckers and the travelling 
salesmen can afford that 7 cents a litre after you’ve heaped 
upon them flat taxes, and increases in business taxes, E&H tax 
increases, and cut-backs to every service; the drug prescription 
plan, a $125 deductible? Where are they to get this money? 
Where are they to find these dollars? 
 
And then you address the business tax, really address the 
business tax. You put $10 million into the blue book for a 
reduction in the business tax, but you’re asking the municipal 
Government of Saskatchewan to match the 10 million. Well 
where do they get the 10 million from? I mean, does this  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

844 
 

10 million just fall out of the air the same way your deficit 
money seem to appear from? I say to you, Madam Minister, 
you’re not speaking for the business community in 
Saskatchewan, and they’re beginning to understand that you 
don’t govern for Saskatchewan businesses, but that you govern 
for the Weyerhaeusers and the Pocklingtons. That’s where your 
loyalties are, and that’s where your programs have been 
directed. 
 
You want to enhance tourism and bring in tens of millions of 
dollars of revenue, and then at the same time you increase the 
park fees to where they’re the highest in the western world or 
. . . I’m sure, or least in western Saskatchewan . . . or western 
Canada. You increase the rates, even down to the rates for kids 
that are going out to take swimming lessons in the summer, and 
chase those people out of the park. 
 
And you’ve got to know full well that rural Saskatchewan 
people can’t afford another penny of increase because of the 
agricultural situation in this province. But what do I hear from 
the minister? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Zip. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  My colleague says, zip, and that’s what 
I’ve been hearing. and I hear the same lines that were spouted 
by the former minister of Economic Development in the last 
estimates, so it tells me that, in terms of your vision of 
Saskatchewan, it hasn’t changed from that of the minister 
before you, that didn’t have one. 
 
And I tell you, Madam Minister, that the people of this province 
are not going to accept it. The business people are going to be 
along with the working people, and along with the farmers, and 
they’re going to be in 1990 or 1991, whenever your Premier 
gets the courage to call and election, they’re going to all join 
together and they’re going to turf you guys. 
 
And what I want to say to you is, you’re going to get a little 
taste of that on May 4 when the people from Saskatoon 
Eastview and the people from Elphinstone indicate very clearly 
to your candidates what they think of your economic 
development program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  And I tell you, Madam Minister, I want 
to watch the faces of your colleagues, your cabinet colleagues 
and your back-benchers, as two new NDP MLAs walk into this 
room with a message from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you can talk about Manitoba; you’ve been chirping about 
Manitoba for months as I’ve been in here. But I think, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, what’s more relevant is your political future, 
and I’m telling you, on May 4 you’re going to get a taste of 
what it is whenever you call that election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  And I would say to you, if your cabinet 
colleagues had any courage, they’d be telling the Premier of this 
province that he can’t be tearing this  

province apart as he’s done. Every institution that has been built 
up over decades in this province, you’re tearing apart, right 
from Sask Power to SGI, Sask Minerals  you name them. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Premier, since you seem to be 
interested, I say to you that on May 4 you’ll be facing the voice 
 and a very strong voice  from people of two ridings, and 
one whom you haven’t given a chance to speak for many 
months, and it’s long overdue. 
 
I want to say, Madam Minister, that the performance of your 
government has been a shame. And I want to say to you, as 
well, that what you’ve shown me tonight is that your 
performance in the Department of Economic Development and 
Tourism will be just as shoddy as that of your Premier and the 
Executive Council and the kind of government that you’ve 
delivered. 
 
And you talk about a negative attitude. Well I tell you, Madam 
Minister, there’s a lot of optimism on this side of the house. 
And I want to tell you why there’s optimism on this side of the 
House, because people in this province have come to 
understand your government for what it is. They’ve come to 
understand that you’re a wing of the Fraser Institute, the rip and 
tear and gouge organization out of B.C. They’ve come to 
understand that you’ll deliver no better government than what 
Maggie Thatcher did in Great Britain. And I would suggest to 
you that they know all about your colleague, Vander Zalm, in 
British Columbia, and they are seeing through right-wing 
administrations like yours, and I say you’re going to pay dearly 
at the polls whenever you call another election. 
 
I want to close, Madam Minister, tonight by thanking your 
officials for spending this time with us  and a difficult time 
they’ve had, indeed. I think one of my other colleagues would 
like to ask some questions in terms of the co-operative 
movement and the development of that particular vehicle of our 
economy. 
 
It being close to 10 o’clock, I will complete my remarks. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Mr. Chairman, a diatribe like that 
doesn’t require a response. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:56 p.m. 
 


