


















































May 11, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 11, 1988 
 

1237 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
introduce 21 grade 3 and 4 students, seated in your gallery 
today, from the Odessa School. They’re accompanied by their 
teach, Mrs. Marjory Holingshead; chaperons, Shirley Muhr, 
Marie Lockert, Brenda Schneider, and Sally Schneider. 
 
I hope the students enjoy their trip to Regina today, and I hope 
you enjoy a portion of the question period that you’ll be able to 
stay and see here in the House. And I’ll be glad to meet with 
you later to have pictures and refreshments. 
 
Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a good 
deal of pleasure to welcome from my constituency the chairman 
of the board of the Herbert School Division. He’s Mr. Wayne 
Watson of Hodgeville and he’s seated in your gallery here. And 
I’d like all the members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming you here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce, on 
behalf of the Premier, students from Scotsburn School in 
Estevan, grade 4 students. There are 19 of them. They are 
accompanied by their teach, Marilyn Mamczasz; also 
chaperons, Jan Blue and Charlotte Johner. 
 
I will be meeting with you at 2:30 for photographs. Meanwhile, 
I hope you enjoy the next half hour or so in the House. And on 
behalf of all the members, please join me in welcoming these 
students from Estevan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Division of SPC into Four Units 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was 
to be directed to the minister in charge of the power 
corporation. In his absence and the absence of the Premier, I 
suppose it should go to the minister in charge of privatization, 
and it has to do with the announcement yesterday by the SPC 
president, Mr. George Hill, that in effect SPC, Mr. Speaker, is 
now going to be split effectively into four separate units: one 
dealing with SaskPower, one dealing with Prov Gas . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Worse than you expected. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, as the Minister of Education says, 
worse that we expected, that’s for sure . . . one for Trans  

Gas, and one for Saskatchewan Energy Corporation. I notice 
that the Deputy Premier has just arrived. Perhaps I’ll, without 
repeating the preamble to the question, put the question in this 
way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, dealing with Trans Gas and the 
announcement by Mr. Hill that we now have a truncated 
four-part Saskatchewan Power Corporation where there used to 
be one integrated unit, will you not admit to the legislature that 
Trans Gas has been set up in this fashion specifically and 
purposefully, given the fact that its function is designed to 
export natural gas to the export markets, bypassing contact with 
local customers in Saskatchewan, that it’s been set up this way 
purposefully in order to achieve the objectives of privatization 
of you and your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer is no. 
The longer answer is Trans Gas has been set up to 
accommodate the conducting the business of the gas side of the 
existing utility in a changing world as it relates to the natural 
gas sector. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, there are about a hundred . . . I think about 
a hundred billion cubic feet of natural gas transported in the 
total system approximately with direct sales, a policy that was 
brought in by this government, that would provide for larger 
customers to source gas directly with the producer, with 
SaskPower maintaining the monopoly on transportation, Mr. 
Speaker. With that policy change and with . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you losing your train of thought? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, no I’m not. 
 
And with, Mr. Speaker, the additional and anticipated exports 
of natural gas as a result of policy changes by this government 
and the federal government, Mr. Speaker, it’s expected that 
Trans Gas will have to be in a position to carry about twice that; 
about, I think, 180 billion cubic feet of natural gas in the very 
near future, Mr. Speaker. So you can see that the gas business 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier. I must say as a short preface to the question 
that I find it very difficult to understand how breaking up an 
integrated, efficient utility into four separate units is somehow 
going to be more efficient or somehow will achieve an 
objective that couldn’t be otherwise achieved under the current 
structure. But my question is this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question is this to you — a new 
question: will you confirm, Mr. Deputy Premier, that your 
government is about ready to announce shortly an approximate 
$100 million project of 216 miles from Beacon Hill to Kyle 
with respect to the natural gas  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1238 
 

distribution system? And if so, does this fall under the 
ownership and control of the new subsidiary, Trans Gas, and if 
so, isn’t it correct that that’s being done specifically to make 
Trans Gas a very viable candidate for privatization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that we’re 
planning to make that announcement soon. In fact, I was of the 
impression that we made it some time ago, Mr. Speaker. If 
that’s not the case, I’ll ask them why. 
 
But it’s true that there’s about $90 million, I think it’s $90 
million worth of additional pipeline needed in the province to 
handle anticipated volumes, and it’s true that Ipsco is very 
happy about, and it’s true that gas producers are very happy 
about that. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not true that this is a design to 
. . . in some exercise of privatization. Mr. Speaker, that’s simply 
not the case. 
 
It’s not the case no more than it was the case for him to break 
up the potash corporation. What he broke up the potash 
corporation for was to have efficient management in the mining 
company, in the transportation company, and in the 
international company. We are looking for efficiency, Mr. 
Speaker, in a utility and in a transportation company and in an 
electrical company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. And as a preface, we must get this Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan break-up into perspective. That was done 
because of the United States taxation laws. And if you tell me 
that that’s what’s being done here, I’d like to hear that answer. 
 
I want to ask you specifically, Mr. Deputy Premiere, this: with 
respect to the $100 million Beacon Hill to Kyle project, is it 
correct that this is going to be built? Is it correct that it’s going 
to be fast-tracked to be built by November? Is it correct that 
Trans Gas will be owning it? Who’s paying it? And why 
doesn’t that make sense, according to your philosophy, to put 
Trans Gas up for sale? Tell us those answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if he’s suggesting that we 
should put Trans Gas up for sale, I’m prepared to take a look at 
that. The plan, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, is to separate the gas 
utility from the electrical utility for all of the reasons that I went 
through yesterday. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, it makes sense that the gas utility and 
the transportation network, which are different functions . . . 
IPL (Interprovincial Pipe Line) doesn’t have a utility. IPL 
doesn’t have a distribution system, they have a transportation 
system. We want a transportation system, Mr. Speaker, to get 
export gas into the export market, to get producer gas to 
sole-source consumers, and to get gas, Mr. Speaker, from the 
producer to the utility. 
 
It seems to me that by focusing the management in each  

one of these areas, that that is the right and proper way to go. 
And I’ve been persuaded of that, Mr. Speaker, and I support it 
100 per cent. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a further question — further 
new question to the Deputy Premier. This has to do with the 
overall theme of the Deputy Premier’s questions about this 
being merely an act of efficiency; this, meaning the break-up of 
power corporation, the integrated cross-subsidization, efficient 
— up to this current administration in any event — corporation; 
the breaking that corporation up into four separate units — his 
argument essentially boils to efficiency. 
 
Will the Deputy Premier please advise the House; you’re going 
to now have four separate entities. You’re going to have 
SaskPower, you’re going to have Prov Gas, you’re going to 
have Trans Gas, you’re going to have something call 
Saskatchewan Energy Corporation. Which one of those will 
George Hill be the president of? Who will be the overall 
president in charge of the co-ordinated activities of those four 
units? Or, as my colleague suggests, is George Hill going to be 
the boss of everything — not only the power corporation buy 
your government as well? Who’s going to run it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to draw a little 
comparison. The comparison is as follows. He’s talking about 
. . . I’m talking about the changing world in the gas business 
and in the utility business; he’s talking about the inefficiency, 
the inefficiency of breaking it up. 
 
Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what we have done is we 
have come to the belief that there is natural gas in 
Saskatchewan, and we have come to the belief that that resource 
ought to be developed, not as members opposite did. 
 
And while we’re talking about that, Mr. Speaker, they owned, 
they owned a thing called Many Islands Pipe Lines, which was 
an Alberta company, Mr. Speaker, owned by SPC — owned by 
SPC. They were the government. They owned a thing called 
North-Sask Electric, owned by SPC, separate company, owned 
by SPC, a wholly owned subsidiary of SaskPower. 
 
You know what we did with that, Mr. Speaker? We brought it 
in as part of SaskPower. North-Sask Electric is now part of 
SaskPower, and we are developing the electrical distribution 
and transmission system in the North to the benefit of 
Northerners, and they like it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now he can fracture the company to suit himself for his 
purposes at his time, but when we try to bring some efficiency 
to the modern times, he’s agin ’er. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not fracturing the 
company; this is not my announcement. It is my final new 
question to the minister, and I’m still waiting for an answer 
about what we’re going to do for poor old George Hill, which 
he hasn’t answered. 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1239 
 

But anyway, my question to the Deputy Premier is very simple. 
Perhaps he could give us an answer on this. We don’t know 
what George Hill is going to do. We don’t know quite what 
Trans Gas is going to do. Will the Deputy Premier be able to 
tell this House with respect to this question: he claims that 
they’re doing all of this for efficiency and for reduction of debt 
— the overall debt of the power corporation. If you want to 
reduce debt, Mr. Deputy Premier, why is it that your 
government has committed $1.1 billion for the building of 
shafferty in your own riding and in the Premier’s riding to save 
your own political skins? If you want to save debt, why didn’t 
you start looking right there to begin with, saving debts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points. 
Number one, he makes a big issue out of SaskPower owning 
subsidiary companies. He had two; he had two; it’s okay for 
him, but it’s not okay for us. 
 
Second point, he says $1.2 billion for Rafferty and he’s right 
out to lunch on that. It’s been pointed out to him a thousand 
times, in here and in Crown corporations and other places, it’s 
about six of one and half a dozen of the other as it relates to cost 
of the Shand project or the Coronach project. He wanted to 
build it in Coronach. Right? He wanted to build it in Coronach 
where it would have cost an additional $80 million for a 
scrubber. 
 
But their preferred option, Mr. Speaker, was to buy electricity 
from Manitoba. The Manitoba deal, Mr. Speaker, was so far out 
of whack that even those members wouldn’t have opted for that 
deal. They offered us 85 per cent of the avoided cost of a 
Minnesota utility that bore no relevance at all to the 
Saskatchewan situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privatization of SaskCOMP 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is to 
the minister of privatization. I have here the latest annual report 
for the Saskatchewan computer utility corporation, and it shows 
that SaskCOMP in the year 1987 made $3.4 million. It also 
shows that in the last 10 years this corporation has made $21 
million. Why then, Mr. Minister, is the sell-off of SaskCOMP 
such a good deal for the people of province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated when I 
announced the formation of WESTBRIDGE computer 
company, that we were able, with this merger with SaskCOMP, 
SaskTel, and a couple of other companies, to put together a 
state of the art computer company that will have over 200 new 
jobs for Regina in this area. We’ll be able to compete in the 
western market and is offering the, as I say, state of the art 
services to western Canada, headquartered right here in Regina. 
And I believe that kind of diversification and development is 
right on the money. 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. We’ve heard this song and 
dance before, Mr. Minister. We hard this when you privatized 
Saskoil. Where are the jobs? Twenty-five per cent of the jobs 
were lost within the first year. We hard it with SED Systems. 
Where are the jobs? Seventy jobs were lost this past winter. 
 
Mr. Minister, this annual report shows that this company had a 
net return on profit of 36 per cent — a return of 36 per cent, Mr. 
Minister. In the last five years there have been years where this 
company has returned over 100 per cent on equity. 
 
My question is: why do you feel that this kind of profitability 
should not be available for all of us? Why do you suggest that 
this kind of profitability should only be available for the few? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I really don’t understand 
what a net return on profit is, but I’ll let their member explain 
that. But certainly she does not listen and these things had been 
explained in this legislature before. 
 
She indicates that Saskoil there are no new jobs. I heard the 
Deputy Premier indicate that there will be about 6 to 800 wells 
drilled by Saskoil, gas wells in this province, and I can tell you 
that is going to be new jobs and new job creation right here in 
Saskatchewan. It’ll be good for Saskatchewan people and 
certainly for employees. 
 
I’d like to remind the member opposite of the quote from the 
union in SaskTel on the merger towards . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — SaskCOMP. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — . . . with SaskCOMP coming in with 
WESTBRIDGE. They indicated they were in favour of it 
because it was new job creation — jobs for Saskatchewan 
people, jobs for graduates of our schools. And that, I believe, is 
good for employees and good for this city and good for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. In 1987 the return on 
investment was 37 per cent; in 1986 the return was 25 per cent; 
in 1985, 35 per cent; in 1984, 100 per cent; in 1983, 90 per cent; 
in 1982, 120 per cent return on investment. Mr. Minister, why 
can’t those kinds of returns be the property of the people of this 
province to pay for important public programs like health and 
education, and why should those profits be the property only of 
a few of the PC Party friends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
fails to realize . . . and she’s bound by her ideology of 
controlling and keeping things as they were, not building and 
not diversifying. Does she realize that 200 new employees will 
be people that will be adding to the consumption of this city and 
this province? Does she realize that that will be 200 new 
taxpayers paying taxes to  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1240 
 

the revenues of the province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is by creating new jobs by doing things 
different, by keeping in tune with the times and creating 
companies right here in Saskatchewan that can compete across 
Canada, bring that work and bring those jobs here. And that’s 
what this side of the House stands for. That’s what I believe in, 
diversification, and that’s what public participation is doing 
time after time after time under the guidance of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know who the builders of 
this province are, and they aren’t the members opposite. The 
people of this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The people of this province believe that those 
members opposite are trying to destroy this province. 
 
I have a new question. Mr. Minister, in early March I wrote to 
you asking for the agreements which established 
WESTBRIDGE, as referred to in your orders in council, and all 
supporting documentation. So far, Mr. Minister, you haven’t 
even had the courtesy of acknowledging my letter. Mr. 
Minister, if this is such a good deal for the people of this 
province, will you today table the documentation that has to do 
with the sale of SaskCOMP, SaskTel, and Secore? Will you do 
that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated to the 
member opposite that yes, those documents would be 
forthcoming, and they will, I should also indicate to the member 
opposite, because she chooses to ignore this, that there will be a 
public share offering in that company. There will be a public 
share offering in which the ordinary people of Saskatchewan 
can invest in that company and can reap the benefits of the 
growth of that company as it grows and expands in the new 
computer industry across western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Suspension of Water Study Employee 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the absence of the 
minister responsible for the water corporation and the absence 
of the Premier, I will direct this question to the Deputy Premier 
who, I assume, can speak on behalf of this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I read in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix this 
morning, an article that tells me the minister responsible for the 
water corporation has given a two-week suspension without pay 
to Stephen Kendall, director of the four-year study in the South 
Saskatchewan River Basin. I also understand that the basis of 
this suspension is because the minister responsible for the water 
corporation doesn’t agree with some things stated by Mr. 
Kendall. Mr. Deputy Premier, is it the position of your 
government that you can suspend, without pay,  

anybody associated with your government who doesn’t happen 
to share your version of the facts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The hon. member, Mr. Speaker, says 
that — and these are his words — he says, I understand that he 
was suspended because the minister responsible for the Sask 
Water Corporation didn’t like something that he said. Reading 
from the same article — I point out that this is from the 
Star-Phoenix — reading from the same article, Mr. Speaker, it 
says here, it says here, quoting the minister, — and I wish I 
could find it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, he said, “Swan 
said he was unaware of the suspension, although (he said) the 
letter . . . the person made some very foolish remarks,” very 
foolish remarks and perhaps he would have . . . and he was 
surprised, quite frankly, that he wasn’t notified by the water 
corporation, Mr. Speaker, that . . . the only reason I point that 
out is I would like the hon. member to be completely honest, 
completely honest; you were implying that this person was 
suspended because of some disenchantment of the minister. The 
minister had no knowledge of the suspension, Mr. Speaker. And 
so I just point that out in answer to the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister. I 
will quote the quote that the minister has today in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix. Listen to this, Mr. Deputy Premier, again quoting 
the minister — “he”, referring to Mr. Kendall. 
 

He made some very foolish remarks last week where I 
would have felt like suspending him but I didn’t do it. (He 
said.) I’m surprised that I wasn’t notified. 

 
Your Minister of the Environment publicly accuses a qualified 
individual of making foolish statements. Your minister 
responsible for the water corporation suspends this man without 
pay. He says he wasn’t notified, Mr. Deputy Premier. Who is in 
charge of the water corporation, and why don’t you just stand 
up and admit in this House that your government will not 
tolerate any opposition to the Shand-Rafferty project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, again quoting from the 
same article. It says that: 
 

Bob Halliday, the federal representative on the joint 
board . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. We’re having 
some difficulty hearing the minister, and would the House 
co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — 
 

Bob Halliday, the federal representative on the joint board 
overseeing the study, said that Kendall’s suspension was 
prompted by comments in the article, but there was 
(much) more to it (that that). 

 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1241 
 

Much more to it than that, Mr. Speaker. So it was a simple, I 
suppose, an unfortunate situation, Mr. Speaker, but clearly an 
administrative problem within the water corporation, and 
nothing that neither the minister nor I nor members of this 
House had anything to do with. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question, final question. Mr. 
Deputy Premier, I think this does have much more to do with 
this particular situation. I think it has more to do with the kind 
of government you operate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, isn’t this just one more example of the 
kind of government that you’re a part of and lead; a government 
that tyrannizes its civil servants; a government that cannot 
accept opposition; a government that will deny free speech in 
this province; and a government who will do absolutely 
anything to accomplish its political goals. Isn’t that what’s 
really going on here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, no. 
 

Administering of Medical Drugs in Provincial Jails 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the Minister of Justice, 
and concerns your announced policy of having guards 
administer medical drugs in provincial jails. 
 
Mr. Minister, the danger of having untrained people administer 
medical drugs is too obvious to need to be stated. Indeed, so 
concerned are the guards, who are the first to admit that they 
don’t have the knowledge or qualifications, that they’ve 
commenced a court action trying to stop this policy. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that this idea deserves the same 
distinguished end as your one great phone book idea, and will 
you can it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I make two observations, Mr. Speaker. 
Number one, I was served today with a notice of motion on this, 
and as the hon. member is aware, when a matter like this is 
going before the Court of Queen’s Bench, then it is no proper 
for myself or the member opposite to get into a detailed 
political debate about an issue that is going to be argued before 
the court. I would make that point number one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask the hon. member as well, before he gets carried 
away in a flap, to look at the history of this province on this 
particular issue, and particular as how this is done in correction 
centres in the city of Saskatoon and the city of Prince Albert, 
before he gets carried away with his tantrum. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think we can do this a little more 
efficiently if we, by leave, before orders of the day, move: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 7, An Act to 
amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments Act, be 
discharged and the Bill referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by the leave of the 
Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 8, An 
Act to amend The Public Libraries Act, be discharged 
and the Bill referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 20 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank, you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, as the 
critic for seniors’ issues I have some specific questions to ask 
you as the minister in charge of the Seniors’ Directorate and the 
senior citizens’ services. 
 
But before I begin my specific questions I want to take a few 
minutes to express my concerns regarding your government’s 
treatment of seniors. And I make these comments here because 
you are the minister who has been speaking with seniors as their 
representative in the PC government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I know very well from what I can expect in 
terms of your response after sitting here in the legislature 
listening to the comments that you’ve made in response to the 
serious issues that my colleagues have addressed to you. I know 
that anything that I choose to say will probably be either 
ignored or condemned, and that as soon as I sit down you will 
deliver yourself of another irrational speech. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, that you were quite rude to my colleague, 
the member from Regina Lakeview, in the House when she was 
questioning you about women’s issues, and so I have no reason 
to expect much different from you today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to tell you that it was a very sad day for 
Saskatchewan when you were named the minister in charge of 
your government’s social policies. 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1242 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: —Your PC government has been attempting to 
create a political atmosphere of hatred, an atmosphere which 
attempts to poison the social fabric of this beautiful province. 
 
And on behalf of the constituents in Saskatoon Centre and of all 
the Saskatchewan seniors, I criticize you for your juvenile, 
unstatesmanlike behaviour. And I want to go on record in this 
Assembly as a member who finds your attacks on groups of 
people to be deeply offensive and completely unjustified. And I 
do know, Mr. Minister, that many older people are alarmed by 
your allegiance t these politics of hatred and fear and deceit. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s been obvious from your actions and your 
remarks that you have little knowledge of the life situations or 
the life expectancies and the experiences of many people in this 
province today and that you and your PC government friends 
have no intention of becoming better informed about the 
realities of life for a good percentage of the people, both urban 
and rural, who are struggling to live under you PC 
government’s incompetence and often crushing regime. 
 
For one thing, the PC government which you so clearly 
represent has demonstrated a total lack of respect for the history 
of this province, a history which the seniors have worked so 
hard to create. You are destroying what they have built. You are 
condemning what they have valued and you are betraying what 
they have achieved. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I know these are strong words and that you 
will probably call this just rhetoric, and you will try to portray 
yourself as Mr. Nice Guy, Mr. Moral Majority, and that you 
will even try to link yourself with wonderful leaders like 
Tommy Douglas, who means so much to the people in this 
province, particularly the older people. 
 
If it suits you, you’re going to tell us that you’ve been following 
the policies of the NDP, and then you’re going to spin around 
and tell us exactly the opposite. Your performances are familiar 
now to the people of Saskatchewan even while you hurt them 
and while you make them heartsick. 
 
For example, Mr. Minister, your PC government’s attacks on 
our Crown corporations are destroying years of struggle to have 
some economic control in this province. It was the seniors who 
established and built the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is 
just one example. And it’s the seniors who understand the need 
to be frugal with our no-renewable resources. Our natural gas 
reserves will not last for ever, but they could be managed so 
that the seniors could have a heritage for their grandchildren. 
 
Your government doesn’t respect this as building for the future. 
You want to squander it all away in one feel swoop for 
short-term gain. And you, Mr. Minister, represent the “me” 
generation gone berserk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Your PC government tries to smear a  

valuable institution like the United Church, an institution dear 
to the hearts of many senior citizens. And when I was 
canvassing door to door in Eastview, I met many seniors who 
were just appalled at the cheap political attack on the church. It 
was a senseless remark that you made, but it backfired badly on 
you. And I say, thank goodness it did, because we now have 
two members of this side of the House to join in speaking out 
for the many seniors who live in Saskatoon and Regina and all 
around this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: —And, Mr. Minister, I say the PC government 
betrays what the seniors have achieved when you practise the 
politics of deceit. For years and years the political climate of 
this province was one of respect for this legislature and for the 
political life. But this PC government, by its broken promises, 
its cynical manipulation of the political process, and its hateful 
treatment of people, has brought discredit to politicians and to 
political life. 
 
And the seniors of this province are angry at you for doing this 
too. Over the years they have put a great deal of time and 
energy into political activity, and they value this legislature and 
they value the political process in this province. And they hope 
to leave a strong legacy for their grandchildren. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what they see instead right now is the 
cynicism and the powerlessness of the younger generation, 
which your government has done so much to encourage. You 
bought the young people off with your promises to remove the 
gas tax and then you turned around and implemented policies 
which forced young people into wretched unemployment, into 
leaving the farms and into leaving the province. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when we speak of seniors, we speak of all the 
changes which concern and upset older people, but we also 
speak of particular concerns which you as the minister 
responsible to seniors should be addressing. Mr. Minister, there 
is no protection left for seniors any more through the 
Rentalsman’s office, and their rents are sky-rocketing. There are 
any number of increases in utility bills, sales tax, municipal 
taxes, car registration, the flat tax. And the list goes on. 
 
The stupid destruction of the prescription drug plan has caused 
all sorts of hardships. Mr. Minister, if you really cared about the 
seniors, you would have worked hard against the changes to the 
prescription drug plan. No other issue has caused such pain. 
 
But what does your PC government do? It accuses the seniors 
of being drug abusers, and that, Mr. Minister, ha got to be the 
worst insult and the stupidest thing your government could say 
and do. It was grossly unjust. 
 
That action alone, destroying the prescription drug plan, 
supposedly to catch drug abusers while leaving the sick and the 
elderly to pay the price, just shows so clearly where your 
government’s priorities are when it comes to people. And it 
shows so clearly just why you lost so badly in both Elphinstone 
and Eastview. 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1243 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: —Mr. Minister, when I was going door to door in 
Eastview I was wondering if you were out there knocking on 
doors on behalf of your party. But I’m willing to be that you 
never set foot in either one of those constituencies on a 
door-to-door basis because you wouldn’t have the courage to go 
out and face the people, one to one, on the doorsteps. 
 
If you’d gone out, you would have heard and seen what I’ve 
seen — older people reeling under the effects of your policies, 
older people dismayed beyond belief by your actions. And I 
don’t exaggerate. 
 
I admit there are seniors who are well off and not hurting. I 
admit there are senior who are fiercely independent, and they 
don’t want to complain. I admit there are seniors who feel well 
cared for, if they are fortunate enough to live in the senior 
citizen residence. But there are many, many seniors who face 
fixed incomes, rising drug costs, inadequate housing, lack of 
transportation, concern about health care — and virtually all of 
them are deeply concerned about the future and about the 
quality of life that their grandchildren face. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I have made these general statements 
because you are the minister who appears to have been assigned 
to represent seniors to the government and in the cabinet, and I 
want to raise those issues because I think there are many, many 
concerns that you should be addressing and speaking out on, on 
behalf of seniors. 
 
I want to begin by pointing out to the heritage grant program, a 
program put in place — what, three years ago? — on a one-shot 
deal. And then the seniors didn’t known if it was going to come 
back again the next year, and they had to wait until the budget 
came out. Then they found out that the heritage grant was back, 
and they would have a little bit of money to help pay these 
escalating costs that they’re facing. And the same thing 
happened again this year. I got lots of phone calls: what about 
the heritage grant? Is it in; isn’t it in? 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you if it’s the intention of the 
government to keep this program on an ongoing basis. And can 
you assure the citizens, the senior citizens of this province, that 
the heritage grant will be in place next year and the year after 
that and the year after that? 
 
It’s cruelty to the seniors not to let them know whether they can 
count on that income when they’re living on low incomes to 
start with and facing the rising costs of your government. Can 
you guarantee then that the heritage grant will be in place in the 
future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I think I detected a 
question in that monologue, and I’m going to try to address 
some of the concerns that were raised there. 
 
First of all, let me give to the committee here an indication  

of what kind of a guarantee seniors can expect with respect to 
income in this province. The members opposite talk about a 
guaranteed income, and for senior citizens there is a guaranteed 
income. 
 
And I’ll give you the example of a senior couple over the age of 
65 who have no savings in the bank, no interest income, no 
rental income, only living on government pensions and 
government benefits. And they would have an income, that 
couple, as we stand here today they would have $15,392.96 of 
government pensions and supplements to live on in 
Saskatchewan as a guaranteed income for that senior citizens 
couple. 
 
That works out to: the old age pension from the federal 
government, old age security of $626.30 or $313.15 each; 
guaranteed income supplement for that senior couple of 
$484.78; and Saskatchewan income plan paid by the province 
of Saskatchewan of $105 for that couple, and that will be 
increased by $15 each. The maximum amount will go up to 
$135 for that couple as of November of this year as announced 
in the budget. In addition, they would be entitled to the 
Saskatchewan heritage program of $700, and a federal sales tax 
credit of $100, for a total income of $15,392.96 which is tax 
free — that’s clear money. 
 
Now you’d have to earn quite a lot more than that in the work 
place to clear $15,392.96. In addition, when our increase goes 
through in the Saskatchewan income plan in November, that 
income will go up to $15,752.96. 
 
Now when you look at a single senior, that income would be 
less for the single, but it would still be — after our increase 
comes through in fall — $9, 733.72, tax free and clear. 
 
So this government has implemented a guaranteed minimum 
income for senior citizens, and we have to compare that with 
the so-called compassion of the members opposite when they 
were government. Under the Saskatchewan income plan — 
that’s the pension that this government pays — that government 
paid $25 per month for a single senior. Our government, as of 
this November of this year, will be paying $80 per month. We 
have already had a 220 per cent increase in the Saskatchewan 
pension paid to senior citizens. 
 
So the members opposite try to paint a picture of how they 
cared for senior citizens. What I’m saying is the cash is there, 
Mr. Chairman. This government has put the cash in the pockets 
of senior citizens, and we are proud of the record and the 
financial assistance we have given to senior citizens. 
 
With respect to the heritage program implemented by this 
government, the former government had a plan based on taxes, 
on whether you paid taxes or not on your property taxes. If you 
didn’t pay property taxes, you didn’t receive that kind of 
money, nor did you receive $700 for a family and $500 single, 
nor was there any limit. 
 
They talk about the rich. You could have an income of 
$100,000 a year and you would get a property tax grant rebate 
from the NDP. The program that we have implemented pays as 
follows: $500 for a single senior  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1244 
 

with an income under $25,000 a year; $700 for a senior couple 
with an income under $25,000 per year; and $200 for seniors 
who are living in government-subsidized housing which is 
already subsidized by the taxpayers, and we feel that $200 
should be paid to assist with other costs, but they don’t pay 
taxes there. 
 
So that totals 107,000 senior citizens in Saskatchewan who 
received $39,554,000 last year to assist them. Now that had an 
upper limit on it, and if your income was between 25,000 and 
30,000, you received half payment on that; and over 30,000 we 
felt that senior citizens could retire on their own funds and did 
not need that government assistance. 
 
But the NDP in their program, when they talk about giving 
money to the rich, paid everyone regardless of their income. So 
that shows some of the hypocrisy that that government 
displayed in their practices compared to the things that they 
now advocate in opposition. 
 
I can go on and on, and I will later today, in explaining more 
and more of the seniors’ programs that this government has. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure I got an answer to 
my question as to whether the heritage grant program would 
continue next year and the year after that. Could you just 
answer that question, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the concern 
out there is caused purposefully by the NDP who go around 
preaching negativism and saying — oh yes, I remember in the 
election, I remember what they said — oh you got it now, but 
you won’t get it after the election. Well they did; they got it the 
year after the election and they got it two years after the 
election. 
 
I say that if the NDP want to go out and say again that no, 
you’re not going to get this any more, they can go ahead and 
tell the seniors that again. But the seniors are alert enough to 
know when the NDP have given them a false story. And if 
they’re going to go out and say that again for the fourth time, 
that you’re not going to get that next year, they can go ahead 
and do it, but the senior citizens have now had three cheques. 
They know — I say, they have had two; the third one is out; 
they’re applying for it now — they know there is consistency 
with this government. As long as we can maintain that amount 
of money, $39 million out of the treasury, we will do it. 
 
But I also point out to the members opposite that this 
government spends in excess of $650 million a year assisting 
senior citizens, of which health care alone is approximately 
$500 million. We will maintain health care and we will 
maintain assistance to senior citizens. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Will you continue the heritage grant program 
next year and the year after that? Will you answer that question 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we will continue that 
program, and the details of next year’s budget will be 
announced in next year’s budget. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, this year’s estimates for the  

heritage grant are unchanged from last year and yet the cost that 
people have had to incur have gone up and up. 
 
I mentioned already, that the Rentalsman’s office is useless to 
seniors in terms of controlling the rents, and they’re 
sky-rocketing. Their utility bills are going up, home heating 
bills are going up. I would like to see you and your wife live on 
$15,000 a year and pay those kinds of costs. 
 
I want to know if the heritage grant, since it’s unchanged from 
last year, how you expect that amount of money to cover the 
increasing costs that people have to face? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we also have a federal 
government which happens to be a Conservative government. 
And the member opposite does not notice or chooses to ignore 
that every three months old age security goes up a little, 
supplement goes up a little. In addition, we are raising again the 
Saskatchewan income plan pension for senior citizens. There 
are 27,000 of those, out of 132,000 who are needy enough, to 
qualify for that pension. 
 
I told you earlier that the NDP had a pension of $25. We are 
increasing that now to $80. I say that the Government of 
Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan has increased 
payments to senior citizens faster than their cost of living has 
gone up. And senior citizens have done relatively well in 
keeping up with society as a whole. 
 
And when I went on tour speaking to senior citizens, visiting 
with approximately 800 senior citizens in the last three weeks, 
senior citizens on the whole were very, very happy with how 
they are being governed. They were very, very happy with the 
income that the government provides them. They were very 
satisfied with health care. And senior citizens said, for the most 
part, thank you, things have never been this good before. 
 
Now there were a few at those meetings — I recall a few 
specific negative democrats who came there for he purpose of 
being negative. And when they spieled off, giving us the same 
speech that the member opposite has read to us today — a 
negative variety of oh how terrible things are — the majority of 
the senior citizens when I went around after and had coffee and 
doughnuts with them — I don’t drink coffee, they had coffee; I 
had water and doughnuts, Mr. Chairman — when I had water 
and cake with them, the majority said, don’t listen to those 
negative ones; we are quite satisfied. 
 
So if the NDP want to go out scaring senior citizens like they 
have for 40 years — it’s a free country; they can do that. If they 
want to shout loud, negative slogans, they can do that. But I 
know what the senior citizens of Saskatchewan think. First of 
all, I have been out talking to them. And secondly, one-third of 
the voters in my constituency are senior citizens, and I know 
what they think. 
 
And they are saying: yes, the economy is difficult, but we 
seniors are getting by; we’re not doing too badly. And they do 
not at all listen to the NDP rhetoric, so the NDP might as well 
save their breath and carry one with their usual type of conduct 
because the senior citizens are not  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1245 
 

listening to their radical ideas. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, the amount of money that the 
seniors get, the minimum amount that you’ve mentioned, the 
$15,393, puts a couple below the poverty line. The $9,000 for a 
single senior puts a single senior below the poverty line. The 
costs are going up and you haven’t done anything to help with 
that. You also have not addressed the fact that when one of the 
couple is in a nursing home, that money is taken out of the 
$15,000 and those people are facing a tremendous expense in 
maintaining one couple in a nursing home. 
 
But I’m not surprised that you aren’t aware of the many issues 
that are concerning seniors and I’m not surprised that you think 
it’s only a few because you haven’t had the courage to go out 
knocking on doors and talking to the people that I’ve talked to 
in Saskatoon Eastview and the people that I have in my 
constituency. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to talk some more about the money 
that you say is available to people. My understanding, when 
you went to meet with the seniors in Unity, was that you told 
the seniors that they could also get subsidized rent up to $200 a 
month. That is what a senior said to me when they phoned me 
up and asked me about this. 
 
Can you explain how people get this $200 subsidized for rent? 
Through what housing authority of through what program does 
that happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I wasn’t speaking to the senior citizens 
directly but, you see, if the member from Saskatoon Centre had 
any knowledge of business or rental accommodation or paying 
mortgages or taxes, if she really understood those parts of life 
that everybody else is involved in, she would understand that it 
costs at least . . . it costs $38,000 to build, minimum, a senior 
citizens’ housing unit which is subsidized by the federal 
government and the provincial government for 35 years, that 
the senior citizens who live in those units pay 25 per cent of 
their income as a maximum rent, 25 per cent of their income as 
maximum rent there for those senior citizens. And in the case of 
the lowest income senior citizens, that means they pay a rent of 
approximately $187 per month — approximately, I haven’t 
calculated it exactly; and it costs nearly $400 per month to 
provide that unit — that the provincial and federal government 
are paying the balance of somewhere in the nature of $200 per 
month depending on the circumstances of the senior citizen. 
 
Now if the member from Saskatoon Centre could understand 
that basic arithmetic and could understand what makes this 
country and this province tick, and how these programs work, 
then she would know that that is in fact true — that most senior 
citizens are subsidized to the extent of $200 per month in the 
10,000 subsidized units that exist in Saskatchewan. 
 
I wish to point out that one out of every 10 senior citizens in 
Saskatchewan, or one out of eight . . . or about eight per cent, or 
about one out of every 10, live in subsidized accommodation — 
subsidized by the taxpayer of Canada and the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Now I think the member opposite can take that all into account 
and she will understand how these subsidies work. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I thought that that’s what you were referring to, 
and I wanted you to explain it yourself, because what you . . . 
the impression you gave the seniors in Unity was that any 
senior could get $200 to subsidize their rent. 
 
But what you’re talking about is the housing authority units, 
and there’s a waiting list for those. They’re not available to 
everybody who wants them across this province. So it’s not 
$200 that’s available to every senior for subsidized rent; it’s 
only to the ones that get into the subsidized housing. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to turn to the Seniors’ Directorate. 
And my first question is regarding the 20.5 person-years now 
put into the directorate. Before that you had four and a half 
person-years with the former seniors’ bureau, and 11.3 per cent 
person-years were required for the administration of heritage 
program. That leaves four person-years to be accounted for, in 
terms of the Seniors’ Directorate. 
 
And would you enlighten us, please, as to the composition of 
the 20.5 years that are now found in the Seniors’ Directorate. 
What are those people doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we have a Saskatchewan 
income plan that is now administered out of our branch that has 
required a few more people. So we have a few more employees 
and greater efficiency overall. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, the 1988-1989 Estimates indicate 
that the total funding for the subvote of the directorate has been 
reduced by $13,600. I want to know what the reason for the 
decrease in the amount. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Efficiency. 
 
Ms. Smart: — What amount was transferred from the 
Department of Social Services for the Seniors’ Directorate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, no money was 
transferred from Social Services. The grant that we are 
discussing here from this Assembly, the vote that we’re talking 
about, is placed in the budget by the Department of Finance. 
They do a calculation as to what we think and what they think is 
the amount necessary to operate that branch of the department. 
 
I’ve indicated earlier it’s $13,000 less than last year due to 
efficiency. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well I guess part of your efficiency was getting 
rid of the position of the provincial gerontologist. Your assistant 
deputy minister was quoted in the Leader-Post as saying that 
there are other government employees already working in this 
area who can fill the role of the provincial gerontologist. I’d 
like to know who they are and what qualifications they have to 
fill that role. 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1246 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman I’m glad the 
member opposite asked that question because the individual 
that she refers to, at one time under the NDP was the deputy 
minister of Health, and he was on my payroll at $72,000 per 
year, and he retired. We didn’t reduce the salary to what we felt 
the position warranted because they had been paying him 
$72,000 at Health and your salary doesn’t go down. 
 
So when this man retired, we felt that it was not necessary to 
spend another $72,000 per year to fill that position in the 
manner it had been occupied before. And so we are solving 
those problems and taking care of those solutions there within 
the department without having a new $72,000 a year position, 
which I might say is more than the minister is paid, more than 
all of the cabinet ministers are paid. And so we weren’t going to 
hire someone else at $72,000 to replace that particular position. 
 
Ms. Smart: — My question to you: who are the people in the 
Seniors’ Directorate who are filling the role that the provincial 
gerontologist had, and what qualifications do they have for the 
work of a provincial gerontologist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize, I was in 
error on that $72,000 salary. It was actually $86,000 a year, and 
so I apologize for not getting the figures exactly right on that. I 
want to correct that as soon as possible. 
 
And so for $86,000 a year we thought that the taxpayers’ 
money could be spent in other ways, and we are tying to get 
people in the department to do that function at a cheaper cost. 
And that 86,000, by the way, is considerably more than the 
Premier is paid, as well. 
 
Ms. Smart: — You still haven’t answered my question, Mr. 
Minister. I want to know, on behalf of the seniors, who it is in 
the Seniors’ Directorate that’s filling the role, as your assistant 
deputy minister told the Leader-Post that you had government 
employees who would fill the role. Who are they and what 
qualifications do they have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, there are people within 
the Department of Health that assist us in filling that role, and I 
don’t know the salaries of the people in Department of Health, 
but I would expect that they wouldn’t be $86,000 a year. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think as your . . . as 
representing the seniors, as a person who’s eliminated a 
position that was within your department, that you should know 
who is filling that role. 
 
If your assistant deputy minister is saying to the public that 
someone is there doing it, then you should know what that 
person is, and you should be able to answer my question in this 
House so that I tell the seniors in my constituency and across 
this province who that person is and what qualifications they 
have for the work that you’re assigning them to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the senior 
citizens of Saskatchewan knew all along that the NDP were 
paying when they were government, a deputy minister of 
Health at that time $86,000 a year, and that  

person was then put in charge of senior citizens . . . And we had 
the compassion to keep that position; we did not slash that 
person out, and we continued that salary of $86,000 a year for 
another — what is it? — six years that we’ve been government. 
That person is now retired. I think the senior citizens of 
Saskatchewan would congratulate us for not spending another 
$86,000 to fill the position. 
 
I mean, the senior citizens of Saskatchewan, we’re talking here 
about people with incomes in the range of $15,000 for a couple 
and up. And here the member opposite is complaining that we 
haven’t replaced an $86,000 a year person. This is inconsistent. 
 
I said we saved money due to efficiency, and that’s why we are 
budgeted down $13,000. We’re not going to hire somebody for 
$86,000 a year to fill that position that she insists has to be 
filled by somebody for $86,000 a year. We have people in the 
Department of Health; we have people in my branch that can 
look at this problems; we have a seniors’ advisory council that 
the taxpayers fund; we have facilities to senior citizens. And I 
am not — I refuse to hire anybody at $86,000 a year to fill that 
position again. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I accused you earlier of practising 
the politics of deceit, and this is a good example of just what I 
mean because I have not asked you any questions about 
restoring the provincial gerontologist. 
 
I’m asking you to back up the statements made publicly by your 
assistant deputy minister in which she said that other people in 
your department — and you’ve just admitted in your branch — 
are filling the role of the provincial gerontologist. I want to 
know who they are and what their qualifications are so that I 
can know that for the seniors in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, my assistant deputy 
minister is sitting right beside me and she recalls telling the 
media that other people within government would fill this 
position and provide those services. And her recollection is 
more acceptable to me than the NDP’s utterances of what was 
reported in the media, because we have seen in the past the 
accuracy of the NDP’s interpretation of what was reported in 
the media. 
 
And we’ve also seen the accuracy of what was reported in the 
media, which is not the fault of the media, but the fault of the 
people the NDP have running to the media giving them 
improper and sometimes false information. And I have had — 
the NDP and the Department of Social Services have their 
people talk to the media, and that person didn’t exist. I’ve had 
them give information on welfare rates to the media, and those 
rates were totally erroneous. So I accept the recollection of the 
assistant deputy minister of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment, because she is a woman of extreme integrity. And 
if she says other people in government are filling those 
positions, are providing that service, then I believe that’s what 
she said, and I know that’s what’s happening. And I still refuse 
to pay anybody, especially friends of the NDP, $86,000 a year 
to fill any positions in that department. 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1247 
 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairman, I’m referring to an article in the 
Leader-Post, April 6, ’88. It was an article based on your 
announcement of Harold Danchilla as the new head director of 
the Seniors’ Directorate. And there’s a direct quote from Judy 
Moore, an assistant deputy minister with the Human Resources, 
Labour and Employment Department, and the direct quote says, 
“There are other government employees already working in this 
area who can fill the role,” referring to the role of the provincial 
gerontologists. 
 
My question to you is: who are those people and what are their 
qualifications? Now are you saying they don’t exist, or are you 
saying that your deputy assistant was not correct, or what are 
you saying here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I ask the member 
opposite to read her quote again, to read it slowly, to consider it 
carefully, and I believe she will see that it says there are other 
people in the government who can fulfil those, and they are in 
the Department of Health, the experts in health; they’re in the 
Department of Health. I’m not going to go into the details of 
who’s doing what in the Department of Health. But we find that 
that role is being filled by the professional people at the 
Department of Health. 
 
Ms. Smart: — You seem to be saying the Department of 
Health. A little while ago you said people in your branch, in 
your department. And you’re saying that you don’t know who 
they are when you’re the minister supposedly representing 
seniors and you’re a person who’s done away with the position. 
 
And you have an assistant deputy minister who has said that 
there are other employees, other government employees already 
working in this area. Now this is the Seniors’ Directorate. You 
should know who those people are and what their qualifications 
are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I visited 10 seniors’ 
centres with regional miniforums. On Saturday evening I 
attended the Legion seniors’ conference at Fort San, and on 
Saturday afternoon I was at the senior citizens’ tea in Melville. 
So all told, when you add up the 800 I saw at the miniforums 
and the other senior citizens I’ve seen, I’ve talked to, and 
visited with, not personally, but with them, at least a thousand 
senior citizens in the last three weeks — and these are the 
leaders of the senior citizens’ organizations — and not one said, 
we don’t have a provincial gerontologist. And we don’t have to 
have that position. 
 
Provincial gerontologist was a convenient way of continuing an 
individual from the Department of Health on the payroll at 
$86,000 a year, rather than abolishing the position. When we 
abolish positions that the NDP created, they complain about us 
laying people off. When we allow people to work to their 
retirement, they complain that they won’t replace them. 
 
I said earlier, we’re not going to spend $86,000 a year for a 
provincial gerontologist. There are people in the Department of 
Health that understand this field and that are trained and 
qualified physicians. In addition, our  

department will be hiring more people, and in future hiring we 
will have people with more expertise in this area. 
 
But I have not got a request from senior citizens that I spoke to 
in the last three weeks that said, please go out and hire a 
provincial gerontologist for $86,000 a year. And since I think it 
is not a wise expenditure of the taxpayers’ money, or that senior 
citizens have not asked for an $86,000-a-year provincial 
gerontologist, I am not going to spend $86,000 a year to hire 
one. And I hope the member opposite understands that clear. 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Smart: — And I hope the minister understands clearly that 
the people of this province didn’t ask for George Hill’s salary to 
be $250,000 a year either. If you want to talk about high 
salaries that are being paid to people, then we’ve got a great big 
list that we can deliver to you. 
 
Now I attended that meeting at Fort San that you talk about 
attending. I was there all day Saturday attending the workshops. 
I’ve been out speaking to a lot of senior citizen group too. And 
what I am asking you for is honesty and openness with the 
seniors of this province. And if your assistant deputy minister 
says a statement publicly that there are people to fulfil a role 
and a position that you’ve eliminated, then I think we should 
know who those people are, and I think we should know what 
their qualifications are. 
 
But you obviously don’t know who they are, and you’re not 
prepared to tell me who they are or tell the seniors of this 
province who they are. And that’s just part of your 
government’s failure to provide information to people in this 
province about what you’re up to, who’s doing what in your 
government, and whether or not it’s of any value. 
 
And on behalf of the seniors of this province, I think that that’s 
really poor. It really makes me very uncertain about how I can 
go on talking to somebody like you about the value of seniors 
and about the need that they have to have good representation. 
 
Now will you please not talk to me from your seat. I have the 
right to stand here and ask you questions. And one of the 
questions that I want to ask you, because you referred to the 
federal government which is also a Conservative government, 
with the old age security going up every three months, what has 
happened is that this same federal government has taken that 
amount of money off of . . . when the Canada Pension Plan goes 
up, they take it off the old age security. So I have a lot of 
seniors in my constituency, as everyone does, who are 
continuing to get less money from their old age security 
because their Canada Pension Plan goes up, the government 
takes it away from the other hand. 
 
And I want to know what you have done to represent seniors to 
the federal government to stop this deducting money from one 
pocket that they put into another pocket. The seniors fought 
very hard to avoid de-indexing the pension plan. And I’m sure 
that when they were in that fight, you weren’t there speaking on 
their behalf, that you were quite willing to go along with the 
federal  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1248 
 

government’s plan to de-index the Canada Pension Plan. 
 
But now that they won that battle, it’s being taken out of the old 
age security. And I want to know what you’ve done to represent 
them to the federal government; and I also want to know why 
your government is forcing people to go on the Canada Pension 
Plan early, to take early retirement, instead of continuing to pay 
them on social assistance until they can get their full pension 
when they turn 65. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s unfortunate 
that someone has to get elected to the legislature to come here 
and learn what makes Canada operate. Now the member 
opposite is getting an education here, but the taxpayers are 
paying her for it. People should really understand the country 
before they come here. But if they don’t, I don’t mind teaching 
the member opposite what really makes this country tick. 
 
First of all, let us consider George Hill. Now there’s a 
complaint about his salary. I don’t know what it is, and the 
NDP don’t know what it is, but they make up a figure and they 
inflate it every day. But let’s look at George Hill as an example. 
George Hill turned around electrical utility last year and made 
$36 million for the people of Saskatchewan. I would think that 
someone who made $36 million for the people of Saskatchewan 
should be entitled to a pretty reasonable salary. 
 
Now the NDP had people that they paid as much as George Hill 
and they lost money. I think George Hill would be prepared to 
work on commission. I think if he lost money he’s be prepared 
to work for nothing, and if he made money he’d be prepared to 
take a commission. And I would think on the $36 million that 
he made last year that he has the confidence to work on 
commission. 
 
You find me an NDP who will manage anything on 
commission. You will not find such a person because that 
requires skill, competence and self-confidence, things that are 
not common in the negative democratic parties. Now that we’ve 
determined what a fair salary for George Hill should be, I will 
continue to explain to the member opposite how the world of 
senior citizens operates and how it works. 
 
Now what we have here, as I explained earlier, we have federal 
old-age pension which everybody gets; you have federal 
supplements which those people get based on their need; you 
have Saskatchewan pensions which are based on need, and 
income outside of those pensions is considered when you’re 
calculating the need. Rental income is considered income, 
interest is income, profit is income. However a senior citizen 
earns income, it’s considered income, and Canada pension is 
considered income. 
 
So if your Canada pension goes up, that is taken into account in 
the formula as to how much you need from the federal and 
provincial governments in supplements. And it would be unfair 
to calculate interest income as income for the basis of need and 
not calculate Canada pension income. Or where do you draw 
the line? Do you then not calculate registered retirement savings 
income? Do you not calculate government pensions from your  

employment? Do you not calculate company pensions? The 
cut-off line, Mr. Chairman, is that everything except the 
supplement payments — old age, guaranteed income 
supplement from the federal government, Saskatchewan income 
plan, the Saskatchewan heritage plan — everything except 
those are calculated as income. 
 
And what happens is that, for the benefit of the member 
opposite and anyone who might be listening . . . because I think 
they could . . . most senior citizens could explain this to the 
member opposite; they understand it better than she does. What 
happens is that at the end of each year, in January or February, 
the federal government sends you out a form that you fill in as 
to what your income was for the prior year, and that is sent to 
Ottawa and it goes into the computer and the computer in 
Ottawa calculates on the basis of the formula. 
 
The formula, that I might point out, was set up in the days of 
the Liberal-NDP coalition in Ottawa. The formula hasn’t 
changed. The formula sets up what your needs are. When that is 
calculated, you receive a guaranteed income supplement if you 
qualify on the formula. The information is then sent to Regina. 
In Regina our department gets the computer information and 
runs it through our computer, and it automatically calculates to 
what sum of Saskatchewan income plan assistance the senior 
citizen is entitled. 
 
Twenty-seven thousand out of 132,000 senior citizens qualify 
for assistance from the Saskatchewan income plan and, as I 
pointed out earlier, that has been raised from the time we 
became government; it’s been raised from $25 to November of 
this year, $80 for a single senior citizen. So that, in a nutshell, 
explains why Canada Pension Plan is taken into the calculation, 
because it’s a matter of fairness; it’s income, the same as other 
income. 
 
With respect to people on welfare applying for their Canada 
Pension Plan early, I submit that that is not a factor. First of all, 
we do not require anyone to do it, but we encourage welfare 
recipients to apply for their Canada Pension Plan because we 
would rather have them receive their earned pension from the 
Government of Canada through the Canada Pension Plan than 
require additional assistance through the welfare system. 
 
So they do not lose any money by applying. As a matter of fact, 
with the income exemption they can be better off today by 
applying early. 
 
Now the argument would be made is that once they retire their 
Canada Pension Plan will be lower. Yes, it will. However, I 
explained at the very beginning that every senior citizen has a 
guaranteed income, so that the net saving to the Government of 
Saskatchewan by early application now will be paid by the 
Government of Saskatchewan later in Saskatchewan income 
plan payments, unless of course the NDP are saying that if they 
were government they would put them back down to $25 a 
month. In that case, in that case, yes, that recipient would be 
worse off. 
 
But under the PC governments of the future, those people are 
better off taking the money now from Canada Pension Plan, and 
will be better off in the future because we have  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1249 
 

raised the Saskatchewan income plan — so they are not out any 
money. What it is really a question of whether their income 
comes from the Government of Canada at this stage, or whether 
it comes from the Government of Saskatchewan through 
welfare. 
 
So at best, at best, Mr. Chairman, this is a red herring, but I 
doubt very much if the members opposite can understand this 
relatively complicated calculation, so I suppose they will be 
opposed to it. 
 
Ms. Smart: — It’s complicated because you’ve made it so, and 
it’s no wonder that we have a deficit with people like you trying 
to work on the budget and figure out what to do in terms of the 
economy. 
 
The purpose for this money is to help people to survive the high 
increases in costs that your government has put on them, and 
you’re not doing anything to help them with that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to the Grants for Senior Citizens’ 
Services which have decreased 32.5 per cent since 1984-85. 
This covers the operating grants for the 400-plus senior citizen 
centres throughout the province, providing grants equalling to 
40 per cent of the previous year’s operating budget. But since 
1986 there’s been a cap on the operating grants for these 
centres. Why have you decreased the money so much for 
operating the senior citizen centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we haven’t decreased 
the money. The expenditure is less, yes. But I want to thank the 
senior citizens of Saskatchewan and the senior citizen centres of 
Saskatchewan. The reasons that we’re paying out less is that 
some of them are not asking for the grant. They’re saying — 
and they’re proud of it — they’re saying: we are self-sufficient; 
we don’t want the grant; we don’t need it; you give it to the 
ones that need it, but we don’t need it. I can name you centres, 
and we could even give you a list of those that don’t want to 
take that grant. 
 
These senior citizens are so self-sufficient and so proud of it, 
and they are saving the taxpayers of Saskatchewan money. I 
certainly encourage them, and I discourage the NDP from 
trying to changes these seniors’ minds and having them 
becoming dependent on the government again. They are 
independent and they are proud of it. And we haven’t reduced 
the money we pay. If they need it, we’ll still pay it, but they 
haven’t been asking for it. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, transportation grants are also 
provided under these grants for senior citizens’ services, I 
understand. They’ve been virtually frozen for the past three 
years. They accounted for $87,000 or 7.8 per cent of this year’s 
subvote estimates. 
 
I ask you why, especially following the provincial council’s 
report in May of 1987, their survey of the transportation 
patterns and the needs of the urban elderly in Saskatchewan — 
which indicated that quite a number of people, some 14.5 per 
cent of urban seniors, reported serious problems with 
transportation, and money was provided through this budget for 
that — why have you frozen it for the last three years? 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There are several different things here, 
Mr. Chairman. First of all, the transportation grants are for 
those communities that are larger but do not have public 
transportation systems. And this government, at my 
recollection, through the Department of Urban Affairs . . . but 
my recollection is this government spends approximately $2.2 
million a year on the subsidization of bus transportation in those 
cities like Regina, Saskatoon, and possibly Moose Jaw and P.A. 
— I’m not that familiar with their sums, but I know the two 
largest cities receive subsidization for their urban transit 
systems. 
 
The money that the member opposite is referring to here is 
money for cities like the size of Melville, and the smaller cities 
where there is no urban transportation system. That money has 
never been in rural Saskatchewan where 55 per cent of the 
senior citizens now live. 
 
So it’s not fair to say that we don’t subsidize transportation. 
And she’s quoting from a survey talking about urban 
transportation where we’re already spending, in another 
government department, $2.2 million, to the best of my 
recollection. And therefore there’s a considerable sum being put 
into this. 
 
In addition, as I pointed out earlier, the NDP didn’t pay out 
$700 per family in seniors’ heritage grants. On the whole, in 
large parts of rural Saskatchewan where taxes were not $1,400 
per year for senior citizens, they weren’t getting anywhere close 
to $700 a year. 
 
(1630) 
 
And so not only did the NDP pay part of their taxes, in large 
parts of Saskatchewan we are paying more than their taxes in 
the heritage grants, and they have money to be used for 
transportation out of the $700 that they weren’t getting under 
the NDP. 
 
I just want to point that out so that the member opposite 
understands the total picture of Saskatchewan, rather than 
taking one line from a report that refers to urban transportation 
which, yes, is a problem for those senior citizens who have a 
difficulty getting off and on buses, and things of that nature. 
And I understand that the transportation industry and the cities 
are looking at new kinds of steps that allow senior citizens to 
get onto buses without having t step up high to get on the bus, 
and those kind of things. 
 
But certainly she is mixing one line from a report with a 
different line on the budget here, and the two do not go together 
at all. 
 
Ms. Smart: — The transportation grants have been virtually 
frozen for the past three years. I accept your description that the 
transportation grants are for the smaller centres and not for the 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina. But the survey covered smaller 
cities; it covered Weyburn, which has no bus service at all. 
 
I want to know why, when transportation is a major concern for 
seniors, have you frozen this amount of money for the last three 
years? 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1250 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, where has the 
member opposite been for the last three years? Does she now 
know that farm income has gone down? It wasn’t frozen; 
people would have been happy to have it frozen. 
 
Does she not know — no, she probably doesn’t know — that 
for the first time in the history of income tax, starting in 1985, 
the amount of money that the provincial government received 
went down. For the first time in the history of the temporary 
income tax, a it once was called, the revenue to the province 
went down. 
 
Does she not know that the price of oil fell about $10 per 
barrel? I bet she doesn’t know that the price of oil falling $10 
per barrel costs the treasury of Saskatchewan approximately 
$350 million, which would just about wipe out this year’s 
deficit. 
 
She doesn’t know all these things, and then she says, why did 
we not increase it? We will when that money is there. Right 
now senior citizens are getting increases every three months on 
their old age pension; they’re getting increases from this 
government under their Saskatchewan income plan for those 
that are in the greatest need. They are getting regular raises that 
other parts of Saskatchewan cannot afford. 
 
So senior citizens as a whole — I told you earlier — are 
satisfied. They are understanding and they are not complaining. 
It’s only the NDP that are complaining. The senior citizens 
understand and are satisfied, an I am very proud of the senior 
citizens of Saskatchewan. I am very pleased that they have 
more wisdom than the NDP. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I want to point out that your 
grants to provincial organizations have dropped dramatically 
from the 1985-86 level. In ’88-89 they amount to only $48,950 
as opposed to almost $140,000 in 1985-86. That’s a decrease of 
65 per cent to senior citizens’ provincial organizations. It must 
indicate that you don’t value very much the kind of work that 
they’ve been doing. 
 
The only two groups that I can see that are receiving money 
from you right now are Senior Citizens’ Action Now and the 
Saskatchewan Seniors’ Association Inc., for a total of $48,950. 
Is this correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — That is correct, Mr. Chairman, and I 
would like to know who else she thinks should receive money 
from our department. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well if you don’t know the list of seniors’ 
organizations in this province, I’d be quite happy to provide you 
with one. I hope on May 21 you will take the opportunity to go 
to a discussion in Regina regarding the senior citizens’ services 
organization right here in Regina. You won’t have to go very 
far, and you can go and spend the afternoon and learn from the 
seniors there what their concern is about their organization. The 
amount of money that you’ve been paying to those tow 
organizations is a 7.6 per cent decrease over the three-year 
period. 
 
But I’ll leave that because I just want to ask you a few  

questions about the Senior Citizens’ Provincial Council. I want 
to ask you how this council is funded, where the money is in the 
budget that funds the provincial council. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, formerly this council 
received money directly from our government and there was 
staff retained. Last year, in last year’s budget, the advisory 
council’s role was changed a little bit and they are now funded 
through our department budget, and the staff are within our 
department and our department provides services to them. 
 
I have indicated to them and they understand that that council is 
not designed to be a seniors’ research council, where a large 
amount of that money was spent on researchers, but that council 
is designed to be a seniors’ advisory council, and that’s what 
it’s called. 
 
And so they will still be doing some research projects, but 
primarily what the government needs from the council is advice 
rather than research on one topic and no advice on the situation 
as a whole. 
 
And so that council receives services from the department. It 
receives secretarial and research services from the new 
department. And that council does some research projects, but 
primarily its role is as an advisory council. I see their guidance 
and they give me advice. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that the council, 
the provincial council, the seniors’ provincial council, I now 
being funded under your administrative services, vote no. 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m saying that they are being funded 
out of the vote under the directorate, the Seniors’ Directorate. 
And there are departmental staff now. The people that were on 
the payroll of the provincial council are in the department and 
provide services from my department. We can find that we can 
give them a broader range of services. Rather than only having 
two employees there, we have the entire research unit of our 
department; we have all of the resources of our department 
available to the seniors’ provincial council. 
 
In addition, the department has been able to, and will be able to 
in the future, reduce their research time because we have access 
to information from the Department of Health and the 
Department of Social Services. And we can gather up this 
information that’s already available in government rather than 
have someone else hired to go and do it all over again when it’s 
already available. 
 
In addition, the provincial seniors’ council, with independent 
researchers, would not be able to receive access from the other 
departments the way we are from other departments. So we find 
that the research time is being cut down considerably due to this 
function being provided by the department. 
 
Ms. Smart: — So none of the members of the provincial 
council . . . are any of them on staff now. Is Ted Azevedo being 
paid? And if not, are they getting honorariums out of the 
directorate for their work, or how much money is going to the 
council? 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1251 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, they’re not salaried people. The 
chairman is Ted Azevedo; he’s paid $100 per day plus his 
expenses. The members are paid $50 per day plus their 
expenses. And that is the amount budgeted to the council for 
this honorarium and their expenses. They are not employees of 
the department; they’re an advisory council like most other 
boards and commissions. Research staff, secretarial, is paid out 
of our department and that is in the budget of the directorate. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have effectively gutted 
the seniors’ provincial council and that is shocking. This 
seniors’ provincial council did some wonderful research. 
 
But it doesn’t surprise me to hear that you’ve taken the rug right 
out from under them because you said in the House the other 
day — when the member from Regina Lakeview was 
questioning about women’s issues, you were very disparaging 
about research. You didn’t value it. You don’t value statistics. 
And then you obviously don’t value the very, very fine work 
that the provincial council researchers have done under the 
guidance of the people that were running the provincial council. 
 
I’ve got copies of the reports they’ve done. I’ve referred to the 
one on urban transportation, there was one on rural 
transportation, there’s been a study of what’s happening to 
native elders in the province, a very important study that we’re 
waiting to have come out soon. The work of the council has 
been just invaluable, but I’m not the least bit surprised that 
you’ve scrapped the whole thing and put it under your 
department along with all the other work they have to do. 
 
You’ve completely devalued it, and you’ve lost that power for 
the seniors. You given them $50 a day to travel to meet together 
to advise you, and I can’t think of a less-listening person in 
terms of hearing advice that you. I feel very sorry for the people 
who are left in that position trying to tell you anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Now, Mr. Minister, in closing I want to say that 
I know the senior citizens will be very disappointed in the kind 
of performance that you’ve put on today and the kinds of 
remarks that you’ve made about the situations that they’re in. 
 
There are people across this province, older people, who face 
very grim situations, given the high costs that your government 
has incurred on them. And there are people who are paying flat 
tax out of an income of $8,000 a year. They still have to pay 
this provincial government flat tax. 
 
Finally, Mr. Minister, I want to tell you that when the election 
results came in from Eastview — and I’m going to send you a 
copy of the poll by poll — the polls that included the senior 
citizens’ vote was practically nil for the Progressive 
Conservative government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — That’s what you deserve right across this 
province for the treatment that you’ve given to senior  

citizens, many of whom are older women, many of whom live 
in extreme poverty. You are not listening to them, and I am 
very disappointed with this budget for the seniors and with your 
responses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, the 
seniors’ provincial council by 1982-83 had a budget of 
$359,640 per year which was primarily spent on research, and 
we believe that there should be application of the advice rather 
than the search for the problem. 
 
The seniors’ provincial council now understands that society as 
a whole knows what the problems are and that we seek their 
advice on the solutions. And I don’t think that we need to spend 
$359,640 a year to be advised as to what the problems are. 
What we need is people to come to this council as wise senior 
citizens and advise us as to what the solutions are. And they are 
not paid $50 a day for travelling, they are paid $50 a day plus 
their travel, plus their hotel bill, plus their food. So the member 
opposite was no listening closely. 
 
I would not be surprised that the member opposite would not be 
happy with what we are doing. First of all, she doesn’t 
understand it. Secondly, she philosophically doesn’t agree with 
anything that a Conservative government could ever do. 
 
She has not at any stage here said yes, raising the Saskatchewan 
income plan was a good idea. She has not, on behalf of the 
seniors that she claims to represent, said thank you for raising 
the Saskatchewan income plan to $80 per month. She has never 
said anything nice. She has a hard hear, and I have thick skin, 
and so I accept this as part of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I 
do not hold any grievances or grudges against her. 
 
I know that she means what she says, and that she has a hard 
heart. And the people will judge. I don’t think the senior 
citizens accept as fact what she is trying to tell us. So it has 
been an interesting discussion on senior citizens. 
 
We will continue to care for senior citizens. We will continue to 
go out and listen. She has not at all thanked us for going out and 
listening to senior citizens. As a matter of fact, she 
misrepresented what I might have said. I did not at any time 
ever say that this government was going to hand every senior 
citizen $200 to pay their rent; I did not say anything near that. 
 
And so either she wasn’t listening or somebody has 
misrepresented again. But we’re used to that coming from the 
NDP — either errors in fact, or misrepresentation. So this is 
nothing new. So I think nothing as been established today; 
nothing new has been shown. Everybody knows what the NDP 
did and how they operate. Everybody knows what we are doing, 
so I think we can agree to disagree. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll ask the minister, 
if he will, to try and settle himself down and reserve the 
rhetoric. And if we can deal with some, again some short and 
crisp answers and some factual responses, Mr. Minister. 
 
First of all, I would ask that you would advise me of the  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1252 
 

budget assigned to the workers’ advocate office and the number 
of employees of that office for the years ’87-88 and budgeted 
for ’88-89. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’m so pleased that the 
member opposite asked that question because we have such an 
interesting story of management to tell here. 
 
First of all, let me say that they are now part of the . . . the 
worker’s advocate office is now part of the labour relations 
branch that the budget there, as far as we can calculate in 
separating it out, there’s $235,440 last year, and 6.5 people 
work in the . . . sorry, that’s for this year. And that 6.5 people 
work in that division. 
 
I want to also indicate that I am very, very pleased with the 
work that is being done at the worker’s advocate office. I was 
not always pleased, Mr. Chairman, at the work that was being 
done there because, when I was appointed minister, there were 
concerns over the backlog and the number of open files. And 
I’ll give you a bit of a track record of what happened at the 
worker’s advocate office through the management changes that 
were made, and the good work of Mr. Argue from my 
department who has really taken over the management of that 
office. 
 
And so, as of April 30, 1986, there were open files, 482, with a 
backlog of 225 files. In one year, by April 16, 1987, they had 
that down to 272 open files and a backlog of nine. They brought 
the backlog down from 225 to nine with the same number of 
workers — same number of workers — and it brought this 
down to nine at that point. Now it went up a little bit because 
there’s some variation. But as we get to this April 1 to 30 of 
1988, we have total open files 252, with a backlog of 10, as 
compared to two years ago of 482 open files and a backlog of 
225. 
 
So people are getting served a lot quicker. They are solving the 
problems. They are closing the files. The morale is much better. 
The same number of workers are there handling the files but 
they’re doing it quicker, so that if they have smaller backlog 
and fewer open files, I’ve taken the view that we would not 
make them work harder. 
 
The reward for efficiency should not be to work harder, the 
reward should be that they have less pressure on them. So I 
want to congratulate that branch and the management and the 
workers in that branch because there has been a marvellous 
turn-around, and there is an example of what good government 
and good management can do. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you declined to give me the 
figures for the budget and the number of employees for ’87-88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Sorry, I’d overlooked that: $209,300 in 
’87-88, 6.5 person-years. The year before that it was $162,050, 
5 person-years. The year before that it was $198,550, and 6 
person-years, so we’ve maintained approximately the same 
number of staff there and they’re doing much better. 
 

Mr. Hagel: — And the waiting period that workers have to 
wait prior to having their case dealt with by workers’ advocate 
office, Mr. Minister, as of today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well as I indicated earlier, we once had 
a large backlog there two years ago, and at that time it could 
have been a waiting period of up to 9 or 10 months. We’ve got 
that down now to three weeks to a month. And as I indicated 
earlier, the backlog now is down to 10 as compared to 225 
when we started the management changes. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I’m advised that the Workers’ 
Compensation Board is working under somewhat crowded 
conditions and that some thought is being given to locating new 
office space in the near future. I’d be referring to new office 
space different from the current 1840 Lorne and the 13th floor 
of City Hall. Are there any plans in that regard, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, space has become a problem and 
they are considering finding alternate space. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — How long into the future, Mr. Minister, do you 
anticipate that taking before new space is located and a move is 
taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Actually, Mr. Chairman, I thought it 
would have been done by today, but I understand they’re still 
negotiating for space. I would hope that it’s done fairly soon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you advise me as to 
whether there were renovations that took place to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board space at 1840 Lorne and City Hall in 1985 
and ’86, and the nature of those renovations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that, 
first of all, renovations were necessary in 1985 in order to move 
into City Hall as part of the arrangement in moving in. they also 
did some renovations at their regular head office in order to 
squeeze in more staff. So that was a temporary measure in order 
to tide us over until we can get larger quarters. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Were there also significant renovations made to 
the office of the chairman at that time, Mr. Minister, and what 
were the nature of those renovations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the current chairman of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board advises me his office has not 
been renovated in the two and a half years that he has been on 
the job. I was there and, while they weren’t spartan, I found his 
office to be fairly humble. 
 
I don’t recall the specifics of it. I would think that if it would 
have been opulent I would have recalled it. So no, he hasn’t 
made any renovations and it’s just kind of there the way it’s 
always been. Probably the money that has to be spent on 
renovations will have to be spent in the new location in order to 
get it suitable. But we haven’t finalized the deal on a new 
location yet. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I would concur, Mr. Minister. It’s been  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1253 
 

reported to me that the renovations to the chairman’s office 
were something less than spartan as well — or left at something 
different from spartan. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Minister, the renovations — those major 
renovations that occurred — who was the firm that did the 
renovations and refurbishment, and what was the cost of those 
renovations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the renovations to 
the chairman of the Workers’ Compensation Board’s office 
were done before the current chairman was in that position and 
before I was the minister, and I don’t really know what they 
cost or who did them. I mean, that was two or three years ago, 
and surely you would have got that information in estimates 
other years. I don’t know what it cost to renovate that office 
because I wasn’t responsible. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Perhaps I was unclear in my question, Mr. 
Minister, I meant the total cost of the renovations of 1840 Lorne 
and the City Hall in total. Who was the contractor, and the cost 
of the total renovations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
renovations at Workers’ Comp for added fireproofing, for rugs 
and for the necessary changes to move into the Regina City Hall 
— and including such things as moving the women’s washroom 
because the orthopedic surgeon now has his office in the former 
women’s washroom. We’ve been jammed and wedged into 
there. And I met him and he’s taking it all with good humour, 
saying that he enjoys his new washroom. But the total of that 
cost was $400,000 — approximately $400,000. It was done by 
Omsack Construction — I don’t know of this company . . . I 
think it’s O-m-s-a-c-k. In any event, I don’t know of the 
company. 
 
And I want to caution the NDP, to make it quite clear that none 
of that $400,000 was spent on the chairman’s office. I don’t 
want to see in their literature anywhere, $400,000 was spent on 
the chairman’s office, because if they . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and they’re repeating it already. I advise them 
that the chairman would most likely sue if they distorted that. 
None of the $400,000 — I repeat for the NDP — was spent on 
the chairman’s office. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, was there a firm that operates 
under the name of Cite Design that was involved in those 
renovations that you’re referring to here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t recall the name 
of the company — I don’t recall hearing it before — but I think 
it was Cite Design. Is that the word . . . company used? 
 
The company you referred to, in any event, had a contract under 
tender, which was tendered for design of the computer wiring, 
the office flow and for space utilization, which meant that they 
could cram more computers and more people into less space. So 
the company you refer to, if it was Cite Design — the company 
that you did refer to, whatever their name is — that’s the 
company that had the contract under tender for that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Just so I can clarify this, then, the company  

you referred to before as Omsack, that got a contract for 
$400,000, you’re now saying, as a matter of fact, was Cite 
Design and that was by tender? Am I understanding that 
correctly, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, Omsack was a general 
contractor on the renovations. The contract to Cite Design was 
separate from the contract to Omsack, the general contractor. So 
there would be two separate contracts here. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, can you clarify for me, then: was 
it $400,000 to Omsack and some other figure that was paid to 
Cite Design, or was Cite Design a subcontractor of Omsack? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the answer to the first part of your 
question was yes, but then you went on and asked another, so 
now I have to give you a longer answer. 
 
They were separate — separate contracts. Omsack’s was 
approximately $400,000 and Cite Design had a separate 
contract. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — For how much, Mr. Minister, and was it 
tendered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Okay. It was tendered and it was in the 
range of 50 to $60,000. I don’t have the exact figure because 
I’m not familiar with that particular contract. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, could you advise me as to, in the 
case of both Omsack and Cite, C-i-t-e, what other tenders were 
received, from whom and for what amounts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, I don’t know. 
Secondly, the board is more or less autonomous and really are 
not part of these estimates, but it’s been traditional that we 
answer some questions. So the board tendered it. 
 
I don’t known what the other tenders were and I don’t intend to 
look what the other tenders were. The board made that decision 
and went with those contractors. I’ve never heard of the 
contractors before today. That may be insulting to the 
contractors because somebody always finds offence with what I 
say, but I mean — I may have read their name in the paper 
somewhere — I don’t know of these contractors. They 
tendered; they got them; they did the work; we’re satisfied with 
the work. And that’s about all I know about it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re not doing anyone a 
favour by responding to questions about Workers’ 
Compensation Board. That is your responsibility; you’re simply 
doing your job. You and I happen to find ourselves in this 
Assembly at this minute, both of us doing our job. And my job 
is to ask questions to hold your department accountable, and it’s 
your responsibility to answer those questions. I appreciate that 
we’re doing this in a fairly frank manner. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Minister, given that you don’t have that  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1254 
 

information available to you today: will you advise me at a later 
time, perhaps in writing, as to what other tenders were received 
other than those from Omsack and Cite and what the amounts 
of the other tenders were, as well as a more accurate figure 
because you had a range — you weren’t sure, and I understand 
that — as to what Cite actually received for the work that they 
did? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, I will not, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Why not, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I will not because the 
questions that are being asked today are unprecedented in the 
legislature with respect to the internal operations of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, on which I do not sit and for 
which I am minister responsible but have no direct control over 
that board. 
 
So unless you want to change the legislation to give me a hand 
in the management of the board, I’m not going to, in estimates 
of another department, bring in the internal operations of that 
board. I don’t mind giving you some general information on the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, but I am not going to go into 
their board and ask for what the other tenders were. No do I, 
strictly speaking, have the jurisdiction to do that. So I couldn’t 
even order them to give me that information, and you know that 
the Act doesn’t give me the power to order them to give me the 
information. 
 
So I haven’t asked them for he information and I’m not going 
to. They’re doing a good job and these questions are, strictly 
speaking, out of order here, but I will try to answer questions 
relating to workers. 
 
But as far as your fishing expedition into who tendered what 
and who might be unhappy with why they didn’t get the tender 
. . . and I don’t know . . . these renovations — as far as I know, I 
don’t even recall them in my jurisdiction with the board. So 
either they weren’t important enough for the board to tell me 
about these renovations or else they were done before I was the 
minister. So I won’t be giving you any more information. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’re not here to simply 
have an exchange of information based on your powers of 
recall. You have officials of the board sitting right beside you 
and it is, as a matter of fact, Mr. Minister, a matter of concern to 
employers in this province who pay the whole shot for the 
operations of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Now let me repeat my question again, Mr. Minister: what other 
tenders were received for the contracts that were given for the 
renovations provided by and the work provided by Omsack and 
by Cite? And also, Mr. Minister, if you refuse to answer those, 
would you please advise then, through me and through this 
Assembly, the employers of Saskatchewan as to what avenue 
they have available to them to be sure that the administration of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board is accountable and that those 
funds are being used wisely? 
 
This is not an insignificant question, Mr. Minister. You told me 
some 15 minutes ago that you are planning to . . .  

or the Workers’ Compensation Board is looking at moving to 
new facilities. You’ve just advised me as we’ve been talking 
here that some 450 to $460,000 has been spent within the last 
three years to renovate facilities that you’re planning to move 
from. 
 
I’m simply asking: what evidence is there that those contracts 
were done with wisdom in the best interest of efficient 
management? Now you are the minister responsible for the 
administration of The Workers’ Compensation Act, and I don’t 
think I’m asking a terribly complicated question; you’ve 
already said that. I’m simply asking for some accountability. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the only questions that 
come to cabinet with respect to the board are decisions with 
respect to capital, capital expenditures. So if the board were to 
move to other accommodations, they would have to see 
permission of cabinet and cabinet would have to grant 
permission for a capital expenditure of the purchase of a 
building, or something of that nature. 
 
But with respect to the details of the operations of the boards 
being considered by this legislature, I refer you to Regina, 
Tuesday, February 20, 1973, at 2:30 p.m., when Mr. Speaker, 
who at that time was one of your colleagues and probably still 
is — and I don’t see him in the House today, but my 
recollection . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Please, we’re not to use members’ 
names in terms of whether they’re absent or present here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t use any 
member’s name. But I must have touched a nerve and it must 
have been one of their colleagues. 
 
The ruling of Mr. Speaker at that time was: 
 

In summary it seems clear that the Legislature can 
question or debate all matters which are directly related 
. . . 

 
There seems to be a lot of noise. I’ll repeat that, Mr. Chairman: 
 

In summary it seems clear that the Legislature can 
question or debate all matters which are directly related to 
the Board members, but not to appointments made by the 
Board. Administrative actions of the staff (and 
administrative actions of the staff) since the staff is 
responsible to the Board and not to the Minister . . . 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, as ruled in the past in this Assembly — and 
there was a similar ruling in February 1966 from a speaker that 
was a speaker in a Liberal government at the time — that the 
direct actions of the board members are not subject to scrutiny 
and that the minister need not answer directly for the board, that 
the staff are responsible to the board. 
 
I’ve tried to give as much information as possible to give the 
members opposite some background. I have indicated to them 
who had contracts and approximately how much they were for 
and why they were done, but I  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1255 
 

refuse to, and will not, go to the board and ask them to provide 
the details of everyone who contracted on that particular 
project. I will not, and that is final. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, isn’t this interesting! You are 
responsible for administering an Act that requires employers in 
this province, by law, to contribute to workers’ compensation 
fund to administer a very important program. Now you fail to 
advise me and this Assembly as to what avenue the public and 
employers who are paying the shot have to be assured of the 
competent management of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
You are sitting in this Assembly with officials connected to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board sitting within arm’s length of 
you. I am asking you some straightforward questions and you 
refuse to answer them. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: what do you have to hide? Why do 
you refuse to answer these questions today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, employers meet 
annually with the board and discuss their concerns. The board 
gives them a report; the board puts out an annual report. And 
thirdly, the Provincial Auditor audit the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and makes that information available to 
the public and to the members of this Assembly. 
 
So there is quite a lot of accountability, and we haven’t changed 
any of the operations of the board since the board was started 
by the Liberals, continued by the CCF, continued by the 
Liberals, continued by the NDP, and continued by the 
Progressive Conservatives. And we have made no changes in 
the operations of the board with respect to administration and 
who they report to and how they go about their functions. So 
there is nothing new here. 
 
This board has been working for years and years — and it’s 
done a good job — and has three ways of being accountable: 
meeting with employers . . . four: meeting with employers, 
meeting with employees, the auditor’s report and the annual 
report. And I have nothing to hide; it’s all in those reports. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you certainly make it look 
suspicious by your refusal to provide very basic and simple 
information here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, on another matter, would you please advise me as 
to whether a lottery ticket seller for Sask Sport would be 
covered by workers’ compensation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it would depend on the 
circumstances. But as long as they are an employee of an 
employer covered by the Act — for example, if they’re working 
in a retail outlet, they would be covered. I can’t say that they 
would be covered if they were a vendor that was out selling 
them on the street or in a kiosk in a mall, but as long as they’re 
an employee, they’re covered. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, what I hear you saying is that that 
category of employment, someone who’s working for Sask 
Sport as a lottery ticket seller, what you’re saying  

to this Assembly is that that category of employee is covered 
today. Has that category of employee always been covered 
within Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if they are an 
employee of Sask Sport, they would be covered. But under the 
Regulations chapter W-17.1, Regulation 2, section 3(w), 
“selling or similar canvassing on streets” is excluded under the 
coverage of workers’ compensation. If they are an employee of 
a covered employer, which would include Sask Sport, then they 
would be covered. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you please advise me then, 
if that has always been the case, or since what period of time, 
would that particular employee be covered by workers’ 
compensation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, this regulation was 
implemented in 1985. Recollection by the officials of the board 
is that was a standing regulation prior to the consolidation of the 
regulation. Your question here is very hypothetical, and I’ve 
tried to give you the possibilities here, but if you have specifics 
and you want to take them up with my department, my 
assistants will try to get the information from the board and get 
it back to you on who is covered or who isn’t covered. 
 
Generally speaking, if you’re an employee receiving a pay 
cheque, you’re covered. If you’re an agent, a commission sales 
person, then you would not be covered. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well would you also advise me, Mr. Minister, 
what the policy of the board is regarding payment of benefits to 
a worker injured when there has been an SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) insurance settlement which has also 
paid benefits to that injured worker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the process hasn’t 
changed in quite a long time. As a matter of fact, it hasn’t 
changed since I last practised law. And the system is that 
Workers’ Compensation pays for wage loss first. When legal 
action is taken and SGI might recover, then Workers’ Comp has 
subrogation rights against the claim and gets back the money 
that they paid. 
 
For example, if an employee is injured while at work but the 
employee is entitled to sue someone else because they caused 
the damage, and if that employee were paid 10,000 for wage 
loss and recovered 20,000, Workers’ Comp would take their 
$10,000 back because that was paid by SGI. We do not at any 
time apply subrogation to pain and suffering claims, strictly to 
wage loss portions. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, two 
years ago you told an industrial safety seminar in Saskatoon 
that the government planned an oil rig safety training program, 
among other health and safety regulations for that industry. The 
’86 Workers’ Compensation Board annual report, Mr. Minister, 
informs that in 1985 there were five oil field deaths, and in 
1986 there were three oil field deaths. 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1256 
 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, what has happened with the plan for 
industrial safety seminars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, that idea has not been 
forgotten. We were going to implement this special safety 
program in the oil business at the time, two years ago, but the 
price of oil went down so drastically and the drilling fell off so 
badly that there was no demand for the training of oil workers. 
They were laying off the less experienced workers, and they 
were retaining the experienced workers at that time. 
 
Drilling is picking up again now and has been in the last while. 
And We’ve had discussions with occupational health and safety 
with the oil industry to revive this idea because now they’ll be 
hiring new inexperienced people again. And the board 
discussed that this morning so that it’s fresh on their mind. And 
they’re trying to put together that program that we would have 
went with two years ago had the bottom not fallen out of the oil 
business at the time. 
 
So now that the drilling is coming back . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Sorry, I was interrupted by one of your 
members there. The drilling is now coming back, and we are 
working on putting this program together and getting it rolling 
again. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And do you have a time span in mind, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we think we can 
get it rolling for this summer. It’s looking pretty good. So for 
this drilling season that’s coming up . . . of course they drill in 
winter now as well, but for the summer season here we think we 
can get that safety program rolling. 
 
I should point out that that employees and employers have been 
very good in safety in the last few years. Now there is still some 
improvement to be made. We would like to have a zero accident 
rate and a zero fatality rate. 
 
In 1980-81, for example, there were 60 fatalities, and last year 
that was down to 27 fatalities. Now that was 27 too many, but 
certainly there were another 43 people who are alive out there 
because industry employers and employees have taken safety 
very seriously in the last few years. So we consider that 43 lives 
were saved in comparison to past practices and work. I want to 
congratulate the industry and the employees. 
 
I’ve been at some plants. For example, I had the occasion of 
touring the Weyerhaeuser construction site, and they advised 
me that they warned an employee once on safety, and the 
second time an employee goes with slack on safety, they 
dismissed them. So if you’re caught twice without your hard hat 
on, you would be dismissed from the project. And that 
corporation insisted that employees be protected, that accidents 
cost the employees and their families pain, suffering and grief, 
and financially, and also cost the company. 
 
Companies are now saying that a safe work place is a more 
profitable work place. So there’s some agreement there between 
employees and employers — that safety  

pays for everybody. I’m very pleased with that statistic coming 
down, and we’ll try to improve on that 27 and get it down even 
lower. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, the University of Saskatchewan 
centre for agriculture medicine points out that farmers are five 
times more likely to be killed or disabled on the job than 
workers on average. Over the past five years, if I’m reading the 
statistics correctly, there have been an average of 26 fatalities 
per year on farms in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether your department has any plans 
to deal with this tragedy in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, at occupational health 
and safety we have started a program there. And we’ve got two 
people full time on farm safety right now, even though we have 
a low number of farmers on workers’ compensation from the 
point of view of being contributors to workers’ compensation. 
 
We also notice some improvement there. I’ll give you the 
statistics on agricultural fatalities: 1983, 26; 1984, 28; 1985, 25; 
1986, 26 and 1987, 15. So I don’t know if our new program is 
working, if that is the reason that they’ve dropped from 26 to 15 
in 1987. If that’s the reason, then I’m sorry we didn’t start with 
those two people on the road a lot sooner, because certainly 
there are some results. 
 
Now I know this is cyclical and it may go up next year, but 
there’s been these two people out there; they’ve been at farm 
fairs, agribition — everywhere. They’ve got a booth, they try to 
talk to every farmer that comes along, everybody that comes 
along explain safety. They have pamphlets. They give out 
information. They tour the province and it seems to me that the 
expenditure on those two people is worthwhile, since just going 
on the statistic, we’ve decreased the number of farm fatalities 
dramatically in the last year. So maybe it’s working. I certainly 
hope it is. And we’ll see how 1988 goes. I hope it’s a safe year. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m encouraged to hear that 
as well, and I would hope that the impact of two people could 
save some 11 lives a year. That would be a fabulous investment. 
 
I would simply encourage your department to continue these 
initiatives. We all know in this province the risk of hazards on 
the farm, and you have my assurance, sir, that nay initiatives 
that your department takes in that area will have my full 
support. 
 
Can we move to labour standards, Mr. Minister. Last August, in 
estimates, you made a commitment, and I quote from Hansard. 
I don’t have the date here, I’m sorry, but it was during estimates 
of last year: 
 

The Labour Standards Act has not been reviewed in the 
last six years, and I’m now starting to review The Labour 
Standards Act. You have my commitment to review that 
situation. 

 
Also, Mr. Minister, as I take a look at some of the statistics 
related to labour standards, and particularly the relationship 
between complaints and prosecutions, some  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1257 
 

interesting things leap out and whack you between the eyes. In 
1984, Mr. Minister, there were 2,407 formal complaints brought 
to the labour standards branch, with 55 prosecutions. 
 
In 1985 the number of complaints were up by seven to 24 . . . 
sorry, went down by seven to 2,400, but the prosecutions 
dropped by 11, from 55 to 44. In 1986, complaints increased by 
280, but again, the prosecutions dropped by two. There were 
2,680 complaints and only 42 prosecutions. And then in 1987, 
Mr. Minister, the complaints were up substantially, 3,135 — an 
increase of 455 yet again from the previous year. And 
shockingly, it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, the prosecutions 
dropped substantially. In spite of the complaints going up 455, 
the prosecutions for ’87 as compared to ’86 dropped by 22, 
down to only 20. 
 
Now. Mr. Minister, you will agree, I’m sure, that there seems to 
be a trend towards an increased in the complaints, and a 
significant trend in the reduction of prosecutions there were 
brought to fruition or to completion through the efforts of the 
labour standards branch. 
 
Mr. Minister, would it be possible to tell me whether you have 
done a review of labour standards, and what you have 
discovered, if anything? I’m particularly interested in your 
explanation as to why we have a trend over the past four years 
of increased in complaints but very significant reductions in 
prosecutions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I know the member 
opposite probably doesn’t have access to all the statistics, or 
else he forgot one. Clearly, the mandate of the labour standards 
branch is to collect wages that are owing. That’s the primary 
responsibility of that branch. And we have intentionally reduced 
the number of prosecutions. It’s note that we won’t prosecute, 
but prosecution is a quasi-criminal method of collecting wages 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s a rather high legal terminology, and what I’ll say is that 
what it means if that instead of getting a judge to order that the 
wages are owing, you have my department prosecute somebody 
for not paying the wages; then the judge finds them guilty and 
orders that they pay the wages. The usual method of collecting 
debt is to get a court order, ordering that it’s owing, and then go 
out and have it seized or garnisheed or whatever. So this is an 
unusual way of collecting a debt due to someone, and we assist 
people in collecting these debts. 
 
We have asked our department in the last two years, since I 
have become minister, to concentrate on settling these disputes 
rather than prosecuting these disputes. And the opposition has 
been critical — they were last year — that we weren’t 
prosecuting as many people. 
 
But the results have been very good. For example, in 1983-84 
we prosecuted 55 people and we collected $850,000 in wages. 
In 1987-88 we prosecuted only seven people and we collected 
double that in wages — $1.656 million. So we prosecuted only 
seven as compared to 55, and we collected double the amount 
in wages. 
 

So our department has been very good at mediating these 
disputes and getting them settled and getting the money to the 
people faster, rather than dragging people through the court 
process. 
 
And in prosecutions, you may know — on the other hand, you 
may not — but you may know that in a prosecution there’s a 
different onus of proof than there is in a civil matter. So it’s 
more difficult to get a conviction on a prosecution that it is to 
get a civil order in debt. 
 
And so what we have been able to do is to keep things out of 
court and collect double the amount of money for workers in 
Saskatchewan as compared to five years ago. We’ve done this 
intentionally, but we will prosecute where there can be no 
settlement. And then we have prosecuted last year in seven 
cases, and 1986-87 in 20 cases. 
 
So it’s an intentional, conscious thing to prosecute as a last 
resort, and that’s what we’ve done. And we’ve doubled the 
amount of money that’s been collected, over five years ago. 
 
And I want to thank my branch there for showing a better 
attitude. They are no longer being dictatorial to employers. 
They’re no longer antagonizing people. They are simply saying, 
well listen, this is owing; let’s see if we can settle this. And they 
are getting settlements. Where the people agree, there is no need 
to go to court. 
 
So we are proud of this record of mediation rather than 
prosecution. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, there are two ways that problems 
having to do with labour standards can come to the attention of 
the branch. One is if there is a formal complaint, and the other 
is if there are problems that come to light through the course of 
random checks. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would please advise 
the House as to what number of random checks for labour 
standards have been done over the last three fiscal years. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the 
number of routine inspections available at this time, and I don’t 
know if we’ll be able to gather them up. 
 
We’ve had at least 60 promotions to date where people go out 
and give information on what is required, and things of that 
nature. They try to combine these in some cases, and sometimes 
they do routine inspections. But we notice that the number of 
complaints is up, and when the number of complaints go up, we 
do fewer routine inspections because our staff is busy 
investigating the complaints rather than doing routine 
inspections. 
 
It should also be noted that 40 per cent of all the complaints 
refer to holiday pay and disputes over pay for public holidays 
and holiday pay; that’s 40 per cent of the work that they do in 
collection of wages and investigations. 
 
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1258 
 

So as I’ve indicated on other occasions — and I appreciate that 
you haven’t gone into that today — that we will be brining in 
amendments dealing with part-time workers and the rules for 
part-time workers, because 40 per cent of all the complaints 
deal with part-time workers and holiday pay and things of that 
nature. 
 
We think that we can make improvements so that there’s no 
need for so many complaints, and that it is clear exactly what 
people are entitled to, and it’s clear whether they’ve received it 
or not received it. The current formula is quite complicated. I 
intend to make some changes there in the legislation coming 
this session. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I look forward to the 
introduction of that legislation, and again you have my 
commitment that if, in my opinion, those changes in legislation 
to labour standards do provide improvements for part-time 
workers, that you will have my support in doing that. 
 
However, before leaving this particular subject, Mr. Minister, I 
do want to make this point: that it is often the case in reality — 
now we can just dabble in reality for a moment here, Mr. 
Minister — that when employees have concerns about whether 
they are receiving the privileges — or not privileges, but the 
rights assigned to them by law through the labour standards of 
the province, that there is sometimes — let me be a little 
stronger — often a hesitancy to bring forth a complaint because 
it is often obvious as to who the complaint came from, and 
therefore employees are hesitant to jeopardize their employment 
even though that’s not supposed to happen by law, but we all 
know that the reality always isn’t consistent with the intention. 
 
And therefore it would seem to me that it would be in the best 
interests of protecting the spirit of labour standards that there is 
a distinct initiative to do random checks of the adherence to 
labour standards. That is a way of the department honouring 
that legislative commitment to employees in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I fully appreciate, Mr. Minister, that you’ve just finished 
saying that you don’t have figures before you here today to 
describe the number of random checks being done over the last 
three fiscal years; you’ve given some explanation as to why that 
might be. I simply ask you this, Mr. Minister: would you 
provide for me in writing, at some future date, the number of 
random checks over the last three fiscal years from ’85-86 to 
’87-88 that the department has undertaken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, only if it’s readily 
available. If it’s going to take a lot of effort for our department 
to compile these statistics for you, then simply for the matter of 
compiling the statistics I would not provide it, because they 
have to spend their time dealing with complaints and solving 
problems. So if it’s readily available, I’ll send it to you; but if 
it’s not easily put together, then I won’t. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’ve been doing fairly well 
here over the last few minutes and I’m not sure what not readily 
available means, other than I suspect it might  

mean that I will never see those figures. And I would simply 
ask for your commitment that that information be provided. 
 
I don’t think . . . in the past that’s not been difficult to provide, 
to the best of my information, and I would simply ask that you 
make that commitment to provide it. And if you don’t, if you 
would please provide an explanation as to why the information 
wasn’t forthcoming, so as to alleviate myself of any potential 
suspicion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: —Well, Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier 
that it wasn’t readily available now. If they can go back to the 
department and if they can look it up, then we’ll let you know. 
But if they have to spend time calculating it, I have no intention 
of spending 5 or $10,000 putting together information to satisfy 
your curiosity. 
 
If it’s there, we’ll give it to you, but if it’s not easily obtainable, 
we’re not going to spend taxpayers’ money compiling 
something that is of no particular benefit to us. So that’s the 
bottom line — if we’ve got it, we’ll give it, if we don’t have it, 
we’re not going to spend any money getting it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think I’m asking a 
question that takes 5 or $10,000 to answer, and I am a bit 
disturbed by your statement that you will not make any 
calculations to provide that information and you will not incur 
any expense to provide that information. 
 
I can understand that there’s a relationship between the 
importance of the information and the cost of providing that, 
and that’s why I simply ask you: will you provide me with that 
information or an explanation as to why you did not, so that it’s 
possible to determine whether it was too costly or whatever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The question’s been answered, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well no, it hasn’t, Mr. Minister. Do we have to 
get into a bit of a shoving match on this little item again? I’m 
simply asking you a straightforward question and request a 
straightforward answer. I will assume that somewhere along the 
line, motivated by interest in the public good and the 
department’s responsibilities and yours, sir, to be willing to 
defend your actions, that you’ll provide that information to me. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to move to the topic of minimum wage. 
And quite frankly, Mr. Minister, your track record of your 
government in this areas is a best semi-deplorable. 
 
In 1982, Mr. Minister, when your party was given the task and 
the privilege of governing the province of Saskatchewan, you 
inherited the highest minimum wage. And, in fact, I recall 
reading PC literature for some time where you were bragging to 
the public about how you had the highest minimum wage in 
Canada, at $4.25 at that time. 
 
Since that time, Mr. Minister, inflation has taken the toll from 
Saskatchewan people in excess of 30 per cent, and since that 
time, three years later in 1985, the minimum  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1259 
 

wage was moved from $4.25 to $4.50 an hour, an increase of 
5.9 per cent, and it’s been locked there ever since. 
 
In the last two years, Mr. Minister, the majority of the provinces 
and territories in this nation have had increases in minimum 
wage — seven in total — and as of July of this year B.C. will 
make that eight who have had increases within the last two 
years. 
 
Now we all know, Mr. Minister, that minimum wage earners 
are not people who are inclined to sock their money away into a 
savings account. They are people who will spend that money 
and they’ll spend it in the communities in which they made it. 
And we also know, Mr. Minister, it’ll be obvious to everyone 
that minimum wage tends to affect employees in the service 
industry more and tends to affect women much more than it 
affects men. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when I take a review of the realities of 
minimum wage, I find some interesting information. Number 
one, that as of this day, Saskatchewan has now got the sixth 
highest minimum wage of Canada, the sixth highest minimum 
wage in Canada. And we can go through the provinces one by 
one, if you like, and the dates that they changed and so on, but I 
think that’s a big of a shame that you inherited the highest 
minimum wage in Canada and you’ve now reduced it to the 
sixth highest in the nation. In July, B.C. will make that tied for 
the sixth highest in the nation. 
 
I also find it kind of interesting, Mr. Minister, when I try to 
understand why a government would take this particular 
approach to minimum wage. And I look at what happens in 
some — not only other provinces in this nation who are passing 
us by pretty rapidly, I take a look at what’s happening south of 
the border, and particularly, initially, first of all here, Mr. 
Minister, those states which are closest to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we find some interesting trends, Mr. Minister — that in 
North Dakota, which has a complicated series of minimum 
wages, that in North Dakota the highest minimum wage is a 
category called experienced workers who are professional. 
Professional experienced workers’ minimum wage in North 
Dakota — $3.10 an hour; Montana, $3.35 an hour as of 1986; 
South Dakota, $3.35 an hour since January of 1986; Minnesota, 
they have a number of different minimum wages again, their 
highest is $3.55 an hour. 
 
If we take just a kind of a walk around our neighbours to the 
South, take a look at some of the states, we find that there is an 
amazing consistency. And I’m wondering . let you know what 
I’m wondering here, Mr. Minister, whether we are dealing in 
Saskatchewan today with an agenda which is to Americanize 
the minimum wage as part of a preparation for a compliance 
with the Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal and to make this 
province more American in more ways than one, Mr. Minister. 
 
In Arkansas, $3.10 minimum wage since January 1, 1989; 
Delaware, 3.35 effective May 20, 1987; Hawaii, 3.85 an hour, 
January 1, 1988. You’ll be interested, Mr.  

Minister, when you do the calculations from American to 
Canadian dollars, to note that these are not terribly far off the 
minimum wage in Saskatchewan today. 
 
In Maine, 3.65 an hour effective January 1, 1987; 
Massachusetts, 3.75, July 1, 1988; Nebraska, 3.35, August 29, 
1987. All these folks are for some reasons, they’re moving their 
minimum wages. We’re not. Nevada, 3.35, September 10, 
1987; New Hampshire, 3.55 effective January 1, 1988; North 
Carolina, 3.60 an hour in 1987; Rhode Island, 3.65, 1987. 
 
And the list goes on, Mr. Minister. I think there is a trend there 
that is pretty obvious, that when we compare ourselves to our 
American neighbours that there is a fairly consistent minimum 
wage throughout. 
 
When one looks at minimum wage and the significance of 
minimum wage, one has to ask, what does this all mean? And I 
find some of the explanation becomes pretty obvious when we 
have in this nation a Prime Minister who is a hearty endorser of 
the Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal and his number one 
cheer-leader is the Premier of Saskatchewan trotting around just 
extolling all the virtues of free trade, of the Mulroney-Reagan 
free trade deal, and just what it will do for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what will it do for the people of Saskatchewan? Laurent 
Thibault, president of the Canadian Manufacturers’ 
Association, says this when reflecting on the free trade deal, 
and I quote: 
 

It’s simply a fact that as we ask our industries to compete 
toe to toe with American industries, we in Canada are 
obviously forced to create the same condition in Canada 
that exist in the U.S., whether it is the unemployment 
insurance scheme, workmen’s compensation, the cost of 
government, the level of taxation, or whatever. 

 
Interesting enough as well, in commenting upon the 
employment conditions, including in that, minimum wage, the 
Canada West Foundation says this, and I quote: 
 

Free trade between our two countries will inevitably lead 
to wages being equalized between Canada and the United 
States. This will occur since the high cost producer will 
not be able to compete against the lower cost producer if 
goods are traded freely. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, we can go on and we can read other quotes 
if we had more time. But I think the pattern is clear. 
 
What we have in Saskatchewan under your government was the 
inheritance of the highest minimum wage in the nation — as of 
this date, the sixth highest minimum wage in the nation. Only 
one increase in the past six years, that being three years after 
you took office, and then held at that for the past three years. 
 
And it would seem that what’s going on in this province, which 
is being led by a Premier who is the chief cheer-leader of the 
Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal, is that we have an 
Americanization of our minimum wage  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1260 
 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And I say, Mr. Minister, that 
that is a shame, that is a betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan 
and the kinds of working conditions that they have come to 
expect, largely — not exclusively, but largely — through the 
leadership provided by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note last year in Hansard, August 31, 1987, 
page 2174, you said, and I quote: 
 

We would like to raise the minimum wage as soon as 
practical. 

 
And so I have to wonder, Mr. Minister, what is practical? Are 
we in Saskatchewan today faced with a harmonization of 
minimum wage? And I ask you, Mr. Minister, what is your 
explanation for having dropped from the first minimum wage in 
Canada to the sixth; for the increased Americanization of our 
minimum wage in this province? And I ask you, sir: when is it 
going to be practical to increase the minimum wage in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been referring to the 
members opposite as the negative democratic party. I wish to 
amend that. I wish to amend that to the negative deception party 
because that is what they are always doing. That is what their 
party really stands for — the negative deception party. 
 
The member opposite said that we are the sixth highest 
province — province, he said province — he didn’t tell us that 
he was really counting the Northwest Territories and the Yukon 
as a province. I didn’t know that they had become provinces. 
Among provinces we are the fourth highest. And I’m going to 
give you a list of what the minimum wages are in the balance of 
Canada so that we have an accurate picture because this 
deception must be denounced. 
 
We have Manitoba at 4.70 per hour; Ontario at 4.55 per hour; 
Quebec at 4.55 per hour; Saskatchewan at 4.50 per hours; we 
have British Columbia — and the member opposite said that 
they were going to raise their minimum wage, but he failed to 
mention that they were going to raise it to 4.50 per hour, the 
same as Saskatchewan; and we have New Brunswick at $4.00 
per hour; and we have Newfoundland at 4.25 per hour; Nova 
Scotia at $4.00 per hour; Prince Edward Island at $4.00 per 
hour; and Alberta at 3.80 per hour. And he failed to mention 
that Alberta was going to raise theirs to 4.50, the same as 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So then that puts us fourth highest, and considering the 
economic conditions and the cost of living in Saskatchewan, 
and the economic conditions here, that is a reasonable range. 
Now as I said last year, and I say again this year, we would like 
to have that higher as soon as practical, and we are now 
considering that, I am considering that. The minimum wage 
board has made a consideration in 1987 and indicated that it 
was unwise to raise it at this time, I am considering it from the 
point of view of citizens of Saskatchewan, and I would like to 
raise it in the near future. 
 

But to say that we are sixth among the provinces, and count in 
the Northwest Territories and the Yukon as provinces, is a 
deception. By the way, their minimum wages are $5 and 5.39 
respectively, and under the conditions in the North, and the cost 
there, I would say that’s a practical solution there. But certainly 
they are not provinces yet, and the member opposite practices 
. . . certainly unfair statistical calculations, because those two 
territories are not provinces now. And I remind the member 
opposite that they are not provinces, and I am sure he will 
acknowledge his error that they are not provinces, and I am sure 
he will acknowledge that we are fourth highest among the 
provinces. I am certain the member opposite now understands 
that these two territories are not provinces, and he will correct 
the misapprehension that he led us to believe here. 
 
Then the member opposite compares the United States with 
Canada, and the minimum wage there. He does not compare the 
price of rent in the United States, or the price of eggs, or the 
price of anything else in the United States — he compares their 
minimum wage. He does not take into account the exchange 
rate. And then he says, well, if you do take it into account, it’s 
about the same. 
 
But I mean there is statistical deception again. You cannot 
simply go the United States, say the minimum wage is a certain 
sum, and say that reflects on their life-style as compared to our 
life-style. You cannot take into account the government services 
provided here as compared to there. And the member opposite 
might as well use as an example the minimum wage in Poland 
or East Germany. But he doesn’t want to talk about those 
socialist countries; he wants to talk about the United States. 
 
The leading capitalist country of the world, the most powerful 
country in the world, the most affluent country in the world, he 
denounces as there being something wrong with that country 
and its system. But the socialist countries of the world, which 
they used to allude to but now are ashamed of, he will never 
mention — he will never mention. 
 
I ask the members opposite, I ask the members in the Assembly, 
I ask the public of Saskatchewan: the number of people that 
ever defect to East Germany or Poland or the U.S.S.R. — do 
they have a problem with refugees trying to get it? No, they do 
not. The United States does. People come by boat, they paddle, 
they swim. They try to get into the United States to work for 
whatever wage they can get, and they are satisfied with the 
minimum wage. But they do not rush off to the socialist 
countries of the world to try to live and work there. 
 
I ask the member opposite to explain that, to explain that people 
are trying to get into the United States, people are trying to get 
into Canada, and people are trying to get out of the socialist 
countries of the world. If he could explain that, he could explain 
anything. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, yes, we would like to raise the minimum 
wage, and yes, we will as soon as possible but you have to take 
into account the additional services that the Government of 
Saskatchewan provides to people that are no-cost services that 
they have to pay for out of their  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1261 
 

after-tax dollars in other jurisdictions. 
 
And we will consider the minimum wage; we will try to come 
out with a fair and practical solution. And I ask the member 
opposite to take into account all factors rather than deal with 
rhetoric and single issues and compare United States with 
Canada without even considering the cost of living differences. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well I’ll ask the minister to try to get a grip on 
his lip. And I note, Mr. Minister, that you confirmed exactly 
what I said, that we have the sixth highest minimum wage in the 
nation and you went on to prove that without me having to read 
that into the record. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you simply this: at what date will it be 
practical and possible to increase the minimum wage in the 
province of Saskatchewan? When are you intending to do that? 
You waited three years after election before it moved. We’ve 
gone another three years now. When are you going to increase 
the minimum wage? 
 
And I ask you this at the same time, sir: in light of your 
apparent commitment to improve the lot of handicapped 
persons in the province of Saskatchewan, will you be intending, 
as well, when you bring changes to the minimum wage, to 
introduce or to remove the exemption for minimum wage of 
handicapped employees in sheltered industries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite did 
not rise to the challenge of the question I had asked him. I guess 
he has no explanation why people are trying to illegally get into 
the United States and Canada and illegally get out of the 
socialist countries of the world. 
 
But let me deal with the topic of handicapped and handicapped 
employment, Mr. Chairman, I ask the members opposite to be 
patient. I advise them it won’t be long from now that they will 
see a record number of handicapped people employed in 
Saskatchewan in real jobs. Our record with the handicapped in 
the near future — just what we’re going to do in the near future 
— will surpass anything the NDP ever did, ever, in 11 years. It 
will surpass anything they ever did. And you know, it’s all they 
will be able to say — about what we are going to do for the 
handicapped — is they will be able to say something negative 
and go spread deception among the public. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I ask them to be patient because we will do 
something for the handicapped that will be a record-setting, 
precedent-setting initiative that the members opposite will be 
disappointed in only because they are negative. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Could the minister 
tell me whether or not his department or any agencies still have 
grant funding available for food banks such as was given to, I 
believe, Saskatoon and the food bank here in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, this department does not 
fund food banks. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Does the Department of Social Services  

give funding to food banks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it is possible that food 
banks could qualify under welfare reform for money, to pay 
people to work in lieu of receiving welfare. And I believe in the 
past they have qualified on projects of that nature. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I was wondering if the minister could tell us 
. . . in terms of employment we quite often use statistics in this 
House — the media also use statistics — and quite often those 
statistics are StatsCanada statistics that are used. Can you tell us 
what agency in your department, or what department is 
responsible for compiling those statistics on unemployment; 
and is it done in-house or do you contract people to gather those 
statistics, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we get the data from 
StatsCanada, compliments of the taxpayers of Canada, and we 
then analyse them within the department and put together a 
review of the statistics that StatsCanada puts out. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could you enlighten us today as to what the 
methodology is that Statistics Canada uses to determine the 
unemployment statistics for Saskatchewan and other places 
across the country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, StatsCanada is not within my 
jurisdiction, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well would not someone in your department 
be interested in knowing the methodology that Statistics Canada 
uses to try and determine whether or not it offers a true 
reflection in the province of Saskatchewan as to what our 
unemployment picture is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I suggest the member 
opposite get that information from StatsCanada. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I’d suggest to you, Mr. Arrogance, that 
the methodology that StatsCanada uses is one of a telephone 
survey. They do a telephone survey of places across the 
country. 
 
In the case of Saskatchewan, they’ll take so many names and 
there’ll be a telephone survey done. And from that telephone 
survey they try and point out what the unemployment rates are 
for youth unemployment, for other age classifications of 
unemployment. 
 
I would like to ask the minister if he feels that this is an 
accurate way to portray — if he doesn’t think there’s some 
better methodology for determining what the actual and real 
unemployment statistics are for this province in particular? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that in a rural 
economy like Saskatchewan where we still do have some party 
lines — although our government is doing away with rural 
party lines not only at a record pace, but for once and for all, 
because the members opposite couldn’t find the money to do it 
when the money was there — that because we have a rural base 
— we have a high percentage of native population — because 
we have  
  



 
May 11, 1988 

1262 
 

rural party lines, that the statistics are not necessarily as 
accurate as we would like them to be. 
 
But I can’t fault StatsCanada for their gathering of information. 
If you wanted to do it more accurately, it would probably be a 
lot more expensive. So you have to have some trade-offs 
between accuracy and the cost of gathering the information. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well is there no topping up that the 
Employment Development Agency does in terms of looking 
beyond the reports you get from StatsCanada to determine what 
the real unemployment figures are in the province of 
Saskatchewan? I’m sure that the people that work within your 
department, in particular in the Employment Development 
Agency, must do some of that. And could you tell us what it is 
they do beyond accepting those reports from StatsCanada? And 
could you tell us what those rates are, what you deem them to 
be, through the Employment Development Agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we go on the basis of 
StatsCanada information. I don’t see any reason why we should 
spend money doing surveys to duplicate what they are already 
doing. 
 
We try to interpret their statistical information and, as I said, it 
comes to us compliments of the taxpayers of Canada. And 
while it could be a little more accurate, I can’t fault them to the 
extent that I would spend the taxpayers’ money to duplicate 
their work or try to do it better. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


