


















































March 29, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 29, 1988 
 
 

203 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment 
thereto moved by Ms. Simard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before we recessed 
for a slight break, I was speaking for a moment on the success of 
our home program. And I wanted to get into some other area of 
discussion regarding the debate from the throne, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I have to share something that happened with this Assembly 
and, for that matter, with any people that may happen to be 
viewing this discussion tonight. I had the occasion to attend a 
couple of functions in between 5 o’clock and 7 o’clock tonight. 
One was very large. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition keeps saying that I don’t stay in 
touch and I don’t represent my business community. Well I should 
inform him that earlier this afternoon, about 5:30, I was in the 
midst of a couple of 300 business people that had been speaking to 
me about the matter of diversification and the incentives that were 
provided by our government, and how in their mind the NDP 
focus, regardless of that they say about small business, is simply 
not there. It’s disjointed, and again they just reaffirmed all of what 
I was saying earlier — that they don’t understand business, they 
never have, and they probably never will. 
 
But interestingly enough, I suppose that the earlier question period 
of the day brought forward the situation and the discussion 
concerning the ward system in our cities. And of course this 
created . . . People say, well the minister and the government is 
looking at the changes to the ward system simply because . . . And 
there is no basis of foundation and the like. Well I can assure you, 
Mr. Speaker, that that is not the case — and again, as has been the 
case ever since I indicated publicly almost a year and a half ago 
now that we would undertake a review of the ward system and 
begin discussions with people and all the like. 
 
All of these people in the first . . . I’ll speak about the second 
function later, but this first function, it was not just limited, Mr. 
Speaker, to the business community, but some of our larger 
corporations were represented. And I suppose again that members 
opposite wouldn’t have any use for the larger corporations — and 
I think about the likes of Kramer Tractor, for instance, a big, 
well-established firm in the city of Regina that’s been here, good 
gosh, as long as I can remember. And several of their employees 
were there. And I entered into discussion with the employees of 
this firm and, you know, they were convincing me as to why the 
abolishment of the ward system made an awful lot of sense to 
them. And they kept repeating to me, look who’s against the ward 
system; look who objects to the ward system. Just pay  

attention to the primary objectors — union leaders, CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) — attacking me and my 
government because we’re trying to save the taxpayers’ dollars. 
Why are these union leaders like that? That’s the questions that 
they posed me. 
 
Now the NDP, when clearly . . . And as we get into the debate of 
the ward system, in the event our government chooses to make 
some alterations to it, it will be interesting as we go through the 
debates in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, of what the Leader of the 
Opposition, the present-day Leader of the Opposition, had to say 
in 1973 as that government was implementing the ward system. 
So it would be interesting if our government chooses that that is 
the direction to take, that really the ward system becomes an issue 
of the taxpayers’ dollars. And if our government firmly believes 
that we can save those taxpayers their dollars at municipal level 
and we should choose to do something with the ward system, the 
debate in this forum, Mr. Speaker, will be most interesting. 
 
The second function that I attended, Mr. Speaker, I ran into a 
constituent of mine, a woman admittedly, that said, Jack, I just 
happened to turn the TV set on and I was busy making pies, but I 
was listening to your presentation earlier in the afternoon. She 
said, you know, you’re right on. You made so much sense — and 
there they go laughing again, Mr. Speaker — and she was talking 
about vicious dogs, the very thing that the NDP benches opposite 
are laughing about at this very moment. To this lady, Mr. Speaker, 
the vicious dog scenario was a very, very important issue — and 
the member from Moose Jaw laughs — because her 
granddaughter was mauled by a vicious dog and to this day is 
seriously maimed, and there is nothing funny about it. And the 
NDP benches can laugh about it, and if she’s watching now — 
pay attention as again they giggle over this serious issue. Mr. 
Speaker, they all . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. I’d like to ask the hon. 
members to just refrain from interrupting and allow the member to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another comment, 
a funny speech: the Leader of the Opposition seems to get a lot of 
humour out of the vicious dog scenario. And I won’t even bother 
quoting you any more and your ludicrous statements about vicious 
. . . Why don’t you grow up? Why don’t you pay attention? Why 
don’t you go to the hospital and visit some of the people that are, 
in fact and indeed, scarred for life as the result of a vicious dog 
attack, and then see if you still giggle? You’ve got a responsible 
position now; why don’t you treat it that way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m kind of fortunate as well, Mr. Speaker, 
insofar as my family now having basically left home. My wife 
spends an awful lot of time with me at a lot of these affairs and 
functions, and certainly she listens and she respects the attitude of 
the people and the comments of the people, and she shares those 
comments and attitudes with me. 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

204 
 

And I believe that that is an important part of this whole 
democratic process of sharing information of your criticisms and 
likes and dislikes, and I think that that speaks well of any of us in 
this legislature who are fortunate enough to have a partner that 
assists them carry out their responsibilities and duties of this 
legislature. Again, speaking on behalf of my constituents of 
Regina South, I know that the people in Regina South respect my 
wife for that, as I do, as well. 
 
I was speaking earlier, Mr. Speaker, about the home program. 
Over 80 per cent of the work is being done by Saskatchewan 
contractors. That represents almost some $800 million. And the 
home program is doing, of course, what it intended to do and that 
is to create thousands of jobs and generate millions of dollars of 
economic activity. And we realize . . . We realize that there is 
some concern about the capacity of the industry to handle the 
volume of activity that this very successful program has created. 
And the industry, for that matter, as we talk and listen to them, 
have expressed concern to us, and we are making every effort to 
ensure that the benefit of this program is realized over a five-year 
period, so that our Saskatchewan contractors can spread out this 
tremendous economic activity and, in fact, reap the benefits of the 
program right here in Saskatchewan. And the diversification of the 
home building industry and the home builders themselves is not 
unlike the challenges that we face here in Saskatchewan today. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, government can create incentives, but 
really it takes business to make it work, and I am proud of the 
working relationship that this government has with the business 
community and with the home builders. Through consultation, we 
are able to direct our support where it is mot needed. And working 
together — working together is the key to success. It is now, and it 
will be in the future. We heard the Leader of the Opposition about 
three engines and one engine was out and all this malarkey. Well I 
can assure you that the engine that drives the economy of this 
province — the engine of the small-business community — is 
alive and is well and is functioning. 
 
And buying the homes that these home builders build are the most 
important investment that any one of us will ever make. And here 
in Saskatchewan there is a great deal of pride shown in home 
ownership and in the protection of that investment. And our 
government has been committed to providing the opportunity for 
home ownership, Mr. Speaker, to all people. We’ve taken 
measures to help people maintain and protect their investment. 
When sky-rocketing interest rates jeopardized the people’s homes, 
we introduced the mortgage interest rate protection program, and 
through lower interest rates this program provided mortgage 
protection. When interest rates finally levelled out, we redirected 
our support toward the families who wanted to own their own new 
home, and the build-a-home program gave many people in 
Saskatchewan the opportunity to do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the way I see it, in Saskatchewan today we face three 
challenges. The first challenge, and I’m sure that you’re aware of, 
is lack of money, lack of revenue. 
 

And that’s not only a problem being faced here at home but it’s a 
problem world-wide. We’re faced with the international price of 
wheat, oil, uranium and potash going down and down 
dramatically. And when these prices go down together — and who 
in their best judgement or wisest wisdom could have thought that 
it would have hit an all-time low all at the same time? — but when 
it does, we run out of money because they are our major source of 
income. And it’s not the farmers’ fault that the price goes down, or 
the miners’ fault, and we certainly didn’t tell OPEC (Organization 
of Petroleum Exporting Countries) what to do with the price of oil 
when they did that. But we face severe economic pressures as a 
result of international economic conditions, economic forces well 
beyond the bounds of Saskatchewan, forces, Mr. Speaker, that we, 
here in Saskatchewan, have no control over. 
 
To illustrate our revenue problem, if you took all of the income 
tax, all of the sales tax, all of the oil royalties in our province 
today, it wouldn’t quite pay for health care alone. It just isn’t here. 
Manitoba has an eight billion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . there 
he goes again, the member from Saskatoon South. Boy, he just 
keeps spouting off, and then he asks me to have pity on him. 
 
Well it isn’t just here, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba — their party in 
Manitoba, you know, I don’t know what their deficit is, 8, 8, $10 
billion and still growing. They’ve got a problem $12 billion; 
Alberta, over $3 billion, and it’s growing. So it’s not just a 
Saskatchewan problem. But we have to make sure in this province 
that our financial security will be in place and indeed stay in place 
so we can build for our future. We can either resign ourselves to 
our future or we can redesign our future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — We can either resign ourselves to the future 
or redesign the future — simple enough. We have to manage our 
local economy so that we can control our destiny in the future, in 
spite of global economic conditions. 
 
The second challenge we face is economic diversification; in other 
words we have to remove all of our eggs from one basket. 
Commodities like agriculture and potash have been our economic 
mainstay. While we will continue to support those industries, Mr. 
Speaker, we must broaden our base, we must diversify, we must 
process, we must manufacture. The final challenge is the loss of 
markets because of protectionism and subsidy, and this, Mr. 
Speaker, is perhaps our greatest problem because it makes trade 
between Saskatchewan and the rest of the world harder and 
harder. 
 
So three problems: money, because of the lack of revenue from 
international trade; all of our eggs in one basket — we must 
diversify more than we are; and third, we have an international 
trade and relationship problem. 
 
So what are we going to do about it? Do we have a plan? You 
didn’t seem to want to listen to the throne speech. Well sure, I can 
give you some very simple examples, Mr. Speaker, examples that 
my constituents of Regina South really appreciate. We will be 
refining soon our own  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

205 
 

Saskatchewan heavy crude oil at the new upgrader right here in 
Regina. For the first time in our history, we’ll be refining our own 
heavy oil — right here, right here in my home town of Regina. 
 
(1915) 
 
Another interesting fact that you may not realize. We all know that 
the number one industry in Saskatchewan is agriculture. Do we 
know that the number two export of agriculture is pork products? 
So we’re diversifying by manufacturing bacon, both in Saskatoon 
and now in North Battleford, and it doesn’t stop there. 
 
There’s pulp, and soon paper — paper in Prince Albert as well. 
Members of the opposition said, Mr. Speaker, it would never be 
built. Well it’s built. And soon they will be shipping paper into 
that big market in the U.S. 
 
It all creates jobs; it all creates new sources of revenue. And while 
it’s true that you might consider these industries as big, this 
diversification with the added-on values to our growth, our own 
oil, our own pigs, our own paper, and all of the small businesses 
that are required to support these megaprojects . . . 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, again I repeat, is where the NDP 
philosophy is lost, is mired in some deep, old philosophical 
rhetoric that they simply don’t understand, that the big businesses 
require a host of small businesses in order for them to survive and 
prosper. One of the largest industries we have in our province 
today is tourism, and the growth in tourism reflects what has 
always been a great strength of Saskatchewan’s, particularly when 
you consider the hospitality and the friendly people here. I could 
go on at some length on tourism, Mr. Speaker, but I know that 
some of my colleagues are interested in entering into this debate 
this evening so I’ll save tourism for another time. 
 
A plan — you bet we have a plan. The people here in 
Saskatchewan are not easily intimidated, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite seem to think they are, but they aren’t. The 
people in Saskatchewan know how to work, they know how to 
think, and they know to manage. So the three solutions that I’ve 
mentioned are reasonable. 
 
The people here in this province want us to make the right 
decisions and the right choices, to take the action that is necessary 
— and in some cases overdue, long overdue — and we will do it 
fairly, we will do it openly, and above all, we will do it with 
consultation. I know that the members opposite don’t like to hear 
that, but we will do it with consultation. 
 
And sure, while our province faces these economic challenges, 
we’re not going to face them alone. We’re going to face them in 
co-operation with the people of this province, of this country, and, 
you know, wherever we heave to. After all the things we’ve been 
through — various problems: drought, grasshoppers, falling 
commodity prices, severe economic conditions, just about 
anything else we could run into — we’ve either had the lowest or 
second lowest unemployment rate in Canada for the last five 
years. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has made great strides in encouraging 
new business and industrial development, resulting in new 
development opportunities for Saskatchewan people, young and 
old. Major advances have been made in all sectors of our 
economy, Mr. Speaker, and all regions of the province, and the 
thanks goes to the business community. They’ve identified new 
opportunities and development in manufacturing, food processing, 
construction, tourism, resource development, resulting in billions 
of dollars in economic activity and thousands and thousands of 
new jobs. I can hardly believe the members opposite as they deny 
the people of our province all of these good things that go hand in 
hand. 
 
If we work together and co-operate, the private sector with 
government, we can create a powerful economic force. It’s a 
common vision and a common purpose, and you find it in every 
single, solitary community in Saskatchewan. All of Saskatchewan 
wants to build. Our plan in Saskatchewan is to build on our 
strengths and realize our great potential for those natural 
resources, for our agricultural base, in diversifying our industries 
and in small business, and to take the strength of the rural, 
agricultural, oil, timber, mining, and combine it with the energy 
and activities of the people in towns and villages and put them 
together so that they all meld and build and process and 
manufacture to make this province of ours so much better. 
 
There are many recent example of programs which demonstrate 
our record in Saskatchewan and our commitment to build a 
stronger and more diversified and stable economy, Mr. Speaker. 
Some of the examples of products never manufactured before in 
Saskatchewan, which are now readily available from 
Saskatchewan manufacturers: plastic gas pipe, insulted 
high-voltage cable, laminated wood cross arms for power poles, 
street light standards, fibreglass transformer foundations, 
fibreglass truck bodies, coveralls. 
 
I was in Moose Jaw the other day, for example, Mr. Speaker. 
Phillips Cable, they’re manufacturing for SaskPower, and it’s the 
first time that they’ve decided to manufacture in western Canada. 
Not only for Saskatchewan, not only for our neighbouring 
provinces, but they are going to supply cable to southern, northern, 
eastern, western United States because of the economics of scale 
and because the best technology they could find in the world is 
right here in Saskatchewan — diversification. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know what? Nobody disagrees with it. 
Everybody agrees. You can travel right across this province. 
Whether you’re in Lloydminster or in Estevan or in Swift Current 
or Nipawin, they’re all saying it — right on, it makes sense, build 
it here. Cut those ties of dependency on Ontario and Quebec and 
manufacture in Saskatchewan. Give the jobs here to our young 
people. We can manufacture in Humboldt; we can make it in 
Saskatoon; we can do it in Moose Jaw — everybody agrees. 
 
That wasn’t going on before, and they agree to that as well. It 
simply wasn’t happening. The government and the private sector 
co-operating, allowing us to do it here. 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

206 
 

And they’re saying, that’s building; that’s the common purpose. 
And it’s showing up right here across the province. 
 
I’d like to talk, Mr. Speaker, on free trade. And I just looked up in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I see my partner up there — my 
little wife — the one I was talking about that does go out and 
listen, that does complement the work that we’re trying to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Free trade, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to 
Saskatchewan. You know, Ontario alone, Ontario alone, Mr. 
Speaker, does more trade with the United States of America than 
Japan does. That puts it into a little bit of a perspective because the 
people — my constituents, your constituents — they see all these 
products coming in from Japan. And just imagine, Ontario alone 
trading more than Japan does with our American neighbours. 
 
Doesn’t it make an awful lot of sense that if Saskatchewan could 
get a little piece of this action, just a little bit — and I don’t care 
what industry you’re in, whether you’re making bacon or whether 
you’re making cross arms or whether you’re making chopsticks — 
if you could get that much business in Los Angeles or in New 
York instead of all of the business in Davidson, Saskatchewan, 
wouldn’t it make economic sense? 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, I can speak on free trade at length, but I won’t. 
But at my second function this evening, I met Mr. Thomas 
Roesch, the Consul and Trade Commissioner from the United 
States who is stationed in Calgary, and we had quite an interesting 
discussion. And I’ll just close after very briefly describing for you 
some of our conversation. While lots and lots of Americans object 
to the deal because . . . I don’t know why they’re afraid of Canada, 
why they’re afraid of Saskatchewan. I guess it’s because when we 
do something we do it well and we do it right. 
 
But when you listen to this commissioner and encouraging the free 
trade the way he does — he is waiting for this free trade 
opportunity so that we can have this agreement and trade freely 
between our two countries to make his job easier, to make our job 
easier. And why are the Americans afraid? Why are they . . . Why 
do they fear us? You know, and I’d like to again quote the Leader 
of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, and when he referred earlier in his 
remarks to me, are we going to outslick the Americans? Outslick 
the Americans — it’s got nothing to do with outslicking anybody. 
It’s a matter of negotiations; it’s a matter of help; it’s a matter of 
very survival; and it’s a matter of opportunity for our young 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll close my remarks this evening simply by 
indicating that this government, our Premier, does represent a 
vision for the future. We are not burying our heads in the sand and 
closing our eyes to reality and ducking any issues. I’ve spoken 
freely abut the issues this afternoon that confront my particular 
portfolio, but our Premier, with his vision for the future of this 
province in health, in agriculture, in rural life in quality of life for  

our urban people, in reduction of taxes in building, and yes, even 
protecting the kids and seniors against vicious dogs. Mr. Speaker, 
I support the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be able to 
take part in the throne speech debate this afternoon. 
 
My first comments, Mr. Speaker, must be on the speaker who just 
took his seat. I was interested that he started his remarks about 
talking about the industrial and expansion and diversification in 
Saskatchewan, and he was talking about Mr. Peter Pocklington, 
and he was talking about the upgrader. Mr. Peter Pocklington, of 
course, being the private enterpriser who is making it work in 
Saskatchewan; and the upgrader, of course, which doesn’t have a 
cent of private capital in it. And the member for Regina South 
holds this up as an example of private enterprise doing the job in 
Saskatchewan. And here on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, we have 
Mr. Pocklington, who is the disciple of private enterprise, and he’s 
held up as the shining example — this millionaire from Alberta — 
he’s held up as a shining example of how to make free enterprise 
work. 
 
And it’s interesting to not . . . And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan and other provinces are becoming more and more 
aware of how Mr. Pocklington works. He has obtained from the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, who says free enterprise will do it — 
and Mr. Pocklington is a disciple of free enterprise; they say free 
enterprise will do it . . . Why did the $20 million change hands 
between the Premier of Saskatchewan and Mr. Pocklington, if free 
enterprise will do it, if free enterprise will do it? 
 
He mentions in the same breath the Weyerhaeuser corporation as 
being a free enterprise corporation. I agree it’s a big corporation, 
and it’s doing something in northern Saskatchewan. But the 
question is, at our cost, at what cost? And it’s our cost. 
 
He said, and he reiterated it after supper — he drove me out of the 
chamber before supper, but I cam back because I decided I wanted 
to hear some more of what the member for Regina South said — 
he said he spent supper talking to some business people. And I 
was interested in, wondering . . . I was thinking to myself, what 
was he telling those business people. 
 
He told us some of the questions they raised with him about dogs 
and wards. But I wonder, when he was discussing things with 
them, if he related to them some of the things he’s done for 
business in Saskatchewan. I just happen to have a list of some of 
the things he’s done for business in Saskatchewan. And we have 
here business corporations’ fees. A certificate of incorporation, 
which previously cost $100, now costs $250, which is a 100 per 
cent increase, 150 per cent increase. I wonder if he told those 
business men when he had them assembled there that he’d put a 
150 per cent increase on that particular fee, restoring the name of a 
corporation to the register. It used to cost $100, now it costs $250 
— 150 per cent increase. Did he tell those small-business people 
when he was talking to them that he’d done that for them? 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

207 
 

(1930) 
 
A certificate of revival. I’m not sure what kind of revival that is, 
but at least the certificate cost $100 before, cost 250 now — 150 
per cent increase in this business fee. A certificate to amalgamate 
two or more companies. This occurs quite commonly in the 
business world. The fee used to be $100, it’s now $250 — that’s a 
150 per cent increase. and this is taken from a list of fees. Just on 
this page along, Mr. Speaker, there are 17 increases in fees ranging 
. . . The smallest one and the only one below 100 per cent is 25 per 
cent increase and the largest one is 1,000 per cent increase. And 
that’s what this government has been doing for business, and 
many of them small businesses in this province. 
 
I think the members of the Assembly will agree that most of the 
auctioneers in Saskatchewan would be classed as small business. 
Now what’s he done for the auctioneers, the small-business 
auctioneers? The licence fee for an auctioneer previously was 
$100. It’s now $125. That’s a 25 per cent increase. The licence for 
an auction sales company used to be $100, is now $300 — a 300 
per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m goad that he brought this up about what his 
government was doing for small business in Saskatchewan. 
They’ve done a lot of things to small business in Saskatchewan. 
And I’ve listened to some small-business men that have come to 
talk to me who were in preparation, had prepared the documents to 
obtain a loan from the government and it was approved. And then 
the government notified them that the loan program was gone; 
they were pulling it. And I’ll tell you that that person will not be 
voting Conservative in the next election. He was very upset by 
what happened. They just . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Your cousin. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No, no relation whatsoever. I’m glad to see 
the member from Maple Creek is here. She hasn’t been here much 
since the Pioneer Trust . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. members are not to refer to the absence of presence of 
members. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with part of your 
ruling, and that is the part that we cannot refer to the absence of a 
member from the House, and I have not done that. I said, I’m goad 
to see the member from Maple Creek here. I’m glad to see the 
member from Melville here too, and Kelsey-Tisdale and Arm 
River. I’m glad to have enough of them here so that I can talk to 
them about this throne speech. But the distortion . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And I’m glad to see the member for Rosthern here 
as well. I know he feels left out. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Beauchesne’s 
citation 316(c) indicates clearly members are not to “refer to the 
presence of absence of specific Members.” You may continue 
your speech. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I will accept your ruling. I 
will accept your ruling and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. If the hon. member from 
Saskatoon south has a problem he may rise and be recognized. 
Otherwise I would advise him not to make comments from the 
chair, from his desk. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon when the Minister of 
Urban Affairs referred to me as the member from Saskatoon South 
speaking from his chair, I didn’t hear a ruling at that time. Now the 
member from Westmount refers to a member on the opposite side 
in her chair, and there’s a ruling. Why the difference in the ruling? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The difference in the ruling is that the member 
from Saskatoon Westmount referred to the member in such a way 
that she had been absent and that he’s happy to see her back. That 
is the ruling. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get bogged 
down in the relevancies of rulings in the House; I want to get on 
with the speech that I came here to make this evening. And the 
comments I’m making this evening are about the throne speech, 
and I have a copy of the throne speech here, and all members will 
be familiar with this particular document. In this document it 
mentions diversify, or diversification, at least five times, and there 
is a section of the speech designated as diversification. Now this 
seems to illustrate one point about this government, that the 
perception is more important to them than the reality of the 
situation that is occurring today in Saskatchewan. They must . . . I 
think there is a mandatory rule that members on that side of the 
House, when they make their speeches on the throne speech, must, 
at some time, or several times through their speech, mention the 
word diversification or diversify. And I wish that the members 
would get down to the reality of the situation we’re faced with 
here today in Saskatchewan. 
 
The member, in the speech, in its words of wisdom, if they be that, 
discusses the matter of dangerous dogs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we received quite a serious lecture from the 
member from Regina South about whether this was a serious 
situation or not, or what our thoughts were on the situation of 
dangerous dogs. I don’t think anyone in this Assembly believes 
that that is not a serious situation. I know some people who were 
mauled by dogs in the city of Saskatoon. The question that is 
before us in this throne speech is the priorities of this government 
and how they relate and arrange their priorities. That is what is 
laughable in this throne speech, and the government’s 
arrangement of priorities in this throne speech leaves much to be 
desired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Something else which was not mentioned 
in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, but which the member from 
Regina South and some other members  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

208 
 

spoke about a number of times, was the ward system. What we 
have here in Saskatchewan is a government that is now prepared, 
after they have interfered in the boundaries commission, the 
independent boundaries commission of the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . have brought in legislation to make it not an 
independent, more independent commission, but a political 
commission. That political commission is now in place and it will 
do this work. It has on it a direct appointment of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan and the Chief Electoral Officer — and no one 
denies that is a direct political appointment. 
 
Now what this government has done is said, we will bring in 
legislation dealing with the ward system. It’s important that we 
know what is the source of the demand for this legislation. Well, I 
did a little bit of research, Mr. Speaker, because I wanted to know 
what the source of the demand for this legislation on the ward 
system would be. And I looked in the SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), 82nd annual convention — 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 1987, last year. 
In these resolutions . . . there are 41 resolutions here and these 
were all adopted by the convention — 41 resolutions. 
 
The member from Weyburn who is . . . I don’t know whether he is 
here or not, Mr. Speaker, but I hear his voice. And I wonder if 
later we can make a ruling on him. 
 
In these resolutions from SUMA, the urban municipalities 
association, the largest and most significant urban association in 
Saskatchewan, there is not one resolution about the ward system 
— not one resolution, Mr. Speaker. And in this resolution, Mr. 
Speaker, there is not one resolution about dangerous dogs. And 
has the member from Regina South attacked SUMA because they 
didn’t have dangerous dogs on their list of resolutions? No, he 
hasn’t said a word about them. What his attack is, is a political 
attack to try and direct attention away from the folly of this 
government. 
 
What are the priorities of SUMA, the urban municipalities 
association? Well, if you look at the resolutions, the first one ins 
municipal infrastructure financing, municipal infrastructure 
financing, tax arrears, sewer lines maintenance, right of appeal of 
the decision of the municipal boundary commission, The Local 
Government Election Act, business taxes — a number of very 
important issues. And I suspect that SUMA has arranged these in 
their order of priority, something that this government doesn’t 
recognize. Is there an order of priority? They haven’t recognized 
it. 
 
To be perfectly fair to this government in their concern about dogs 
and the ward system, I thought, well, what about this year’s 
SUMA convention. So I obtained the resolutions from SUMA 
convention, 1988, February 1 to 3. In this one there are more 
resolutions — 81 resolutions, Mr. Speaker. Not one mentions the 
ward system, not one mentions dangerous dogs — not one. And 
did the member from Regina South, the Minister of Urban Affairs 
who should have some sense of priority on behalf of the urban 
municipalities of this province, did he attack them because they 
didn’t have the ward system and dangerous dogs on their list of 
priorities? Well I hear that member  

from Weyburn again. I don’t know whether he’s here or not, Mr. 
Speaker, but I hear his voice. Perhaps he’s here in spirit. 
 
Now the issues that SUMA does address in its resolutions are ones 
such as these: federal and Saskatchewan government taxation. 
Well that’s a burning issue with SUMA. Well let’s take a look at 
what SUMA has to say about these particular items, Mr. Speaker. 
This is the third resolution in the book, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

Whereas the federal and Saskatchewan governments have 
imposed increased and certain taxes on various goods (in 
brackets, including motive funds) purchased by 
municipalities (and it goes on and on with several other 
whereas’s), therefore be it resolved (Mr. Speaker) that the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association expresses 
its concern about the financial impact on local governments 
arising from the further elimination of their tax exempt status 
as a result of greater reliance by the federal and 
Saskatchewan governments on commodity based taxes as a 
resource of revenue. 

 
And it goes on wit another “be it resolved” section. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they have their priorities arranged, and this is 
something the government has failed t do in the throne speech. I 
thought to myself, maybe, maybe when SUMA distilled these 
resolutions down and made a presentation to the cabinet, they 
would put something in about dangerous dogs or about ward 
systems because the government gives this very high priority. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have the submission to the provincial cabinet, 
February ’87. This is . . . There might have been one submission 
since then, but this is the one in ’87 following the ’87 resolutions 
of SUMA. And, Mr. Speaker, lo and behold, not one mention 
about dangerous dogs, not one request for changes to the ward 
system. But they do say something about municipal financing. 
SUMA members are very concerned about the problem in 
municipal financing. And I can understand that because the 
government has dealt them a blow in the eye every year since 
they’ve been in government by removing certain features in 
grants, by removing certain grants that they pay to them. They 
have their priorities in order. This government has failed to put 
their priorities in order. 
 
I thought, well why not go a little further back to the grass roots. 
And I started checking and I have here the resolutions for the 1987 
convention of the PC Party. It’s called “On Track,” it’s called “On 
Track.” Now I wonder if they’re on track. I wonder if they’re on 
track. I read who the convention chairman was. W. Roy Wellman, 
Liberal/Tory, at the PC convention. 
 
And you know what? The prime mover behind the dogs and the 
ward system is the member for Regina South. And I thought he 
must have checked this with his leader, the Premier, the member 
from Estevan — and I hesitate to say where he is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1945) 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

209 
 

However, on going through these resolutions, I checked every 
resolution from Estevan constituency, the Premier’s constituency. 
Not one resolution mentioned dangerous dogs, not one resolution 
mentioned the ward system. Then I thought I’d check the 
resolutions from Regina South, the constituency of the Minister of 
Urban Affairs. There was not one resolution about anything; not 
one resolution about anything from Regina south. So he didn’t get 
the idea for the ward system changes or the dangerous dogs from 
the constituency of Estevan or his own constituency of Regina 
South. 
 
So I thought to myself, Mr. Speaker, there’s one step farther we 
can go. We can go to the bedrock, the bedrock of the Tory party, 
and that’s Tory policy. This is “the” policy of the Tory party. Now 
this is the blueprint, this is the blueprint for the Tory party. And I 
had a look at this book, Mr. Speaker, and it’s very interesting. And 
I want to read some of this because it’s got titles here that would 
just blow your mind. It says . . . There’s one of the headings is, 
“Government wasteful spending, finance, and operations.” And 
one of these sections in there saying, “A Progressive Conservative 
government will (this is the second point) provide sufficient 
resources to the Provincial Auditor so that he can properly carry 
out his function as protector of the public purse.” 
 
Well we know what this government has done to the Provincial 
Auditor. His staff is down, his budget is down, and we need spend 
no more time on that. We know what this government has done 
about shutting up, attempting to shut up the auditor, the Provincial 
Auditor in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s take . . . Oh, and I let my fingers do the walking in this book, 
and I went to taxation. Now this is an interesting section. This is a 
bedrock of Tory policy. this is on which they fashioned their 
victory in ’82. Under taxation it says, “Eliminate the provincial 
sales tax and pressure Ottawa to remove federal sales tax.” Well 
there’s a lot of silence over there now. I don’t even hear the 
member for Weyburn, and I don’t know whether he’s here or not, 
Mr. Speaker, but I don’t hear him. And they haven’t removed the 
provincial sales tax, and I don’t think they’ve pressured Ottawa to 
remove the federal sales tax. 
 
Well it says, the next point, “Reduce income tax to encourage 
individual initiative and economic expansion.” Well if they were 
talking about me, they sure didn’t reduce my income tax. They 
jacked it up with a flat . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m quite 
prepared. The member for Melville has indicated that he is here by 
speaking out from his seat, and I’m quite prepared to pay my 
portion of the taxes to the running of this province, and I hope the 
member from Melville is as well. Now have they reduced income 
taxes in the province of Saskatchewan? Clearly they have not. 
 
What else does this book have to say? Under agriculture . . . Now 
this is interesting. Under agriculture they say, “Right to maintain 
the Crow’s Nest freight rate structure and its expansion to improve 
the whole transportation system.” Well the crows are coming 
back; it’s spring in Saskatchewan, but one of them that isn’t 
coming back is the Crow’s Nest freight rate. The Conservative 
Party, federally and provincially, has taken care of that crow. 

Under agriculture, “A two-price system for wheat with domestic 
price that recognizes and reflects the producers cost.” This is a 
bedrock of Tory policy. And our agricultural critic will have 
something to say about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We get over into the energy section of this book, and its . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m coming to that. I’m coming to 
the section on dogs and the ward system. 
 
Under energy they say, “Enforce the province’s constitutional 
right to set its own policies governing resource development 
without federal interference.” Well, of course, this was written 
before the free trade, Mulroney-Reagan deal. So this one has gone 
out the window, definitely. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s gone to the dogs. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, this one’s gone to the dogs, definitely. 
 
Now by this time, Mr. Speaker, when I was reading this, I was in 
tears, because I’ve arrived at the health and social services section. 
And if the member for Melville is here, I want him to listen to this. 
“A Progressive Conservative government is committed to the 
preservation of the free medicare system and opposed to any 
deterrent fee in any shape or form.” 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who wrote that? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well that’s part of the bedrock policy of the 
party, and not only that, the issue — the guarantee which says the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is committed to 
continue the medicare system in our province. “The Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan rejects any form of deterrent 
fees or health insurance premiums.” 
 
Budget time coming up. Note that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
“The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan will abolish 
the unfair deterrent fees for prescription drugs.” Well that one has 
certainly gone with the crows and will never return. Well this is a 
timeless document; it has no date on it; it’s good for ever. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who signed it? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I’m not sure who signed this, but it’s 
got a blue cover. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member for Estevan, maybe. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It could be the member for Estevan. 
 
“A Progressive Conservative government will institute measures 
to ensure that rural citizens have reasonable access to health and 
social service programs.” I suppose that means do away with the 
dental programs for children, in modern-day translation. and this 
says, “A Progressive Conservative government will.” 
 
And just in case the member for Weyburn missed it, Mr.  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

210 
 

Speaker — maybe he wasn’t listening closely — this is the 
bedrock document of the Conservative Party, the policy manual. 
We could get no more authoritative piece of literature than this. 
And it says, “Make changes in the Saskatchewan drug plan.” Well 
they certainly have done that, but I don’t know if they conform 
with what’s in the policy book. The policy book says, “to abolish 
the unfair deterrent fee for high-volume prescription drug users.” 
Well, the high volume prescription drug users in Saskatchewan 
now pay a fee that is commensurate with the amount of drugs they 
use and this sick tax makes sure they do — this Tory sick tax. 
 
And here’s another one. The pharmacists will get a great . . . If I 
can be heard over the member from Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. the 
pharmacists will get a little bit of laughter out of this one. “To 
alleviate . . . “ This is what the government promises to do. “To 
alleviate the necessity for onerous bookkeeping by the 
pharmacists.” I’m sure the pharmacist is filling out just as many or 
more forms than he did before. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I went through this document with care. Not 
once, not once does it mention dangerous dogs or doing away with 
the ward system. Not once does it do that, Mr. Speaker. Are these 
the real issues, then? No, these are not the real issues. This is a 
case of the tail wagging the dog; the tail from Regina South 
wagging the dog. 
 
He says we’ve got to have changes in the legislation with regard to 
dangerous dogs, and it’s a high priority. And he says we’ve got to 
change the ward system. Well I could recommend one thing to the 
Premier. Since there is no evidence in SUMA, in the party’s 
resolutions, or in the party’s policy document, to support the 
legislation on the ward system being changed which the minister 
promises will be brought in, I can recommend to . . . I can 
recommend to the Premier, since there’s no evidence, that he put 
the member from Regina south on a shorter leash and put a muzzle 
on him. 
 
These are not the real issues. And we have a word from the hog 
dog from Weyburn there. He’s not even in his own seat, and he’s 
chirping up. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. I’m sure the 
hon. member will not wish to speak to another member in terms 
which perhaps are somewhat unparliamentary. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’ll take that back, Mr. Speaker. I was 
looking at his seat and there was no one there, and I heard his 
voice. I’ll take it back. I see he is there. He’s occupying the seat of 
the member for Regina South, if I may observe that. 
 
Now what are the real issues? What are the real issues in this 
budget to the people of Saskatoon Westmount? That’s what I’m 
concerned about. We want to deal with the real issues. 
 
The ward system is an issue if this government tampers with it, 
Mr. Speaker. It is an issue then, and I’ll make it an issue. I have in 
my hand two maps, Mr. Speaker. The first one was the ward 
boundaries for the city of Saskatoon,  

established by their municipal wards commission of the city of 
Saskatoon — at great expense to the city of Saskatoon — for the 
1982 municipal elections. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, those were 
very successful elections. I had a part to take in them, and I 
enjoyed it very much. I also want to say that the other map that I 
have in my hand has come about because the municipal wards 
commission of the city of Saskatoon has just completed the 
redrawing of the ward boundaries for the city of Saskatoon. And it 
says on here pursuant to the relative section of the municipal Act: 
 

. . . the municipal wards commission, on February 15, ’88, 
filed its report with the Saskatoon city council and with the 
Minister of Urban Affairs. 

 
The map outlines the new boundaries for the ten wards of the city 
of Saskatoon, and this takes place on a scheduled basis to 
accommodate changes in population, the shifts of population and 
growth. 
 
Now do you suppose, Mr. Speaker, and I know the councillors in 
Saskatoon; I know the aldermen in Saskatoon. Do you suppose for 
one moment that they would go through an expensive process of 
running full-page ads in the paper informing the citizenry that 
there’s going to be a change in boundaries — we want to receive 
your opinions, if any — having this commission sit on it, sit on it 
and deliberate and come forward with a map which they then 
advertised in the paper as being “the” map for the elections this 
fall, if they wanted a change in the ward boundaries? 
 
No, the city of Saskatoon councillors, I give them much more 
credit for more intelligence than that. They would have made 
representations to this government for changes in the municipal 
boundaries of the wards. I don’t believe the people of Saskatoon 
are prepared to have that tampered with. I know that when I was 
on council — the issues was raised once in three years on council 
— it received a very brief discussion, and that was the last we 
heard of it. And for the member for Regina South to stand in his 
place and suggest there’s a demand for this, there’s no demand for 
this. It’s a deflection, it’s a deflection by the member for Regina 
south, the Minister of Urban Affairs, to get attention off of the 
folly of this government’s actions over the last few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I never thought I’d see the day — I’ve lived in 
Saskatoon many years — I never thought Id see the day when the 
Star-Phoenix would run a whole section on hunger — a whole 
section in the Star-Phoenix on hunger. It’s entitled, our Hungry 
Kids,” and it was this year, January 30, ’88 — “Our Hungry 
Kids,” and here’s the heading, the heading section:” 
 

One young Saskatoon mother is considering placing her 
children in a foster home so they can get three square meals a 
day. Another lives on a diet of bread so her daughters will 
have enough to eat. 
 
Exactly how many city children are going to bed hungry 
every night is unknown, but a team of Star-Phoenix 
reporters, who spent the past three weeks examining hunger 
in Saskatoon, found that  

  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

211 
 

the problem is definitely real. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now this government has had some successes in this area, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve started four food banks in the province, just on 
their own. That shows a kind of initiative, not that I admire it at 
all. It shows the folly of this government’s actions over the last 
five, six years in Saskatchewan. And even the food banks are 
faltering, Mr. Speaker, even the food banks are faltering under this 
government. What a folly this government has perpetrated on the 
people of Saskatchewan. There are all kinds of stories in this three 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh there’s the . . . The door blew 
open in Weyburn again, Mr. Speaker, and somebody, somebody’s 
voice is being heard in here other than mine. And I thought I had 
the floor. 
 
Well here’s an article. I want to read a bit of this to the House and 
to the people that are listening: 
 

Going without food, sometimes the only option. There is 
child neglect in Saskatoon. It doesn’t mean all hungry 
children are neglected, say a supervisor of child protection of 
the Department of Social Services. I don’t think we’re 
talking epidemic, but I know there are children going to 
sleep hungry in our city. There are also children poorly 
nourished because they’re living on a starch diet. 

 
And it gives the minimum welfare rates here, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re not very princely sums. This is January 30 this year, Mr. 
Speaker. And I never thought in my lifetime I would have to read 
this in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, a three-page section 
completely devoted to the business of hungry children in the city 
of Saskatoon, children coming to school hungry. And the headline 
here, and there’s a name of a minister, and it’s the Minister of 
Social Services, “rejects school-run lunch plan.” The minister 
rejects it. 
 
“Welfare diet, barely nutritional.” Mr. Speaker, it goes on here to 
say, and this is a person who says that, yes — a chief Saskatoon 
nutritionist, Janet Mitchall — it can be done, that people can eat 
on welfare rates, but the person buying and preparing the food 
needs almost a degree in nutrition to do it. And this relates the 
story of how difficult it is to figure out, calculate the nutrition in 
food. It goes on with many more heart-rending stories about 
hunger in Saskatoon. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the issues in Saskatoon. It’s 
apparently not an issue with this government because it wasn’t 
dealt with in the throne speech. They had other things like the 
ward system, which nobody appears to have asked for but the 
member for Regina south and the Premier and those that they have 
encouraged to sponsor the idea that it is important that we change 
the ward system. 
 
What is some other issue in Saskatoon? Well I wanted to refer to 
the prescription drug plan. This is an issue in Saskatoon. The cuts 
to the prescription drug plan. This is an issue in Saskatoon. The 
cuts to the prescription drug plan have caused severe financial 
stress to thousands of families and individuals and have forced 
many to make the choice  

between necessary medication or groceries. And I know that to be 
a fact because I have a constituency office in the centre of one of 
the poorer parts of Saskatoon, very low-income or fixed-income 
wage-earners. And I know that to be a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What are the cuts to the prescription drug plan? Well these people, 
these people across the way who give out guarantees that they will 
not allow medicare to be damaged, will not allow penalties or fees 
on prescription drug plan, have allowed one here. They have now 
put in place a deductible of $125 a person which has to be paid 
every year for those that use prescription drugs. And there is a 
further deterrent of 20 per cent of the prescription cost — 20 per 
cent of the prescription cost — where people before had to pay 
$3.95. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a burden on many of the people in the 
constituency I represent, that I have the honour to represent, 
Saskatoon Westmount. And it’s not mentioned in the throne 
speech, not mentioned in the throne speech, but changing the ward 
system is high on the priorities; and dangerous dogs, although it’s 
serious, is very high on the government’s list of priorities. 
 
What about hospital waiting lists, Mr. Speaker? I just want to deal 
with that for a brief moment because hospital waiting lists in 
Saskatoon ballooned up to 11,000 — 11,000 people in the city of 
Saskatoon. And the government made noises like it was going to 
attack that problem, get that rate down. Well, Mr. Speaker, at the 
end of February ’88, the list is still around 10,000 people waiting 
for hospital beds in the city of Saskatoon: City Hospital, over 
3,200; University Hospital, over 2,100; St. Paul’s Hospital, over 
4,500. And these people say they’re gong to preserve and protect 
medicare. Nothing about it of preserving and protecting medicare 
in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. Just more abuse — abuse by 
this government of medicare. 
 
What about nursing home waiting lists? That’s an interesting 
topic, nursing home waiting lists. Well in July 1987, there were 
1,251 people on nursing home waiting lists; in March of this year, 
there are 1,316. So it had gone from 1,251 to 1,316, Mr. Speaker, 
people on nursing home waiting lists. That’s a problem in 
Saskatoon and Saskatoon Westmount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about home care in Saskatoon, a program that the 
government of Saskatchewan has been tightening down the thumb 
screws on in its economy drive? Instead of tightening down the 
thumb screws on government advertising, which is running in the 
multi millions of dollars, they’re tightening down the thumb 
screws on home care. And an article in the Star-Phoenix just on 
February 6, ’88, says: 
 

Saskatoon home care official waiting list has about 282 
names, but another 200 people have dropped their names 
from it in the last two years because they simply couldn’t 
wait any longer. 

 
So here’s the waiting home . . . or the home care waiting list, Mr. 
Speaker, a very significant factor in Saskatoon, and of importance 
to the people in Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

212 
 

What about the unemployment figures? Now, that’s important to 
the people in Westmount because there’s a lot of them looking for 
jobs. Every once in a while some of them drop into the office and 
they say they’re looking for jobs. Well, what’s the situation? 
 
We go back to December ’86, there’s a headline which seems to 
prophesy that things are going to get better, “The job picture may 
improve in ’87.” This appeared in the Star-Phoenix. But the first 
report in ’87 shows that the city’s jobless rates rises to 9.5 per 
cent. This was on January 9, 1987; that’s for the December jobless 
rate. And then in February ’87, one month later, it climbed from 
9.5 per cent to 11.4 per cent in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
What is it this year, Mr. Speaker? Well in January it was 11.4 per 
cent in ’87; it’s now 12.5 per cent in January of ’88, and it’s gone 
up to 12.6 per cent. And those figures in ’88 were higher than the 
same period in ’87, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unemployment is a problem in Saskatoon Westmount, but this 
government would rather tinker with the electoral system in 
Saskatoon Westmount or in Saskatoon city where no one’s 
requested it. But people are talking every day to this government 
trying to get them to listen, trying to get them to listen, say there’s 
a problem here in welfare, there’s a problem in the jobless rate. 
But this government’s not listening, it’s not on their list of 
priorities. And that’s distressing. 
 
What about the cost of living? Well the cost of living is going up, 
going up, Mr. Speaker. Here’s a clipping on December 10, ’87, 
“Basic telephone rates rise 5 per cent.” Here’s another one, 
December 3, ’87, “Gas, electricity to cost more.” Here’s one, 
December 31, ’87, “Power rates to rise January 1, ’88.” Another 
clipping, December 19, ’87, “Saskatoon’ inflation tops in 
Canada.” And it states: 
 

Saskatoon’s inflation rate was the highest among major 
Canadian cities at 5.9 per cent in November, up from 5.3 per 
cent in October. 

 
So that’s a problem in Saskatoon. The government could alleviate 
the situation if there were jobs. People would be able to pay the 
bills. They’d be able to pay for things that they require. However, 
there are not the jobs there. It’s the highest unemployment of 
major urban centres. 
 
And the most recent item about Saskatoon city’s cost of living, it 
shows a 6.3 per cent Saskatoon inflation rate in February — so it’s 
up again, Mr. Speaker, and continued to be the highest of the 
major Canadian cities. And this is according to Stats Canada 
figures which were released for this report which is dated March 
19, ’88. These are the problems in the urban areas. 
 
I referred to a list earlier, Mr. Speaker, of fees an increases. Now 
that list is not completed. I referred to some of the business taxes 
that had gone up, or some of the fees that had been charged for 
licences, and business amalgamations, and so forth. That list is not 
yet complete. There are already 234 taxes or fees that have gone 
up since this government took power in ’82. And they haven’t 
even touched the area of health care, haven’t even touched the area 
of health care. 

I had the opportunity to . . . or I required a birth certificate for 
someone last summer. And I phoned the vital statistics to get the 
birth certificate, and I found not only did birth certificates go up, 
marriage certificates went up, and so did death certificates. So this 
government has got the people of Saskatchewan coming here and 
gong with increased fees — birth, marriage, and death. They got 
them at every turn, at every turn. 
 
And the member for Weyburn is proud of that. He’s proud of his 
government’s record of taxing and taxing again the people of this 
province. The people of this province are getting sick and tired of 
the member of Weyburn and his attitude, his arrogant attitude 
about the people of Saskatchewan and how he can go ahead and 
tax them all he wants. 
 
Is the burden of taxation falling fairly on the people, Mr. Speaker? 
We must examine that. Well there’s some very enlightening 
information in this area, Mr. Speaker. It’s fine for some people. I 
noticed just recently that the Premier, when he was telling 
everybody else to suck in their stomach and tighten up their belt, 
he was appointing 10 legislative secretaries — 10 legislative 
secretaries. And what some people will not know is that a 
Legislative Secretary gets $7,000 a year approximately over the 
MLA’s stipend, over and above that, plus expenses, plus expenses. 
 
Now the Premier says, I’m going to take care of the families, I’m 
for the family. Well I’ll tell you something, he’s certainly taken 
care of the family for the member from Biggar because he’s a 
Legislative Secretary. The Premier says, everybody else suck in 
your stomach, tighten up your belt because tough times are ahead, 
but he’s just appointed the member for Biggar as a Legislative 
Secretary to the Provincial Secretary. 
 
(2015) 
 
Now the provincial . . . everybody in government who has 
anything to do with it knows that the Provincial Secretary position 
is the lightest possible position you can get except for head of the 
crop insurance corporation. The only one that is lighter weight 
than that, and that’s the head of the crop insurance. 
 
So the Provincial Secretary has a Legislative Secretary. I ask why, 
when the people of my constituency are bearing an undue tax 
burden, when they’re being hit in the welfare, they’re being hit in 
the health care, unemployment is at unreasonable proportions, 
why are we appointing more legislative secretaries? 
 
Well the family of the member for Saltcoats is certainly taken care 
of by the Premier’s appointment of legislative secretaries, because 
he just appointed the member from Saltcoats as a Legislative 
Secretary at 7,000 plus expenses a year on top of what he gets as 
an MLA. 
 
What about the member for Canora? He’s a nice enough fellow. I 
like him fine. The Premier has just appointed him as a Legislative 
Secretary at $7,000 a year plus expenses. . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, well now we’ve heard from, I think it was 
the member from Yorkton . . . 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

213 
 

An Hon. Member: — Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . Wilkie. He’s been . . . The member 
from Wilkie has been a legislative secretary already. He’s had his 
whirl at the trough. He’s had his whirl at the trough when the 
people of Saskatchewan were being overtaxed. He says, he asks a 
question from his seat, Mr. Speaker, a question which he doesn’t 
have the gumption to get up on his feet and ask: did you have 
legislative secretaries? 
 
Allan Blakeney, the maximum legislative secretaries he ever had 
was four. This government had 14; 14 legislative secretaries — 14 
of them. 
 
Now I agree with the position of legislative secretaries, providing 
it’s for the purpose of putting somebody in a position to see how 
they perform if you’re going to put them in the cabinet. You want 
to have a look at him under speaking engagements and so forth, so 
you put him in the cabinet. 
 
But that’s not the way it’s used here. Mr. Speaker, there are only 
six people on that side of the House — from the government side 
— that do not have extra remuneration over and above their MLA. 
Out of 37 people, there are only six that don’t have extra 
remuneration. 
 
Well I’m ashamed of that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll admit I was more 
ashamed when they had 14 of them because there was no 
justification for that, but I’m ashamed of the fact. And there’s 
many more of them: Arm River, Morse, Kelvington-Wadena, 
Bengough-Milestone, Nipawin, thunder Creek, Regina Wascana; 
and, Mr. Speaker, they’ve since then, since they appointed those 
10, they’ve sneaked in the appointment of another one. They 
sneak in the appointment of the member from Kinistino. So I’ve 
got to revise my figures on how many are on the payroll here. 
 
And that becomes obscene, Mr. Speaker, when the people of 
Westmount constituency and Saskatoon are suffering under some 
of the burden of this government. And not only do they have to 
suffer under the burden of the legislative secretaries that are 
appointed here but they’ve got to shoulder the burden of the 
Schoenhals, the Sandbergs, the Katzmans of the world, who are 
also another layer of appointment by this government, of former 
cabinet ministers. My constituents are making their sacrifices. This 
government is not making the sacrifices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that I certainly cannot 
vote for this document. It shows the chaos of the government. It 
shows misconstrued priorities. And I think if the Lieutenant 
Governor, when he is reading that speech, had left some of it out, 
he would have been excused — he would have been excused. 
 
I notice the Lieutenant Governor in British Columbia, he left out 
reading a half a page of the throne speech in British Columbia. 
And if this government is bringing in any more throne speeches, I 
would recommend to the Lieutenant Governor that he leave out a 
lot of sections. He could have left out a lot of sections here and the 
speech would have been just as heavyweight as it is now. 

I’m disappointed in this speech, and I’m certainly going to vote 
against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — At the onset I want to congratulate the move 
and seconder of the throne speech, the members from Moosomin 
and Rosthern. And in the spirit of good fun, I want to remind the 
member of Rosthern that the last mover of the throne speech was 
Mr. Ray Martineau, who six months after he moved the throne 
speech resigned his seat, and we’re now awaiting a by-election in 
Eastview. Perhaps if history repeats itself, which if often does, 
next year we’ll be awaiting a by-election in Rosthern. But in all 
good seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the mover 
and seconders. 
 
Last week as I listened to the throne speech, I thought about the 
people back home, the people who are my friends and my 
neighbours, the people who sent me here to speak on their behalf, 
and when I heard all of the familiar buzz-words of the 
Conservative Party I wondered what those words meant to the 
people that I represent. 
 
I heard words like “diversify,” “efficiency” and “effectiveness,” 
“consult,” “fair,” “protection,” “opportunities,” “fair trade,” 
“competitive edge,” “a fair market value,” “public participation,” 
“first-rate health care,” “major renovation” and “to build 
Saskatchewan.” I thought of the people back home in Saskatoon 
Nutana and what those words meant to them. And I think we 
would all acknowledge that those words are regularly used with 
enthusiasm by the members opposite, but for the people who I 
represent, those words have very little reality in their lives. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech referred to the word “build.” 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have had enough of 
Tory building. They’ve seen what these people opposite can build. 
They build provincial debt; they build taxes; they build high 
unemployment rates; they build huge hospital waiting lists in 
Saskatoon; they’ve certainly built Tory patronage for Tory friends; 
they’ve built the welfare rolls; and they are building farm and 
business bankruptcy. How is that building Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? How is that building? 
 
You people aren’t builders; you people are destroying this 
province. And there are people who believe across this province, 
and believe strongly, that when your work is done, when your day 
is done, there will be nothing left. 
 
I think the Conservative members are aware that the political 
decisions you make as a governing body of Saskatchewan affect 
the lives of all or us. And tonight I want to talk about the 
tremendous toll that has been paid by Saskatchewan people as a 
result of your actions. You say on a regular basis that you aren’t 
responsible for the state of our economy, and to some extent that’s 
true. But since you came to power six years ago, a number of 
decisions have been made by your government that would suggest 
that you are indeed responsible and that you are quite prepared to 
reward your friends. 
 
Let’s look at the oil companies. In 1982 we, the people of  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

214 
 

this province, collected $700 million $1.292 billion worth of oil 
production. In 1985 production rose to $2.4 billion, and the 
revenue declined to $670 million. 
 
Since 1982 you have changed the tax system in favour of the oil 
companies, giving up $1.7 billion in revenue. Had you collected 
the taxes from those oil companies, the prescription drug plan 
could have existed for another 35 years. Had the oil companies 
paid their fair share — their fair share — the school-based 
children’s dental plan could have been funded for the next 300 
years. Had you not rewarded the oil companies, senior citizens in 
this province wouldn’t have to wait for over a year for hip and 
cataract operations, and cancer patients wouldn’t have to wait four 
to five weeks to get into hospital. 
 
Had you done the honourable thing, had you done the honourable 
thing, jobs would not have been lost at our post-secondary 
institutions when you eliminated over 1,000 student positions. 
And young, young people in this province would have hope that 
they might be able to enter into a post-secondary institution of 
higher learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are hundreds of other examples of ways that 
$1.7 billion of lost revenue could have been used to support public 
programs that could have benefited battered women, the could 
have benefited children and native people, that could have 
benefited children and native people, the could have benefited 
disabled people, persons who have emotional illnesses, the 
unemployed, senior citizens, and the list goes on. But you made 
your choice and the choice was the oil companies, and those who 
are not as rich and not as powerful lost out. 
 
But this is consistent, this is consistent with your philosophy of 
rewarding your friends and punishing those that don’t have much, 
those that aren’t so rich. We’ve seen you reward Peter 
Pocklington, Paul Schoenhals, Gavin Koyl, Weyerhaeuser, Ralph 
Katzman, Jack Sandberg, Mercury Graphics, and the list goes on. 
Peter Pocklington, but not senior citizens who choose between 
prescriptions and groceries; Weyerhaeuser, but not battered 
women and their children who are turned away on a regular basis 
from transition homes because of no space and cuts in funding; 
Gavin Koyl, but not senior citizens and disabled people who sit on 
waiting lists to get into home care services because of cutbacks; 
Mercury Graphics, but not the 10,500 patients on the hospital 
waiting lists in Saskatoon. Jack Sandberg and Ralph Katzman, but 
not rural families who have to drive many, many miles while the 
school-based children’s dental plan was eliminated and over 400 
workers fired. 
 
All of these people know who’s in power in this province. We 
know who’s in power. It’s not us, but it’s the friends of the Tory 
Party. It’s the rich in this province, that’s who’s in power. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech did not even mention the 
problems of young people. He didn’t even mention the future. Mr. 
Speaker, young people are faced with the increasing problem of 
not being able to enter our technical schools and universities 
because of restrictions on enrolments. And the restrictions have 
arisen as a result of a lack of Conservative government funding. 
Increasingly, young people can’t find full-time jobs and  

are relying on part-time work, and some young people have no 
work at all. Increasingly, young people are postponing marriage 
and families because they can’t get full-time jobs, because they 
feel insecure about the future. 
 
How demoralizing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seeing the years go by 
and finding themselves without technical training or mental 
preparation for useful work. There is a problem and this 
government didn’t even bother to address it — didn’t even bother 
to address it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to direct my attention to the men 
and women between the ages of 50 and 65, the people who have 
helped produce and build the wealth of Saskatchewan. Hundreds 
of those people are having difficulty facing the future with any 
degree of optimism. The member from Weyburn talks about those 
people contributing to the pension plan, and that is total nonsense. 
Many of those people don’t have work. Many businesses aren’t 
hiring them. They have been cast aside. And what do you propose 
to do with these people? They helped produce the wealth of this 
province and I . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’d like to 
introduce some guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — It’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you, 
and through you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 
some guests that I just noticed in your gallery. I have not had a 
chance to visit with them yet, but they are constituents of mine, 
good friends of mine as a mater of fact. They are here in Regina 
on some important business, and I would like to introduce to you 
Roger and Carol Pedersen from the town of Star City to the east, 
and we have bill and Ann Robb from just south of Melfort. And 
we’re just happy to have you here. I would assume that you’ve 
conducted your business and now you’re up to just a little bit of 
fun for the rest of the night. So welcome to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment 
thereto moved by Ms. Simard. 
 
(2030) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we must 
have programs and opportunities for those men and women, those 
men and women who are between the ages of 50 and 65 who are 
not working, these men and women who have served their day and 
generation faithfully and who now look to society to do their part 
in  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

215 
 

ensuring them a measure of economic security. But they, too, 
weren’t mentioned in the throne speech. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn my attention to the whole area 
that the government did address, and that’s the area of 
privatization. One of the most damaging economic policies of the 
PC government is its privatization scheme. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — This government is resorting to double speak, 
but it tries to call its sell-out strategy “public participation” — 
because the public already owns those assets, already owns those 
assets that those members over there are giving away. And no 
matter what Saskatchewan people may feel about public 
ownership, they expect that no Crown corporation or government 
department will be sold unless it will benefit them — no sale 
unless it benefits them. 
 
But that’s the problem, that’s the problem. This government’s 
privatization actions just aren’t working. There is no public benefit 
in privatizing the school-based children’s dental program while 
saving the province very, very little money that has thrown over 
400 workers out of work in this province. And it has, in many 
respects, helped empty our rural communities because those 
women, those women who were workers in the dental plan, many 
of them lived in rural Saskatchewan. And as we all know, many 
farm families need that off-farm income because of the economic 
crisis in agriculture. 
 
And there we have it, there we have it — privatization of the 
school-based children’s dental plan, and more people out of work, 
and another loss of a rural service to rural Saskatchewan. This 
policy, this policy of privatization is hurting families, it’s hurting 
health care workers, and it’s hurting small communities. And 
Saskatchewan people are saying, count them out of that kind of 
privatization. 
 
And then we have the other privatization that took place in this 
province. Jobs were lost when your government, Mr. Speaker, 
decided to fire the highway maintenance people, when they 
decided to turn over this work to the private sector. And since that 
time, I think everybody in this province, including the members 
opposite, will realize that the condition of our highways has 
deteriorated and declined in this province. The travelling public is 
saying, if this is privatization, count me out. 
 
A classic example of how privatization hurts our province is seen 
in the sell-off of Saskoil. Within a year after this Crown 
corporation was privatized, a quarter of the employees had lost 
their jobs in Saskatchewan, and more than 75 per cent of those 
shares were held by people outside of Saskatchewan. 
Out-of-province ownership of our resources means a loss of 
control of our resource policy, because when it comes to the 
crunch, non-Saskatchewan shareholders will act in the interests of 
Bay Street or Wall Street but not in the interests of Main Street, 
Saskatchewan. Saskoil already sees its future outside our border. It 
has bought an Alberta oil company and saved Alberta jobs. 
Saskatchewan working people say, if that’s privatization, count 
me out. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Selling off public assets that are profitable and 
future-oriented is the worst folly of this government’s privatization 
schemes. This is the case with the recent merger of the computer 
utility, SaskCOMP, with Mercury Graphics, the company that 
prints all of the Tory political propaganda. Part of SaskTel and 
another company were also involved. A share issued to see the 
new company, WESTBRIDGE Corporation is planned by this 
summer. 
 
There is several bad decisions in this, not the least of which is the 
government’s obvious ploy in creating a sweetheart deal with its 
political friends. SaskCOMP was a successful, high-technology 
company. It kept the costs of high technology down, to the public 
sector and other education institutions. Every school child in this 
province knows that high tech is the future, but this government 
just sold that future off. And for what? No money will come into 
the provincial treasury until shares are offered, and the 
government won’t say what percentage of this company it plans to 
sell. Meanwhile, SaskCOMP’s debt-free record gets blemished by 
the debt load of the private company going into WESTBRIDGE. 
 
In the last privatization boondoggle, one wonders how selling 
Saskatchewan minerals to a private firm is public participation. 
This is a sale that makes absolutely no sense. Sask Minerals is a 
profitable, stable company. It has made money every year but one 
since 1946. As well, its main product, sodium sulphate, is a 
counter-cyclical commodity. Its sales improve during recessionary 
times. Why sell a dependable, unique asset which has paid 
dividends of more than $40 million to the province and helps our 
commodity-dependent economy weather tough times? Why 
indeed? That’s what ordinary Saskatchewan taxpayers are asking 
this government every time it announces another sell-off and 
another asset built up by their labour. And that is the crux of the 
privatization issue. This government can’t give good reasons 
because it has none. It has put the province up for sale for the sake 
of a dogmatic belief that somehow public enterprise is never good 
and public assets must be sold at any cost. 
 
Ordinary Saskatchewan people are worried about such blind 
ideology and about what this government plans to privatize next. 
The PC government says it won’t sell any part of SGI except its 
general insurance section. But that’s the thin edge of the wedge. 
How much further behind would the sale of the Auto-Pak be? And 
what will that mean if the Auto-Pak part of SGI goes? Will it 
mean higher insurance rates like they have in Ontario and Alberta? 
Is that what we’re looking at? 
 
This government denies that it’s going to privatize utilities, but has 
now sold off two pieces of SaskTel. And it says no privatization 
will follow SaskPower’s bond issue, but you have to wonder. 
Under this government SaskPower’s debt has tripled. Labour 
problems and the expensive television advertising program were 
unpopular. Is SaskPower being set up for a sell-off that the public 
won’t object to? 
 
If they get any say in it, ordinary Saskatchewan people  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

216 
 

won’t stand for privatization of these utility companies. But that’s 
if they get any say at all. And there we have a Minister of Public 
Participation, or privatization, as I call it, or privatization, as my 
colleague calls it, from Moose Jaw North — who says that before 
he privatizes any companies or any Crown corporations or any 
services in this province that he is going to consult the public. 
What nonsense! 
 
Consult means, to the members opposite, to go out and tell you 
what we’re going to do. We’re not going to listen to what you 
might say; we’re not going to take feedback from the community 
and consult with the community; we’re just going to come out and 
tell you — and that’s called “consultation.” And we have seen 
example after example of the way this government consults . They 
just go out and they tell you what they’re going to do. They talk, 
we listen — that’s consultation. What hog-wash! 
 
The throne speech also promises new legislation which will give 
the government sweeping powers to privatize whatever it wants by 
cabinet order alone, and we all know what that means. We all 
know about Bill 5, where this government without ever having to 
come before this legislature and justify the decisions it was 
making. And if that’s what this government has planned, if they 
have some sort of omnibus Bill planned where they will simply be 
able to privatize without ever coming before this legislature, once 
again we will see the democracy that the Premier talked about the 
night of the throne speech at the diner, and the Lieutenant 
Governor talked about, and the freedom that this province has had 
for all of these years since 1905; we will know full well what 
democracy means to the members opposite — and democracy 
does not mean bringing its decisions before this legislature. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the members opposite that 
it isn’t enough to achieve high office and all the power associated 
with it. Power does not necessarily bring a sense of personal 
satisfaction. I would ask the Conservative government to be 
mindful that the real measure, the real measure of a province is its 
quality of life; what it does for the least fortunate; how it treats its 
minorities; and the opportunity it gives its people, particularly its 
young people, to live useful and meaningful lives. 
 
The people of our province are looking to this Legislative 
Assembly to do something about the economic crisis and the 
promises that you people have made in the 1982 election and the 
1986 election. I suggest the time has come for action. The people 
of Saskatchewan look to us. The people of Saskatchewan are 
counting on us, and I think that we shouldn’t fail them, or we 
shouldn’t be here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this throne speech because it does 
not address the fundamental issues facing this province. It does not 
address high unemployment rates; it does not address the rapidly 
increasing insecurity and despair that Saskatchewan citizens are 
feeling. 
 
This government can use all of the flowery language in the world. 
It can use all of the cheer-leading words that it wants, and all the 
buzz phrases, but the people of this  

province fundamentally, believe that these members opposite are 
destroying this province, and when they’re done, there’ll be 
nothing left. And until such time as this government comes 
forward with positive economic and social policies. I will not be 
supporting any throne speech. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise tonight to speak on this debate on the throne 
speech, to speak on behalf of my constituency, the people from 
Nipawin area. 
 
I must lead off by congratulating my colleague from Rosthern and 
colleague from Moosomin, the movers and seconder of this throne 
speech; they did an excellent job. I appreciate that and 
congratulate them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of the 
Environment, I listened with some interest to the Leader of the 
Opposition and his response to this throne speech. I must say that 
with some regret I’m disappointed in what his response was. A 
department that has so much impact on every person in 
Saskatchewan — whether it’s to do with their air, whether it’s to 
do with water and water quality, whether it’s to do with other 
types of contamination — that member did not even respond or 
mention the Department of Environment, give it not even passing 
mention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that disappointing for the Leader of the 
Opposition to not recognize the importance of that, particularly at 
a time when even some of his members are calling for various 
changes to that department, for various things to be reviewed, for 
projects to get closer scrutiny and more scrutiny, but they don’t 
even have the integrity to respond to it and to put forward his 
position on that and what it means to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s particularly disappointing, at a time when 
Saskatchewan people thought they could expect to hear new ideas 
out of the opposition leader, the new leader, that he did not even 
mention it — no new ideas. Frequently those ideas from that party 
many times seem to come from the fringe — some type of mental 
acrobatics — ideas like the ones from the member for Saskatoon 
University suggesting that chocolate bars should be banned, 
outlawing farm chemicals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps they were mental wanderings, but at lest 
they were ideas. They were more than we’ve seen come forward 
from the Leader of the Opposition to date. Now we have a man 
who aspires to be premier, a man suffering from the worst kind 
and case of power-hunger tremors, and he’s not even one word to 
say about our environment. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it hearkens back to his days when he was a 
member of the former administration, a member of the cabinet of 
this province, when he participated in one of the most scandalous 
cover-ups of an environmental accident in the history of this 
province. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, he does not want the people 
reminded that it was his government and their own uranium mine 
which spilled uranium tailings, and his  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

217 
 

Department of the Environment that hid that fact from the people 
of Saskatchewan. There are many who are not even so sure that he 
was not involved in breaking the law in that instance, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’ll tell you that under this PC government it is required by 
law to report such accidents. The concern for the environment, for 
the member of Riversdale, seems to extend only to concern for the 
political environment in which he feeds his power hunger, and 
that, Mr. Speaker, it totally unacceptable to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and definitely to the people of Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the throne speech talks of a commitment to the 
land that we love, it is speaking with force to the commitment of 
this government to the environment, to the protection of our land, 
our water systems and our air. 
 
(2045) 
 
I would remind members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and the 
people of Saskatchewan that it was this Progressive Conservative 
government that passed The Clean Air Act, an Act to deal with the 
quality of the air that we breathe, that is fundamental to all of us. 
 
However, as I said, it was the previous government, an NDP 
government, that kept a nuclear accident from the sight of the 
people — an attitude that does not seem to be acceptable to me. 
Their attitude seems to be that because they owned the mines and 
they run the Department of the Environment, let’s get a little 
collusion going here and hide the facts. that was the attitude then, 
and it appears that it’s still the attitude of the member from 
Riversdale — not acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale who wants to 
say what about Rafferty-Alameda, a project that has been on many 
peoples’ minds in Saskatchewan, a project which my colleague, 
the member from Souris-Cannington, elaborated on this afternoon 
in some detail. There are some facts available to the members 
opposite, facts that I believe they should carefully consider in their 
discussion of this major project. 
 
As they look at this project as them seem to have with the blinders 
on, Mr. Speaker, they should remember that this project and 
Shand do not only have to go through our approval process, our 
Department of the Environment, and meet the conditions laid out 
there — a process which is better than anything they had when 
they were members of government, stronger — it also has to go 
through the studies mandated by the minister; it has to go through 
the studies in the environmental process of our partners in the 
project, the U.S. assessment. It also has to go through an 
assessment of Environment Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, unless that member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, wants to continue to impugn every environmental 
expert on the continent, he should be honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan and confess that that project and the Shand projects 
will have to meet the toughest, most stringent environmental 
standards of any project ever undertaken in this province. 
 
But he does not seem to care about the damages to the  

character and the reputations of those good, hard working 
professional people, and he and his party will go merrily along 
implying somehow that professionals that are studying the project 
will distort the truth the way the former government did when it 
came to uranium spills. Everyone, I’m proud to say, is not as 
conspiratorial as the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with my concern with the environment goes 
another concern, and that’s regarding the department that I worked 
for before I became involved with Environment, and that’s the 
Department of Health and the health care system in our province. 
 
I’d like to address a few of the comments of the Leader of the 
Opposition again, and his discussion of that and his response to the 
throne speech. And I’d like to place it in to some perspective as 
regarding some of his ideas that he’s put forward in the past as to 
what he believes is good for our health care system. I would just 
quote from his speech, page 30 of Hansard. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan at this time in its history . . . has no game plan, 
has no blueprint, no vision for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan — none whatsoever, none whatsoever . . . 
(It’s) rudderless, leaderless and visionless. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in fairness to him, he was not speaking of himself 
and the NDP, but he may well have been; perhaps should have 
been. As I said, where was his vision for the environment? Where 
is his ideas for the ways to improve the quality of life for the 
people of Saskatchewan? There was not one word in his major 
speech to this Assembly. Where is his blueprint for agriculture? 
Not a policy, not a suggestion, not an idea since he’s changed 
seats. Where’s his leadership for economic development? Not a 
new idea — not one, Mr. Speaker. Where is his leadership on 
public participation? He says perhaps it is good. But no leadership, 
no ideas, no suggestions; no leadership on health care; no 
leadership on education. The member for Riversdale, I’m afraid, is 
a leader of an opposition of open mouths and closed minds, a party 
suffering from age and obsolescence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — The man from the past, when we’re looking to 
the 1990s and the next century, the 2000s — a leader of a party 
with no game plan, no blueprint, and no vision. 
 
Let us take a look at the health care, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 
earlier. He’s finally taken credit for a task force report and the 
conclusions that he came to. In his rambling address to this 
Assembly on March 23 he said, and I quote: 
 

I think the report was a very, very good study . . . You may 
accept or reject the recommendations, but we did a job. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can at least agree to part of that, that we can 
accept or reject it and, I believe, reject it we will. 
 
Let’s look at some of his recommendations and decide  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

218 
 

whether we should accept or reject them. I have this story from the 
Canadian Hospital Association, and will be quoting the member 
from Riversdale on the Hospital Products and Technology 
Journal, the August-September issue of 1985, reporting the 
Leader of the Opposition’s recommendations from his 
participation on this task force, recommendations that he’s asking 
us to accept. The headline, Mr. Speaker, says, and I’m making a 
direct quote of the member from Riversdale, “Building more 
institutions for the aged is a road to disaster,” Mr. Speaker, 
according to the member from Riversdale, that is their leader’s 
approach and solution to the problems of the senior citizens of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, not accepting the responsibility to care for 
those who are no longer able to care for themselves. 
Recommendation number one, before anything else, he wants to 
refuse, as his government did, refuse to build special care home 
beds and other health care facilities for our seniors. Mr. Speaker, a 
man from the past would go back to the ideas of the past and tell 
them that they don’t need it. Look after yourself — we’re not 
interested in you. That’s his philosophy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, he said we could accept or reject his 
recommendations, and that one we certainly reject. He said in his 
recommendations, and I quote further: “Rationing of high-cost 
technology is desperately needed.” That’s his response to the 
people of Saskatchewan and the people of Nipawin’s constituency 
suffering from serious illness and disease. That’s his response to 
the young person who was recently involved in an accident who 
lost a hand, but because of new technology was able to have that 
hand sewn back on, the nerves replaced, and has full use of the 
arm which had been severed — direct advantage of the new 
technology. That’s his response to the young mother of this young 
family of four children who recently had a brain tumour removed 
because of the breakthroughs in new technology and is home 
caring for her children. Mr. Speaker, I don’t find that acceptable to 
the people who desperately need that type of health care, and I 
don’t believe that the people of Saskatchewan buy that. 
 
He recommends that government politicians, Mr. Speaker, should 
be rationing medical technology. This party and this government 
does not believe that we should be doing that, and we certainly 
reject that recommendation of that member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another quote, and that is: “There is little evidence to 
show that increased funding does lead to better health.” Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t agree with that, and we certainly have increased 
funding to health care and have increased it dramatically — more 
than a 63 per cent increase since we took over government in 1982 
and even larger increases in specific areas, like the 157 per cent in 
ambulance funding and 90 per cent increase in alcohol and drug 
abuse programming, Mr. Speaker; programming to help the youth 
of our province primarily deal with addiction and to chemicals and 
drugs and to return to a normal life-style without the dependence 
on those things; a commitment to education for them to keep them 
from falling into those traps that are there in our society. Mr. 
Speaker, once again, we cannot accept his recommendation 
dealing with that aspect of our health care. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not only a matter, as he seems to think, of 
increasing funding or not and then taking his recommendation not 
to increase it. It’s a matter of deciding whether the funding is 
directed and improving the areas of our health care system that 
need improvement, and not just cutting off everything or 
everyone. 
 
Finally, the Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote again. 
 

Obviously our health care system is undergoing some stress. 
There are some creaks and cracks, but it really does what it is 
supposed to do. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t agree with him on that statement, and that is 
exactly the reason why, in the recent throne speech, there was an 
announcement of a task force to deal wit hour health care system, 
to review it, to study it, and to find out where the deficiencies may 
be; identify the problems, but also, and more importantly than just 
identifying the problems, but also to bring forth recommendations 
for solutions, and proposals to deal with it; to build on the base 
that we have in our health care system and to make it better as we 
go into the next century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the people of Saskatchewan, I’d also ask the 
people of Nipawin, what would have happened if we had accepted 
the recommendations of the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. 
Speaker, there would have been no new hospital in Nipawin, the 
hospital that’s providing needed service to that area, a hospital 
which cost almost $10 million and was funded largely by the 
provincial government. It would not have happened under the 
leadership of that member, and it would not have happened under 
their government. 
 
It reminds me of the day that we had the sod turning for that 
facility. And if you’d permit me to just tell a little story, it comes 
from the then chairman of the hospital board, who is not of the 
same political belief or faith that I am but has tended to support 
some others. His comment, when we had that sod turning, as he 
spoke to the crowd in his address to them, was that the Liberals 
had talked about that project, the NDP had talked about that 
project, but it was the Conservatives who were building it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, building more hospitals and other 
health care facilities, the costs are going to be high, but we are 
going to do it. He said his alternative is that the costs will be 
prohibitive and the results will be disastrous. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan have worked hard. They’ve contributed to 
it. They expect a good health care system and they’re receiving it 
under this government. Building that hospital I do not believe was 
disastrous, and nor do the people of Nipawin, and I would invite 
you to come and talk to them and ask them. 
 
What else would have happened under the leadership of that 
government? Well we would not have had the 16 senior citizens’ 
apartments which were recently built and opened in that 
community, Mr. Speaker, providing housing for those pioneers 
who opened that area up,  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

219 
 

who’ve developed it, and who have worked hard, and who have 
come to a point where they need some assistance. And we have 
given them assistance in their housing needs in that community, 
Mr. Speaker, something that would not have been available under 
the leadership of that member or under the government that he 
would like to lead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we would not have had almost 
2,000 new nursing home beds which this government has built 
across our province. We would not have had the new hospitals in 
Saskatoon, Regina, and other places. We would not have had the 
new technology that has been taken advantage of. We would not 
have had the new cancer clinic. Mr. Speaker, he is right when the 
says that those things cost money, and they do cost a great deal, 
but they’re only responsible in the delivery of our health care 
system to the people of Saskatchewan, people who deserve the 
best health care system that we can provide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, I accept that there is limits to the 
amount of money that’s available in our treasury, but we have to 
continue to provide a health care system that’s for our people’s 
needs. I realize that we cannot have a university hospital in every 
town, nor do we want that. I’m well aware that there are serious 
cost considerations that have to be addressed but the tax force is 
going to look at the various components of our system and deal 
with them and bring in proposals, as I said, recommendations for 
change and improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been out in my constituency and have not had 
an opportunity to listen to all of the speeches here, but I was 
reading through Hansard today, and I understand and read that 
many of my colleagues have addressed most of the other things in 
the throne speech debate and dealt with the other important issues 
that affect particular the people of Nipawin, but all of 
Saskatchewan, the agriculture, our education, resources, 
diversification, trade, and other things. 
 
I do not want to be repetitive and deal with the same things, but it 
is with pride that I can say that I support what’s in that throne 
speech. I’m proud of the past record of this government, as I said, 
on environment, on health care. I’m proud of it in the other areas 
of our province. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be with pride that I support the motion 
of my colleague from Rosthern and do not support the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start by 
congratulating the member from Rosthern who moved the Speech 
from the Throne and the member from Moosomin who was the 
seconder to the Speech from the Throne. I understand that it’s a 
great honour for a back-bench member of the legislature to have 
the opportunity or to be asked to move and second the Speech 
from the Throne. 

I would like to also congratulate the government, but I don’t feel 
that I can actually do that because, although there is some laudable 
things in the Speech from the Throne, there are some things that 
are sadly lacking therein. I feel that those things that are lacking 
are the very serious things that need to be addressed by this 
government to assist the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
through some very difficult times. The difficult times are blamed 
in the throne speech on conditions beyond the control of the 
government, and I don’t thing that’s necessarily so in every 
situation. 
 
But I would want to look first at what the government actually 
says they’re going to do in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker. And when you look at the Speech from the Throne, I 
suppose the indication of what the government is going to do over 
this second session of this legislature are the things where they say 
they will introduce legislation, either new legislation or legislation 
to amend current Acts of this legislature. 
 
They say that they’re going to improve the Saskatchewan pension 
plan. Well that’s an admirable position to take, and I would have 
no disagreement with improving pension plans to people. I would 
hope that the government would at some point look at greater 
portability of pension so that people, when they move in the very 
transient work-force that we’re getting in our society today, that 
they would have some opportunity to transfer their pensions along 
with them so that the pensions attached to the job and not 
necessarily attached to the . . . or the pension is attached to the 
person and not necessarily attached to the job. 
 
The second item that I see in the Speech from the Throne is that 
they’re going to improve labour standards. The Labour Standards 
Act will be brought before the legislature, and as long as it is 
improvements, I’m sure that this side of the House would have no 
objection to improvements in The Labour Standards Act for 
working people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are promising amendments to The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act to provide information on toxic chemicals used in the 
work place. Again, a very noble effort and something that we 
would support and hopefully add some constructive criticism to 
over the course of this session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are going to replace The Family Services Act with 
legislation to improve the role of the family in foster-parent 
situations and to simplify abortion procedures. We very much 
want to see what that legislation actually says. We would have 
some concerns about that and again hope that we can be 
constructive in the legislation that comes before the House. 
 
The government is also going to provide a framework and 
standards for day care in both urban and rural areas of the province 
of Saskatchewan. For many, many years, not only in this 
legislature but in the federal House of commons, New Democrats 
have fought for access to day care so that those that have children, 
especially in single parent situations, are not hampered from the 
work-force because they don’t have adequate child care. And 
we’re  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

220 
 

very anxious again to see this legislation come before the 
legislature. 
 
There is talk in the throne speech about The Homesteads Act and 
to recognize the modern day arrangements concerning ownership 
of marital property. They go on to talk about amendments to The 
Small Claims Enforcement Act so the courts become more easily 
accessible to people. I would have to say that concerns me a little 
bit in that people are finding a greater need to go before the courts 
than they are to come to elected members of the courts than they 
are to come to elected members of the legislature, or members of 
parliament, or whatever the elected officials, to help find remedies 
to the problems. Our court systems are certainly overtaxed at the 
present time. And I think that in the past, people who have put 
more emphasis onto the court system and away from the system 
that we have traditionally known within the country should be 
chastised to some extent. 
 
There is going to be improvements to the judicial system in the 
jury selection process. They’re supposed to provide greater 
financial and personal security for mentally disabled adults, and 
they’re going: 
 

to control and regulate all-terrain vehicles as a result of 
growing concern over accidents resulting from the increased 
use of such vehicles. 

 
Now all of that — we’re anxious to go into debate on those items, 
but as I say, there’s much that’s missing from the throne speech, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s one final thing that entertains me to some extent. The 
previous speaker before the member from Nipawin, from that side 
of the House, the member from Regina South, gave great credence 
to this section of the throne speech, and he said there’s going to be 
an amendment to The Urban Municipality Act to deal with such 
questions as store hours and dangerous dogs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s good. I would not want anyone to be 
bitten by a dangerous dog, as the member from Regina South 
pointed out. In fact, on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we 
believe that all dangerous dogs should be either caged or restricted 
from contact with the public. Now I don’t know if the legislation 
will accomplish its intent, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have to see the Bill 
when it’s introduced, in particular, the definition of dangerous 
dogs will be very important because Saskatchewan citizens have 
already been bitten and many may not even survive. They’ve been 
bitten with the flat tax, the sales tax, income tax, gas tax, property 
tax and about 250 hidden taxes ranging from everything from 
hunting licence increases over to surcharges — some 250 
increases. 
 
So those people when they’re bitten, Mr. Speaker, we want them 
protected. And if this government isn’t gong to protect them, 
we’re going to do our best in opposition to expose this government 
for what they really are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the things that are lacking in the 
throne speech — and the government doesn’t wish,  

obviously, to move on because they’ve been the ones who’ve been 
biting the people in the province of Saskatchewan — are things 
like health care. What remedy is there to solve the waiting list 
problem — 10 to 11,000 people in the city of Saskatoon? 
 
I was talking to a physician this past weekend in The Battlefords 
constituency, and he informs me that there are people coming 
from Saskatoon to receive some surgical procedures at the Union 
Hospital n North Battleford — great hardship on people having to 
travel that distance, but since the government can find no remedy 
to the problem, people are taking it upon themselves to find their 
own remedies, and that means moving out to the regional hospitals 
within the province to assist with any ailments that they may in 
fact have. 
 
The government has chosen to turn a blind eye, even though the 
Progressive Conservative convention last November stated very 
clearly to the Progressive Conservative members of the legislature 
that the changes to the dental program, the children’s school-based 
dental program, were absolutely wrong. And the premier at that 
time responded to his own delegates by saying that we’re going to 
have a look; we know we made a mistake; we know we’ve hurt 
rural Saskatchewan people by the changes to the dental program. 
 
Well what’s the report on that? Last November . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
says, nothing. Well that’s absolutely correct. They’ve done 
nothing. They even tell their own delegates at the convention — 
not just people in the province of Saskatchewan — their own 
people, that they should be able to take into their confidence. They 
say they’ll do something; but nothing. What is there for rural 
dental services, Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech? There’s 
nothing there. It’s non-existent. We want to know what this 
government’s going to do in dealing with those very serious health 
problems. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Speaker, that bothers people the most about 
the dental plan is that they have known a great standard of health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan ever since 1962 — and it 
started a bit before that — and that the dental plan was an 
extension of health care services to people in the province. 
 
The health care plan was supposed to be the sacred trust. Tories 
would never touch the sacred trust, Mr. Speaker. Well the dental 
plan was an extension of that, and now the dental plan has been 
privatized, it’s been decimated. Utilization rates are far, far down 
from what was being utilized by children in the dental plan when 
it was a school-based program that had accessibility, easy 
accessibility to all children throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. A change to our basic structure of medicare; 
betraying the sacred trust. 
 
The other thing in health care, Mr. Speaker, has to do with 
prescription drugs. I’m sure that there’s not a member of the 
legislature in this room tonight that hasn’t been contacted by 
someone who is a senior citizen or someone  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

221 
 

who has to rely on prescription drugs that are prescribed by 
doctors, that have been contacted, and that person will say to them, 
I can’t afford the prescription drug that’s sitting on the druggist’s 
counter. I went there today, and that drug is going to cost them 80, 
90, 100, in some cases, more than that, and people quite often 
don’t have that money to put up front. And the government has 
not found a remedy to that situation. They say that they are going 
to “fast-track” payments back to them; they have the option of 20 
per cent down in some cases. But this is not acceptable, Mr. 
Speaker, to many people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What does the government say in the Speech from the Throne? 
The government says they’re going to have a task force. Well they 
had a task force or a study last year looking at the regionalization 
of hospitals in the province. That’s good, but we’ve heard nothing 
on it yet. Now they’re going to have another task force, and that 
may be good, but in the meantime, what do the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan do who are suffering under the erosion 
of our medicare program in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The government does not listen. They don’t hear what people are 
saying. If there is a consultation process going on, that 
consultation process seems to be directed one way only. The 
government and the members go out and they tell the people what 
is best for them. They don’t hear what people are saying back to 
them, Mr. Speaker. It’s a one direction communication. There’s no 
communication that comes back. At least if it comes back, it’s not 
sinking in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that task force, as far as we’re concerned on this side 
of the House, is a delay tactic because the government refuses, or 
else doesn’t know how to address those very serious problems in 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan, so that they can delay 
and delay and delay, saying that they’re studying the situation. 
And although the study is necessary, we should study health care 
in the province of Saskatchewan because it’s a very basic problem 
that people have come to appreciate. It has future problems that we 
will have to address and deal with. We on this side of the House 
will deal with those problems, Mr. Speaker, by making sure 
people in Saskatchewan have adequate health care services and 
not blame it on a task force study that we have to wait and see 
what happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that is 
lacking in the throne speech, the member from Nipawin was 
saying about the environment, that we’re not saying anything 
about the environment. The government doesn’t even address the 
environment in the Speech from the Throne. There’s nothing in 
there, Mr. Speaker, from the Throne. There’s nothing in there Mr. 
Speaker, about the environment. So the hypocrisy of the member 
from Nipawin to stand up and criticize this side of the House when 
he is speaking in favour of the Speech from the Throne, and 
nothing in that Speech from the Throne on the environment. What 
hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the next thing I would want  

to say is lacking, but is addressed in the Speech from the Throne, 
is the whole thing about the legislation coming in for the 
Department of Public Participation. The Department of Public 
Participation, under the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, I 
believe his constituency is, is not public participation; it’s a 
misnomer. The name is certainly not correct if the actions to date 
are any indication as to what’s going to happen under that 
government department. I would take, for example, the sale just 
within the past few days of Saskatchewan Minerals. Saskatchewan 
Minerals was sold for $15.9 million to two companies. One 
portion of it, the sodium sulphate division of Saskatchewan 
Minerals in Chaplin and Fox Valley, has been sold to Kam-Kotia 
Mines Ltd. for $12.5 million, and the Crown corporation’s peat 
moss division at Carrot River has been sold to Premier 
Saskatchewan Inc. for $3.4 million. 
 
(2115) 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, although one of these companies, at least, has an 
office in Saskatchewan, neither one of them are 
Saskatchewan-based companies. One company is based in the 
province of Quebec, the other company is based, I believe, in the 
city of Toronto. 
 
And now how do you tell people in the province of Saskatchewan 
that’s public participation? Public participation from Quebec and 
Toronto? Well that’s not the kind of public participation that 
people in the province of Saskatchewan have come to appreciate 
and know. They’ve participated in Sask Minerals as a Crown 
corporation since 1947, Mr. Speaker. And since 1947 
Saskatchewan Minerals has — according to the figures that I have 
done up fairly roughly and what the media are quoting — is that 
Saskatchewan Minerals has paid more than $61 million in wages, 
$2 million in grant in lieu of taxes, $12 million in royalties, and 
$40 million in dividends to our province over the years since 1947 
when there was real public participation in Saskatchewan Minerals 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I was just out in the Morse constituency 
recently, and the people there pointed out to me that in 1981 — or 
it was possibly 1982 — Sask Minerals had a profit of $6.1 million, 
Mr. Speaker — $6.1 million in one year. And what does this 
government sell it for? This government sells that division of it for 
$12.5 million. 
 
At the same time they say we’re short of money; we have to 
increase taxation because we can’t support all these programs that 
you’ve known to appreciate and to utilize and to love in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We can’t afford it. We have to sell 
these off to get more money. Well Saskatchewan Minerals, as we 
pointed out, has raised millions and millions of dollars between 
1947 and the current day — and only one year, only one year 
since 1947 did Saskatchewan Minerals suffer a loss, and it was a 
minor loss at that time. 
 
But I don’t think anybody can justify public participation when 
you sell something that has been already owned by the public of 
the province of Saskatchewan to interests outside the province. It 
just doesn’t make any sense, and they should call it for what it  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

222 
 

really is — it’s privatization. These people over there want to turn 
the wheel so far to the right that there’ll never be able to be real 
public participation again in the province of Saskatchewan, so that 
when the people in Saskatchewan kick them out after the next 
provincial election, that they’ll all have cosy jobs to go to. They 
not only put their sons and daughters and relatives and friends in 
high positions, they’ll also have some positions to go to 
themselves when their term is done, by pillaging and looting the 
province of Saskatchewan — the piratization, as it’s called by the 
member from Moose Jaw North. Yes — ha, ha, mateys, what are 
we going to piratize today? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past in the province of Saskatchewan, people 
have always felt a need for a mixed economy. And what is a 
mixed economy? You’ve heard that before in this House, but it 
needs to be said again because obviously the members opposite 
don’t understand it very well. A mixed economy means that you 
have the private sector that is important to our economy, and we 
recognize that. Many members on this side of the House are 
involved in private enterprise. Many members have businesses, 
farming operations, they participate in the private sector just as 
many members opposite do. 
 
But we also need other things. That’s not the main engine of our 
economy, not just the private sector alone. We’ve always relied on 
co-operatives and the co-operative spirit of people in the province 
of Saskatchewan such as Federated Co-operatives, the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, to name two of the biggest that have 
been functioning very well for a long period of time. And those 
co-operatives came into place to make the mixed economy 
because the private sector in the early days alone was an engine in 
the economy, but only for a very few. People in Saskatchewan 
were left without, for the most part, because the very few were 
getting the very most out of the resources and the rewards of the 
province. So the co-operatives came into place. 
 
The other engine of the economy that we’ve had in this mixed 
economy in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has been 
that of public ownership. Public ownership has been very 
important in the past. I’ve just pointed out the importance of 
Saskatchewan Minerals to our economy, employing hundreds of 
people and paying millions of dollars into our economy in the 
province of Saskatchewan to provide these programs such as 
health care, such as education, such as job creation, so that people 
can live with some standard of decency in this fine province of 
ours. 
 
The other thing that was really lacking, Mr. Speaker, in the Speech 
from the Throne was the plight of agriculture that we have today 
in the province. I want to address that for a few moments here this 
evening. 
 
The Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, both provincially and 
nationally have said about all the money they’ve poured into the 
farming operations and agricultural economy in western Canada. 
And granted they have poured large sums of money into the 
agricultural economy and into the hand of farmers in 
Saskatchewan. But it hasn’t helped the situation, Mr. Speaker; all 
it’s done is forestall the inevitable. All of a  

sudden the government says we’ll give you $25 an acre on farm 
production loan and you can pay it back in three years — but the 
agricultural situation gets worse. 
 
And now that the agricultural situation is worse, when farmers got 
the $25 an acres for farm production loan, the government says, 
well, we’ll extend it over 10 years, but we’ll take all the security 
you have so that you’re in jeopardy getting an operating loan with 
your bank or credit union when you want to put in your crop in the 
spring, and we’ll also increase the interest rate on it. They don’t do 
that to their corporate friends, but they certainly do that to the very 
basic salt of the earth from the province of Saskatchewan — from 
our roots, from our farmers in this very fine province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Huge deficiency payment shave come out in 
terms of dollar amount. But what happens, Mr. Speaker, is a very 
small portion get the lion’s share, and all those who actually need 
more get less than those that get the lion’s share — very 
inequitable distribution of the money that comes out of the 
financing schemes that the government has, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about equity financing, the private capital land bank. I 
can’t imagine the government opposite wanting to give farmers’ 
land away to private interests outside of the farmers’ control — 
asking for international capital, capital outside of Saskatchewan, 
capital outside of Canada, to buy up farmer’s land. Why would 
they bank land into those private sector land banks, Mr. Speaker? I 
can’t understand why they’d want to do that. 
 
What the farmers have to have today instead of a private capital 
land bank, Mr. Speaker, is some kind of a family farm transfer 
program so that the retiring farmer can transfer that land to a son 
or a daughter or a nephew or a niece or a cousin or someone who 
is in the family of that farmer. Today they can’t do that, and the 
answer is equity financing, the private capital land bank that this 
government wants to sell out the farmer’s land in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We think that’s disgraceful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What about those farmers, Mr. Speaker, who the 
government gives the majority of the money to, that small 10 per 
cent or so of farmers that are over $250,000 in debt? Very small 
number of farmers, but huge, huge debts. And the farmers that are 
operating efficiently and struggling through these difficult times, 
that haven’t over-expanded and have been prudent and have had 
good farming practices, they’re saying, look, the Conservatives are 
increasing the debt of these people. Some of those small portion of 
farmers are being irresponsible and just gathering all this debt in 
all the time. 
 
And what is this government going to do about it? They’ve got no 
plan for that. They’re just going to increase that debt until they can 
get the land away from those farmers that have increased their 
debt so high that they can’t service it. 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

223 
 

But then there’s a portion that we’re particularly concerned about 
on this side of the House, that’s those farmers that have under 
$250,000 in debt. A good portion of them have no real debt, about 
25 per cent or so, because of their farming practices — maybe 
they didn’t have to go into debt to get farming, maybe the parents 
helped them out, or for whatever reason. We want to make sure 
that those people succeed. We want to make sure that those people 
that have a smaller debt that they’ve had to borrow to get into 
farming and they’ve farmed good for a number of years, that they 
can remain on the farm as well. 
 
But what does this government do? They want to drive them 
deeper in debt, and then give them harsher conditions to pay back 
when the farmers can’t pay it back. what’s this government going 
to do about pricing of the products that farmers grow and raise on 
their farmers? Nothing. They don’t call on the federal government 
to help in that situation. They call on the federal government to 
drive farmers deeper into debt. 
 
Farmers say . . . for the most part, those good farmers say that 
there isn’t really a debt problem as much as there is an income 
problem, and the income problem is because this government 
stood idly by and done nothing to make sure that farmers get a fair 
return on the crops they grow and the livestock that they raise in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, before I close off this evening, I’d 
like to say that the small farm in Saskatchewan is disappearing 
under the policies of the government opposite and the Mulroney 
Conservatives in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Small towns as well. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And with that, as one of the members points out 
so accurately, the small towns as well. Because Saskatchewan has 
relied on agriculture and on farmers, and we still recognize that 
it’s number one in our economy. 
 
But the government allows farmers to be going out of business. 
The farmers get fewer and fewer, and the farms get larger and 
larger. And as a result, the small towns in Saskatchewan are dying. 
 
And I hope that some day, and some day very soon, that this 
government under the member from Estevan is told very harshly 
in an election that we don’t want the face of Saskatchewan to 
change. What’s happening? More and more part-time farmers are 
coming about, Mr. Speaker. They can’t make a go of it on the 
land; they move into other jobs to support their farming operation. 
Even though the love of their life is their family and their farm, 
they find it necessary to go and work off the farm. 
 
The final thing I want to say this evening, Mr. Speaker, is the 
empty arguments that are given by the government in terms of free 
trade. Free trade, Mr. Speaker, is not the great  

thing that would be pointed out to be by the Conservative 
government. 
 
I think though, Mr. Speaker, before I get into the conclusion, I’d 
like to say a bit more about free trade than time would allow me 
here this evening. And I would beg leave to adjourn the debate for 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . Well I understand, Mr. Speaker, from our 
legislative expert that I can’t adjourn the debate and take my place 
back when the debate resumes tomorrow. 
 
Since there’s a vote at 9:30 on our amendment, I would like to 
indicate that I will be supporting that amendment, as all colleagues 
on this side of the House will be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It’s a very good and a very sound amendment. 
 
And when it comes to the final vote on the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker, we will not be supporting the Speech from 
the Throne, not because there aren’t some good things in the 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, but we will not be 
supporting the Speech from the Throne because of the things it 
does not address that I pointed out earlier, Mr. Speaker, such as the 
problems with health care, and the problems with funding of 
education and agriculture, and the many serious problems that the 
government has just really failed to address. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our motion that we’ll be voting on here very 
shortly, put forward by the member from Regina Lakeview reads 
as follows . . . 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I must inform the Assembly that 
under Rule 13(3), that it is my duty at this time to interrupt debate 
and put the question on the amendment. It has been moved in the 
amendment to the main motion by the member for Regina 
Lakeview and seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the following be added after the word “session” in the 
last line: 
 
but regrets that the provincial government has betrayed 
Saskatchewan families by its attacks on medicare, its failure 
to support Saskatchewan farmers in financial crisis, its unfair 
tax policies, and its failure to provide jobs and opportunities 
for Saskatchewan young people. 

 
(2139) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 21 
 
Romanow Kowalksy 
Prebble Koenker 
Rolfes Atkinson 
Brockelbank Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

224 
 

Tchorzewski Hagel 
Koskie Lautermilch 
Thompson Trew 
Solomon Smart 
Mitchell Van Mulligen 
Upshall  
 

Nays — 32 
 
Devine Pickering 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
Andrew Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Hodgins Neudorf 
Gerich Gardner 
Hepworth Kopelchuk 
Hardy Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
would like to congratulate the mover and seconder for their fine 
speeches and their astute perception of how a good government is 
run. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And all the members opposite have 
maligned back-benchers now for the past four or five days. I 
remember being a back-bencher; I remember being maligned by 
the members opposite. So I could say I’m quite used to it, but I 
could also say they’re not a very good judge of character or 
candidate or politics or anything of that nature. They lost some of 
their best people, including a few people on this side. And I 
wouldn’t say that anybody on this side ever crossed over. They 
had the decency to quit and run as a proper Conservative rather 
than stay with the NDP and compromise their principles. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, dealing with the throne speech here, we are 
looking at a document that is detailed, but not lengthy, and gives 
an indication of the economic state of the world and Saskatchewan 
and shows that it takes skill to govern in volatile economic times. 
And it shows that you have to have principles to govern in difficult 
economic times. In contrast, the members opposite, in  

the easiest economic times in the history of Saskatchewan, only 
proved that any fool could spend money, and that they did. They 
spent if faster than drunken sailors. I don’t know what they used 
for an example, but they certainly learned how to do it. 
 
I recall being a member of the party of the Leader of the 
Opposition, and the biggest problem at conventions was: how are 
we going to spend all of this money? Well, they found many, 
many ways: hire more and more bureaucrats — and they would 
say that we hire our friends. Well when I was there I never saw 
them ever hire any of their enemies. So I don’t think politicians . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don’t think politicians have changed over 
the last 2,000 years. It’s not logical to think that your enemies will 
deliver good government for you, so you have to be practical 
about these things and hire people who can get the job done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly refer to my constituency, the 
constituency of Melville, where we have shown leadership in 
governing under volatile economic times. Without going into a 
two or three hour speech on agriculture, I want to remind the 
members opposite the difficulty that agriculture has faced in North 
America, and especially in Saskatchewan as a result of the grain 
wars between the United States and the European economic 
community. And I want to tell you that the farmers of my 
constituency greatly appreciate the support that has been given to 
them by this government and their government in Ottawa in 
keeping them afloat and keeping agriculture strong under difficult 
economic times. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to refer to you about instances in my 
constituency. For example, this government has gone a long way 
to help the economy of Melville, Saskatchewan, and part of that 
commitment was in the moving of the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance office to Melville, Saskatchewan. The members 
opposite suggested that it couldn’t be done, that a head office of an 
agricultural based corporation could not function in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I invite them to come and have a look. They 
are afraid to come to Melville. Two of them did. They didn’t stay 
long, and they didn’t have much to say, but I invite them to come 
to Melville and watch how a corporation designed to serve farmers 
can serve farmers from rural Saskatchewan. This has done a lot to 
improve the economy of Melville. And many, many of the 
workers there are the spouse of farmers supplementing their 
income so that they also can become two-income families. 
 
But all has not been easy in my city. And at the same time that the 
provincial government moved 60 workers into Melville, CNR 
chose to move 57 workers out of Melville and reducing our 
employees at the car shops in Melville. Now this has not been an 
easy thing for the employees or for the city of Melville, but I say 
to the citizens of Melville that we will not give up in trying to keep 
the local economy going. I say to the workers in the car shops in 
my city that we must compete with other car shops in Canada  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

225 
 

and that we must be the most efficient and best managed and best 
operated car shop in Canada, and then we will have more and 
more jobs in the city of Melville. So the challenge goes out to us in 
Melville, not only to have the government provide jobs but for us 
to do the best we can in our own city, shown by the leadership of 
this government and myself as the MLA in competing in the 
world, in Canada, and competing for business and jobs — and the 
jobs that I am talking about include jobs in the car shop in 
Melville. 
 
A little discussion about procedure here, Mr. Speaker. I’m advised 
that one of my colleagues would want to seek to leave to introduce 
guests, and I am prepared to defer to him. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct your 
attention to your gallery where we have members of the Farm 
Land Security Board with us this evening, their chairman, David 
Angell. I would ask all members to give them a warm welcome 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I see that there has 
been a long evening, and I would ask for leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:48 p.m. 
 
 


