


















































June 28, 1988 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 28, 1988 
 

2637 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and to other members 
of the legislature, 21 students, grade 7 and 8 students from the 
Englefeld School. They are in the Speaker’s gallery this afternoon. 
They are accompanied by their teacher Peter Penrose, chaperons 
Donald Breker, John Wilger, Barb Gerspracher and Roger Strunk. 
 
I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to welcome the 
students, to indicate to them that I had made arrangements to meet 
with you following question period; however, I will be occupied 
with the Appropriate Bill. My colleague from Humboldt will in 
fact . . . I know his name, but I thought I’d be called to order. The 
member from Humboldt will in fact meet with you and have some 
drinks, and any questions that you have I’m sure that he will 
answer them. 
 
So I welcome you here. I thank you for coming. I hope you enjoy 
the question period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me today to introduce to you, and the other members of the 
Assembly, 14 grade 4 students from Chaplin Elementary School 
in Chaplin, Saskatchewan. They are here touring the Legislative 
Building this afternoon, and they have with them their teacher 
Mrs. Montgomery, chaperons Mrs. Fjaagesund and Mrs. Hallborg. 
 
I hope that the students enjoy question period. It is probably the 
essence of our democratic system which you’ll view here this 
afternoon. They’re in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, for your 
information, and I would be happy afterwards, as we have picture 
and drinks outside on the lawn, to answer any questions which 
your students might have about the proceedings of the legislature. 
 
And I would ask all members of the legislature to please help me 
welcome the students from Chaplin. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
legislature, 16 students from the adult basic education program at 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) in Saskatoon. They are here with their teachers Marla 
Kowalchuk and Robin Stonehouse. In my former life as a public 
librarian, I had the opportunity to work with the teachers in the 
adult basic education program with co-operative programs with 
the former community college and the Saskatoon Public Library. 
I’m looking forward to meeting with you for coffee and questions 
after question period. 
 
I would like to ask all members of the legislature to extend a warm 
welcome to the adult basic education class from Saskatoon. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Comprehensive Drought Relief Program 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Deputy Premier, and it pertains to what is on 
everybody’s mind in Saskatchewan these days and that is the 
drought, amongst other things. A lot of people are asking us 
everywhere that I travel . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
Minister of Consumer Affairs says, finally. That’s not true. We’ve 
been asking this question on drought almost every day. 
 
And I ask the question to the deputy, I ask the question to the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well it doesn’t matter. But I ask the 
question to the Deputy Premier. Will the Deputy Premier please 
tell the House whether or not the government here, opposite, has a 
firm agreement with the federal government to announce soon a 
comprehensive, all-encompassing drought relief program, and if 
so, will he please tell the details of that program to us and to the 
farmers and the people of Saskatchewan today so that they at least 
can have a bit of uncertainty removed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the provincial government 
and the Premier and the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance have enjoyed good co-operation with the federal 
government. Certainly that was the case with the changes that 
were made to the crop insurance that made sense relative to 
salvage and reseeding and those kinds of things. Further 
announcements relative to the livestock sector I think we could 
expect in the not too distant future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I guess a supplementary has to 
go to the minister who answers, although again I ask the Deputy 
Premier, in the absence of the Premier, to give his attention to this. 
Why is it, Mr. Deputy Premier, or minister in charge, why is it that 
the people of Saskatchewan have to await further developments? 
We know what the facts are. We see it every day as we get up, 
how dry it is, how hot it is. We know the suffering, as far as the 
farmers are concerned, the cattlemen are concerned. We know the 
water table problems for our towns and our village and our 
communities. Why is it that we have to await further 
developments? Can we not implore you to announce a 
comprehensive program now so the people of Saskatchewan can 
at least know this government has a game plan on probably what 
is the most serious crisis since the Dirty Thirties, if not even 
greater than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, this government has had a 
game plan from day one when it became apparent that there was 
minimal snow coverage last winter, then obviously followed by 
large areas of the province with minimal rainfall this spring. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because our first response was as the 
farmers of Saskatchewan asked for and 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2638 
 

expected. And their first priority was to ensure water supplies, and 
the Minister of Environment, the minister in charge of Sask Water 
Corporation made some substantive announcements that were 
followed by a package of federal initiatives that topped off the 
provincial initiatives. The minister in charge of Sask Crop 
Insurance has made the appropriate announcements in 
co-operation and consultation with the federal government as the 
situation dictated, relative to salvaging crops for livestock and 
helping the grain farmer so that his soil doesn’t blow away. And 
common sense moves, in fact, become policy. 
 
The next stage will be, Mr. Speaker, a livestock policy. This has 
been managed; there has been a game plan. Obviously some very 
large sums of money potentially can be involved, and I think we 
would be negligent if in fact we did not involve the federal 
government for assistance in dealing with this drought, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Confidence in Minister of Urban Affairs 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, who’s here today. Mr. Minister, your 
reckless and insensitive approach to urban issues has brought a 
level of protest from urban municipalities never before 
experienced in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yesterday there was a meeting of region 1 of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) at Carnduff, 
south-eastern part of the province, and as a result of that meeting, 
Mr. Minister, a copy of a resolution was delivered to your Premier 
this morning, the resolution stating that the representatives of 
those communities attending that regional meeting had lost 
confidence in you as a minister, and had asked that the Premier 
replace you with another minister who would be more sensitive to 
the issues of municipal government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in light of all of the evidence that shows that 
you are so wrong in your approach, will you do the honourable 
thing and step aside so that the Premier can do the right thing and 
appoint a minister that the urban municipal governments of this 
province can relate to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of resigning. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the 
arrogant Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. Minister, I bring to your 
attention the fact that there were 28 municipalities represented, 28 
communities from south-eastern Saskatchewan, communities from 
the member from Moosomin and other members. They 
represented over 200,000 people from the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They said, Mr. Minister, that you have betrayed the interests of 
their communities with your proposed changed to store hours and 
your proposed changes to the ward system legislation. Are you 
saying to this House that you’re going to turn your back on their 
opinions and their views and ignore their advice and continue on 
your way? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure this House that all 
those present in Carnduff yesterday morning had no concern at all 
with the ward system. Most of them probably didn’t understand 
what it was. That’s number one. They don’t have the ward . . . Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t have the ward system in Carnduff, they don’t 
have the ward system in Yorkton, they don’t have the ward system 
in Oxbow or in Estevan, so they had no concern with the ward 
system. 
 
Regarding the store hours, Mr. Speaker, we see yet another 
example yesterday of the courts, because of the constitution of 
Canada. Because of the Leader of the Opposition who sits there 
now, who had an awful lot to do with the constitution, the rights 
and freedoms of the people regarding store hours have been 
removed and it is indeed the courts that are dictating. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what our government has said. 
We have tried and we have tried and we have tried, only to have 
the issue of store hours resolved by the courts. And yesterday’s 
decision provides one more time that the courts will dictate that, 
unless it gets to the local level where they indeed can control it. 
And even by admittance of the Regina solicitor, that is what 
they’re waiting for. This new legislation is ahead of the courts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, I think the comment by your 
Minister of Urban Affairs, insulting the elected urban officials of 
our province by saying they don’t know what ward systems are, 
really is indicative of why this resolution was passed at that 
original meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Premier, what we’re talking 
about here are the elected representatives of the people. The 
authority for their statements comes from the same authority as 
your government gets it authority to do what it does. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, these same people at the Carnduff meeting 
proposed another resolution to express their strong feeling. And 
they said that this Bill 60 that is on the order paper should be split, 
and that the provisions dealing with the ward system and with the 
store hours legislation should not be proceeded with in this session 
of the legislature. 
 
Are you still rejecting outright their request in favour of the 
narrow political agenda and ego satisfaction of the Minister of 
Urban Affairs, the member from Regina South? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I expect . . . while I wasn’t 
in Carnduff yesterday, I know that, had I been there, I would have 
been very much welcomed, and all of the people who would be at 
that meeting, or the vast 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2639 
 

majority of people that would be at that meeting . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and I’ll get to that, I’ll get to that. But the vast 
majority of the people that would be at that meeting in Carnduff 
are friends of mine and constituents of mine. 
 
Three of them phoned me this morning, unsolicited, and they said, 
you know, we are sorry that SUMA got into this in the way that 
they did — in the way that they did. They told me that there were 
70 people, approximately 70 people at that meeting. This 
resolution was voted on, Mr. Speaker, and it went 24 to 17 in 
favour of the resolution. That tells me that there are 24 people in 
SUMA that would like to see my colleague, the Minister of Urban 
Affairs, resign. 
 
I dare say that I can go to SUMA membership and find at least 24 
that would ask any one of those people, or all of them, to resign, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I met with some of those people this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, as part of the coalition, and I explained to 
them, Mr. Speaker, that we are trying to get to the same place. 
They don’t — and I think they have a better understanding for it 
now — but they don’t accept or didn’t accept that our path to get 
to where we were getting was one that they would have chosen. 
 
I think it fair to say, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m answering the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The minister is giving a good answer, but 
a little lengthy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Directives to Officials Regarding Hotel Registration 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, moving right along to the 
Minister of Culture and youth, I’d like to direct a question to him 
on this path where we’re all going. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell this House why various groups in the 
sports, culture, and recreation associations are being told they must 
always stay at hotels owned by your buddy, John Remai, and 
always must rent facilities owned by him for any event in 
communities where he has a facility, and that they must use his 
name and the name of his company on letterhead and in brochures 
that they produce? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, this is news to me. I haven’t 
heard of any directive. Certainly no directive went from my office. 
I’m not aware of any similar directive going from the office of any 
one of my colleagues, but I’ll certainly be checking with all of 
those organizations. I’ll do it this very afternoon. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Perhaps I can have another question for the 
minister to check with those organizations as well. New question, 
Mr. Minister. You are the funding body for that organization 
through the control of lotteries in 

Saskatchewan. You must have some control, or at least some 
input, Mr. Minister, in to the disbursement of moneys by the 
organization. 
 
Why are these associations being forced by the agreement into 
acting in such a discriminatory fashion, and who drew up this 
agreement? Did you satisfy, Mr. Minister . . . you can check to see 
if your officials, if your officials satisfied themselves that this offer 
was open, this agreement was open to tender so that other hoteliers 
could attempt to compete for the business? Would you do that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen so many 
examples in the last 70 days of this session of members of the 
opposition bringing what they regard as facts to this Assembly, to 
this floor, which turn out to be entirely spurious. So I take it with a 
grain of salt, anything the member is bringing up today. As I said, 
it’s news to me. I’d be prepared to look into it. I wouldn’t be 
surprised if it turns out to be another mythical highways building 
that was ripped down in Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well while I’m at it, Mr. Speaker, I have 
some more salt for the minister. 
 
It’s a nice deal. It’s a nice deal for Mr. Remai. He gets a tax 
deduction, guaranteed business, and free advertising under this 
agreement. We have many people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
making charitable donations. They don’t insist on that kind of a 
pay-back. 
 
Breweries sponsor a lot of sporting events in Saskatchewan. Those 
breweries don’t insist that you drink one kind of beer, their kind of 
beer. Why should John Remai be entitled to these special 
arrangements? 
 
I want to know also, Mr. Minister, if this is the same John Remai 
from which we rent eight expensive floors in the Remai towers in 
Regina, which this government rents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the funding arrangements to 
which the hon. member has referred, in actual fact come through 
Sask Sport Inc. They take their share of the lottery money and they 
decide how to split it up: 50 percent from that organization goes to 
Sask Sport, 40 per cent goes to the Saskatchewan Council of 
Cultural Organizations, and 10 per cent goes to Saskatchewan 
Parks and Recreation Association. 
 
I do not direct that. I do not interfere with that. And I certainly 
don’t tell Sask Sport Inc. where they may tell any of their 
employees or any of their clients where they may stay when 
they’re travelling in the province, or indeed where they may eat 
food, or what lodgings they’re going to take. And I certainly don’t 
interfere with their internal workings. 
 

Contract of CEO of Develcon 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for SEDCO, and it concerns the employment contract 
with Mr. MacPherson of Develcon, a contract which your 
government approved. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2640 
 

Can you confirm that the $50,000 relocation allowance, which 
was paid to Mr. MacPherson, was used to move his family from 
Hackensack, New Jersey, to Toronto, where they remain? And 
who pays to fly Mr. MacPherson to Toronto each week to visit his 
family, and who pays for his accommodation in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this is the third 
time that this question has been asked, and I would indicate to the 
member from Saskatoon that first, management salaries are an 
internal matter for the company, and not something that SEDCO 
would normally be aware of, or would want to be aware of. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, new question, and there are many, 
Madam Minister. You, by your own admission, by the admission 
of the Minister of Science and Technology, your government gave 
approval to that very rich contract when you approved the funding 
agreement between Fairfax and SEDCO, Madam Minister. And 
that’s an agreement that you would want to know the details of, 
Madam Minister, and one that we would like very much to have 
an opportunity to question you on. 
 
You gave $7 million of taxpayers money to Fairfax. You gave 
your blessing to Fairfax to fire as many as 25 per cent of the 
work-force at Develcon. You gave your approval for a chief 
executive officer who won’t even move to Saskatchewan. And I 
ask you: why should Saskatchewan taxpayers pay so handsomely 
to relocate an executive’s family from New Jersey to Toronto, 
while Saskatchewan families have to go on unemployment 
insurance, Madam Minister. That’s what’s happening in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the member stands up here, 
foaming at the mouth, not knowing what she is talking about 
SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) did 
not approve the pay package to the person in question. 
 
However I would say, Mr. Speaker, after taking a company that 
three years ago was a viable company operating in the black and 
in three years that company, under the former management, lost 
sixteen and a half million dollars, was on the verge of bankruptcy, 
I think Saskatchewan and Develcon is fortunate to get someone of 
Mr. MacPherson’s background. 
 
He happened to have left one of the Fortune 10 companies at a 30 
per cent — and I repeat — a 30 per cent decrease in salary to take 
up the challenge, because he knows the potential of a company 
like Develcon, managed properly, can become one of Canada’s, if 
not the world’s, biggest, most profitable high-tech companies. 
 

Diversion of Water from Rafferty-Alameda Project 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question today is to the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. Mr. Minister, 

time after time in this House you have stood here and denied that 
there were any plans to divert water in regards to the 
Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of condition number 9 on the federal licence 
which granted approval for the construction of that boondoggle . . . 
And I want to read to you that condition: 
 

The licensee shall not divert water from outside the Souris 
River drainage basin if such diverted waters would increase 
the annual flow of the Souris River at the international 
boundary above that which would have occurred in the state 
of nature. 

 
In light of that condition, and in light of what the Premier of this 
province said on the 23rd of this month here in the House in 
Executive Council estimates, in which he specifically stated that 
he is going to sell water to the United States along with hydro 
power or natural gas or any other kind of energy — in light of 
those statements, Mr. Minister, won’t you come clean and tell the 
people that you’re planning to divert Saskatchewan water and 
export it to the United States of America? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that 
the hon. member is certainly reading something into that contract 
that’s not there. This government is not intending to divert any 
water from any other basin into the Souris to fill up the Rafferty. 
The Rafferty will fill on its own in due course, and we’re just 
waiting for that to happen. We have no intention of abrogating 
section 9, which says that we are not to sell water to the United 
States by increased flows through the Souris, and we had no 
intention at any time of doing that. I’ve advised the hon. member 
of that several times. Perhaps this time he’ll listen and hear. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I noticed 
you said you’re not going to divert water or sell water through 
increased flows. You have not specifically said to the people of 
this province that you will not divert water from any other basin 
into the Souris. Every time you say and give an answer, it’s got the 
weasel words, it’s got the twisty, slippery words attached to it. 
Will you stand there in your place and say that you will not now, 
or nor in the future, divert water from any other basin through the 
Souris River Basin? Will you make that commitment to the people 
of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve told the hon. member very 
clearly that we’re not going to divert water into the Souris. He’s 
been following this same line of thought and trying to bring up 
new details day after day, but he hasn’t brought anything forward 
yet that would indicate that there’s been a change. There’s no 
change from this government. 
 
Now if there is going to be any water sold to the United States, 
perhaps it’ll be those bottles of water that come out of the Quill 
Lakes region that are being sold to the United 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2641 
 

States, and maybe that’s what’s worrying the hon. member. 
 

Flood Control in Weyburn 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. In 
view of his previous response, I want to see how he laughs this 
one off. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you confirm today that your corporation 
recently awarded a $120,000 contract to Jerry Mainil Ltd. of 
Weyburn for flood control work in that city, which is a contract 
worth about 5 or $6,000 each day. And could you confirm that this 
is the same Jerry Mainil who was a former Progressive 
Conservative Party president for the Weyburn constituency 
association? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I will not confirm the amount or 
the name of the contract that the member is raising. I’ll take notice 
of that and bring back the information to the House. 
 
As you’re aware, the Saskatchewan Water Corporation awards 
many contracts. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A new question, Mr. Minister. Perhaps he 
should, in his review, take a look at the newspaper, the Weyburn 
Review, where they do announce the contract, and they do 
announce it to the tune of the amount that I’ve indicated, and to 
Jerry Mainil Ltd. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when you’re taking notice, would you assure 
the House today that Mr. Mainil won that contract through the fair 
tendering process; and would you table in this House, or provide 
to the members of this Assembly, all the tenders received by the 
water corporation, so that the people of Saskatchewan can see it 
was they, and not another friend of the PC Party, who got the good 
deal here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the hon. member 
that all of the contracts that are let by Sask Water are done by 
tender, and unless there are some very extenuating circumstances, 
the low tender is always taken. We have, I believe, once in the last 
two years taken one contract that was not low tender, and in that 
circumstance the bidder had not really the necessary equipment to 
fulfil the terms of the contract on time. 
 
So yes, I can be very comfortable in advising the hon. member 
that all contracts that we let are done by tender, and in most cases 
the low tender will be the one that gets the successful bid. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply 

granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the 
sum of $106,410,800 be granted out of the Consolidated 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, the sum 
$2,725,809,800 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum of 
$2,065,100 be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, the sum of 
$378,279,000 be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move that the resolutions be now read the 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 104, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year Ending Respectively March 31, 1988, and March 31, 
1989, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly and under rule 
48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Leave granted. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2642 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I wish to discuss the government’s priorities, this 
government’s fiscal management, and I want to discuss the issues 
that arise as a result of this last budget. Mr. Speaker, I wish I could 
indeed be positive in that approach, but I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that I fear that the facts do not support optimism or hope for the 
future as a result of the last budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government took office in 1982 there was 
a positive net equity in this province, of $1.1 billion. That means 
that all of the assets exceeded the liabilities by $1.1. billion. And 
seven years later, Mr. Speaker, this province is drowning in a sea 
of red ink, courtesy of the disastrous fiscal policies of the present 
government. In 1982, we had a positive equity of $1.1 billion, and 
today we have a net debt of 2.8 billion, almost $2.9 billion. 
 
At the same time, the total provincial debt of this province has 
risen from $3.5 billion in 1982 to $11.684 billion in 1989. Yes, 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite had been running a business 
like this since 1982, they would have been bankrupt today. 
Unfortunately, they’re running the province, and running it they 
are, Mr. Speaker — right into the ground. 
 
Let us put their performance into perspective. In just seven years 
they have built up three times the total debt of all previous 
governments had accumulated over the entire 77-year history of 
this province, Mr. Speaker, in 77 years, from the time of 
confederation until 1982, including the years of the great 
depression, Saskatchewan had only $3.5 billion of debt. And 
during those period of years, Saskatchewan built — they built 
schools and they built roads and hospitals, rural electrification, 
power dams, coal-fired generator plants, natural gas systems, 
highways, and the best health care, educational system in all of 
North America. And they built an enormous infrastructure and 
they did all that with a total debt of $3.5 billion. 
 
The Conservatives have tripled that debt in the past seven years, 
Mr. Speaker. At the same time, they have placed an accumulated 
debt on the backs of every man, woman, and child in the total of 
$10,871. And as a result, they have squandered our provincial 
equity in a series of deals with their friends in the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two kinds of public debts that I want to 
look at: the one incurred between 1905 and 1982; and the one that 
is incurred between 1982 and the present. The one between 1905 
and 1982 was incurred to build the future economic growth of this 
province. And growth there was. The present debt was born on 
waste and mismanagement and incompetence. And the great 
tragedy, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of Saskatchewan, not the 
members opposite and their corporate friends, will bear the burden 
of once more restoring Saskatchewan’s financial integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, debt and deficit has become a characteristic of this 
government. In the last seven years this government has shown 
through its mismanagement and incompetence, record deficits. In 
each and every year that they brought down a budget we’ve had a 
deficit. In 

1982-83, $227 million; in 1983-84, $331 million; in 1984-85, 380 
million; in ’85-86, $579 million — a cumulative deficit of $1.5 
billion in their first term of office. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, they promised to do better, and they 
brought in the new Mr. Hack’n’Slash as the Minister of Finance, 
or was it Mr. Pound-the-Poor? I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the 
name shall remain nameless, but I say to you, he shall not remain 
blameless. 
 
In three years as Minister of Finance we have astronomical 
deficits. In 1986-87, going into the election we accumulated $1.23 
billion debt. In ’87-88, $568 million, and in ’88-89, a further $328 
million, which means, Mr. Speaker, the total cumulative PC deficit 
since he took office is $3.7 billion. And if you take into account 
the discrepancy of the auditor, it’s $3.9 billion. 
 
This means, Mr. Speaker, that the government office, it has placed 
out of the consolidated debt alone, a debt of $3,700 on the backs 
of every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan, or a debt of 
$14,400 for a family of four living in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what happens when a government loses 
control of its finances? Well, Michael Wilson, the federal Minister 
of Finance, I think sums it up very well when he said: 
 

When government loses control of its finances, everyone is 
affected. It leads to higher interest rates for mortgages, 
business and consumer loans. It means declining economic 
confidence, less economic growth, and fewer jobs. It 
threatens our ability to provide the kinds of government 
programs and services Canadians want. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the members opposite to listen carefully to 
what Michael Wilson concluded by saying: 
 

I believe (he said) that this generation of Canadians want to 
leave our children and our grandchildren a legacy of 
opportunities and optimism, not one of crushing debt and 
crushed hopes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the legacy of this previous minister of Finance and 
this current Minister of Finance surely is one of crushing debt, 
crushed hopes, crushing despair, and quiet desperation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to the area of taxation and tax 
reform. When they were first elected, they talked about tax reform 
and tax cuts. But, Mr. Speaker, some people got major tax cuts. 
Big business was taken care of. They received excellent return on 
their investment, and they weren’t even promised tax cuts, at least 
not in the election material published by the PC Party. 
 
The only people that were promised tax cuts were those ordinary 
Saskatchewan citizens. And what happened to them, Mr. Speaker? 
While in 1982-83 personal income tax generated something like 
$683 million; by 1987-88 it is estimated to be $752 million 
collected out of personal income tax; and in 1988-89 it’s estimated 
at $831 million 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2643 
 

— almost $200 million a year more taken out of the pockets of 
ordinary people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what about the sales tax. Well they promised and they 
pledged to the people of this province that in their first term of 
office that they would abolish the E & H tax. But in 1988 the tax 
they promised to abolish was not abolished, Mr. Speaker; it was 
raised. It was raised 40 per cent, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. yes, 
Mr. Speaker, another $476 million extorted from ordinary people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
And let me take some comparison, Mr. Speaker, from 1983-84 to 
’88-89. Corporate income tax has increased 1 per cent, for the 
grand total of $1.7 million from ’84 to ’89. At the same time, the 
personal income tax has increased 47 per cent, for the grand total 
of $266 million. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, sales tax 
revenue increased by $136 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government talks about partners in 
progress and we see $402 million in income tax and sales tax 
increases, and only $1.7 million in corporate tax increases, we 
know where their priorities are. And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
what they propose to do is to cut the corporate income tax a 
further 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take too much thought to figure out who 
the senior partners with this government is. But they haven’t 
finished yet. Once they had survived the election, they increased 
the sales tax, they increased the flat tax, and they reimposed the 
gasoline tax. Tax breaks for big business, give-away for the 
resource sector. And that has been the story and the legacy of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look very quickly at the resource sector, 
keeping in mind the enormous tax burden this government has 
placed on ordinary people. If we look in 1981 on the value of oil 
that was produced in this province, we find that the total value of 
oil produced was $821 million. And you realize that the revenues 
to the people of this province from that production of 821 million 
was $533 million to the people of Saskatchewan to provide health 
care, education, and services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The total collected was approximately 66 per cent of the total 
value of oil produced when this government took office, and in 
1985 the value of oil was at $2.4 billion. And do you know what 
the provincial revenue from that enormous production of oil was? 
— $674 million, or 28 per cent of the total value of production, 
during the same time as the provincial government was increasing 
provincial income tax on ordinary people of 47 per cent. It reduced 
the taxes on oil companies in Saskatchewan by over 50 per cent. 
And so much for equity, Mr. Speaker, and so much for the fairness 
of this government to ordinary Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have examined the government’s record; a record 
of debt, of deficits, and increased taxation. It has been a sorry 
record of incompetence, mismanagement, and deceit. 

But surely, Mr. Speaker, they have something to show for this 
massive burden of taxation, deficits and debts that they have 
loaded on the backs of ordinary people here in Saskatchewan. 
Surely this enormous burden had a purpose. Surely it meant the 
creation of jobs and economic activity and the general well-being 
of our people in our province. Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately 
the record of this government in its fiscal and monetary areas have 
carried over into the management of the economy. 
 
I want to look at some of the indicators as to see how stagnant this 
economy is under the present government. Housing starts, always 
a key indicator in the economic activity, reached an all time low in 
Saskatchewan. In 1987, 4,895 housing starts; 10 years ago, 12,825 
housing starts — 7,000 fewer housing starts. It means fewer jobs 
for construction trades, for plumbers and electricians, less sales for 
our service sector, less growth in our towns and villages, fewer 
opportunities for young people. 
 
And let us examine a second area, the value of manufacturing 
shipments. The members opposite like to talk a lot about 
diversification, but the record shows that between 1981 and 1987 
the total value of Saskatchewan manufacturing shipments actually 
declined in real terms after taking inflation into account. Between 
1981 and ’87 there was a 9 per cent decline in the real value of 
Saskatchewan manufacturing shipment after taking inflation into 
account. 
 
A third area of significance in the provincial economy, Mr. 
Speaker, is that of public and private investment. In real terms, 
taking inflation into account, there has been a 22 per cent decline 
between 1981 and ’87 in the total investment spending in the 
Saskatchewan economy. Even in current dollars, from 1983 to ’87, 
there has been a decline in the investment in agriculture, mining, 
and utilities. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, even this government has declared 
Saskatchewan open for business. And even though this 
government has opened the taxpayers’ pocket for this . . . for big 
business, business investment in Saskatchewan has declined. 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, one day the members opposite might want 
to sit down and quietly examine that in spite of the fact that they 
have created the perfect business climate, why business 
investment has actually declined. 
 
I think the answer is obvious, Mr. Speaker, obvious to everyone 
but the members opposite. But as someone said, you must keep in 
mind the definition of a Conservative: the group of the unwilling, 
picked from the unfit, to do the unnecessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me turn to the fourth economic indicator, that of 
retail sales. I want to say that in 1987 the total value of retail sales 
increased by only 4.7 per cent compared to the national average of 
9.8 per cent. And when we take into account inflation in 
Saskatchewan was 4.5 per cent in 1987, that figure is even worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these previous statistics were just that. Let me turn to 
one that has even more meaning for ordinary people — jobs, 
employment in Saskatchewan. In 1981 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2644 
 

when this government assumed office, Saskatchewan had 110,000 
jobs for young people — 110,000 jobs for young people age 15 to 
24. By 1987 that figure had fallen to 95,000. Mr. Speaker, six 
years, 15,000 jobs for young people were gone — gone 
somewhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And where the jobs went, so did the young people, an exodus of 
youth, the best and the brightest citizens of Saskatchewan, driven 
from this province by this government; or worse still, driven onto 
social welfare with lost hopes, lost opportunities — 15,000 
shattered dreams. Optimism replaced by despair, 15,000 less 
partners in progress, Mr. Speaker. Now that’s an accomplishment; 
now that’s real performance. 
 
But there’s more, Mr. Speaker. It gets worse despite all of the 
government’s talk about manufacturing and diversification, 
despite all the government’s advertisements in radio and TV, in 
our newspapers, and when you look at the real story, Mr. Speaker, 
what do you find? You find that in April of 1985 there were 
27,000 employed in manufacturing — in 1985; in April 1988 there 
were 25,000 employed in manufacturing — 2,000 less partners in 
progress. 
 
But not everything has gone down in this province, not everything, 
Mr. Speaker. Bankruptcies are up; bankruptcies are up in 
Saskatchewan. In 1987, the level of bankruptcies was 9 per cent 
higher than in 1986. There were 992 business and consumer 
bankruptcies in 1987 — 992 less partners for progress. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to examine the poverty rate 
for Saskatchewan. In 1986, Saskatchewan had the second worst 
poverty rate per families in Canada; the Saskatchewan rate was 
16.4 per cent; the Canadian rate was 12.3. And worse still, Mr. 
Speaker, 64,600 children were considered to be living in poverty 
in Saskatchewan in 1988 — 64,600 children who will never have 
the opportunities to be partners in progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the most cutting indictment of the economic 
policies of this present government. For one child in four here in 
Saskatchewan, there’s really no future as long as this present 
government continues its economic policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have examined here this afternoon this 
government’s incompetence, its waste, its mismanagement, and 
what it has given to the people of this province, and I want to 
summarize. First of all, Mr. Speaker, this government, as I have 
said, has placed on the backs of the people of this province a 
massive debt of $11.6 billion. And do you realize, Mr. Speaker, 
that servicing that debt costs the taxpayers $330 million a year. 
That means that almost a million dollars a day has to be raised in 
Saskatchewan just to pay the interest of servicing the debt created 
by members opposite. 
 
When they assumed office, Saskatchewan had the lowest per 
capita debt in all of Canada. Today we’re number one, Mr. 
Speaker — Saskatchewan has the highest per capita debt in all of 
Canada. Seven consecutive deficits, and this minister in his three 
budgets has a debt exceeding $2.3 billion, or any average of $700 
million per year. In the previous administration, Mr. Speaker, 
under the Blakeney 

administration, there had been 11 balanced budgets and a surplus 
of $139 million when the minister assumed office. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that from 1947 up till 1982, there had 
only been two small deficits during that whole period, in 1961 and 
1962, and the combined debt was not exceeding much over $5 
million between the two. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen massive debt, we have seen 
consecutive deficits, and also we have seen massive personal taxes 
increase — increases in personal income tax, the imposition of 
that vicious flat tax. This year, Mr. Speaker, in this budget they 
imposed and increased the flat tax by thirty-three and one-third per 
cent. And as I said, they cut the corporate income tax by 2 
percentage points. 
 
Yes, for a family earning a net income of $25,000, the flat tax 
seeks and extracts from the pockets of the taxpayers $500 just with 
that tax, this from a government, Mr. Speaker, that promised to 
decrease personal income tax by 10 per cent. That was the pledge 
that they gave to the people of this province when they were 
electioneering, and what they have done is now cast on the people 
of Saskatchewan the second highest personal income tax rate in all 
of Canada, second only to Quebec. 
 
Even worse, they promised to eliminate the E&H tax, but what did 
they do? They increased it by 40 per cent, from 5 to 7 per cent. 
And they pledged to the people of this province, when they ran in 
’82, that they would eliminate that tax in the first term of office. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, they removed the gas tax. And I remember the 
Premier in this House indicating that as long as a Tory government 
sat opposite, that the gas tax which they had removed would never 
be reimposed on the people of this province. 
 
(1500) 
 
Well I’ll tell you, they reimposed it. And they imposed it on the 
business community, the small-business community in 
Saskatchewan, with no rebate. Oh, they said, there would be a 
rebate to the ordinary driver, 7 per cent rebate. And when we 
analyzed that the other night, we find that an estimated $39 million 
was budgeted for the fuel rebate program, and they now estimate 
that the pay-out will be $26 million. 
 
Do you know what that means, Mr. Speaker? It means that $13 
million has been confiscated from the people of this province, 
which is even worse. They use our money, interest free, for a 
whole entire year, draw interest or use it interest free, and in the 
end they refuse to rebate the full amount to the people of 
Saskatchewan who are entitled to it. 
 
But I want to say that this is not all they have done. They go even 
further, Mr. Speaker. They cut and slash programs that are most 
needed by the people of this province. Gone and destroyed is the 
best school-based dental program in North America. Gone and 
destroyed is the best prescription drug program in Canada. I ask, 
Mr. Speaker, how callous and how heartless can a 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2645 
 

government be to deny the children of this province proper dental 
care. I ask, Mr. speaker, how heartless and how callous can a 
government be that will withdraw needed prescription drugs from 
the senior citizens who built this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today our citizens are denied needed medical care, 
medical treatment, caused by the huge backlog and waiting lists at 
our major hospitals throughout this province. And this is caused 
again, Mr. Speaker, by a major underfunding of the health care 
system and of the lack of a commitment to health care by this 
government opposite. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, today, as never before, our young people are 
being denied access to higher education. For the first time, 
qualified students wanting entrance into the university of this 
province have had the doors of opportunity closed to them. And 
the reason, Mr. Speaker, is this government’s lack of funding and 
commitment to education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they who profess to be the friend of the farmer, and 
let us take a look at what they have done. They instituted the 
production loan, a $1.2 billion production loan, and they said it 
was cash without hassle. And you know what? That was in 
1985-86 that they put out the production loan of $25 per acre. And 
today when the farmers of this province are on their knees as a 
result of huge debt, low commodity prices, and drought, what does 
this government do? They increase the rate from six to nine and 
three-quarters per cent. Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with what they 
did to their corporate friend Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington, who took over PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) pulp mill in P.A. 
 
There they said, as long as you make no profit, no interest. But to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan, when they’re on their knees, hurt by 
low commodity prices and drought, they increase the interest rate. 
Whose do you think they are friends of? 
 
And I say again in respect to the farmers, they fail to address the 
farm debt crisis. Thirty to 40 per cent was confirmed by a wheat 
pool representative; 30 or 40 per cent of the farmers are in serious 
financial problems. And we have asked and we have urged this 
government to bring in a program of debt restructuring to meet the 
crisis of debt placed upon the farmers of Saskatchewan, but there 
has been no help and no assistance and no co-operation from the 
federal government. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, they allege to be the friends of the farmers, but 
truly they’re the friends of the multinational corporations. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, also in respect to farmers, we have, raging 
across this province, a major drought. Our caucus took a tour. We 
went through Pangman and over to Gravelbourg and Vanguard, 
and over to Ponteix and back to Swift Current, and over to 
Rosetown. And we went up to Kindersley and to Lloydminster 
and over to North Battleford. And during that tour, we witnessed 
the devastation of the drought and the anxiety in the faces of 
farmers and small-business men across this south-western part of 
the province. 

Mr. Speaker, we have urged the government to bring in a 
comprehensive drought program, and they have sat idly by. They 
say that they have an agreement with the federal government, but 
no announcement. And I say to the farmers of Saskatchewan that 
this drought program should have been announced far before now. 
It’s too late, much too late, because the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
ridden by the drought, need to know what the program is in order 
to make good business decisions. 
 
How does the farmer know whether he should get rid of all his 
cattle? And what about the farmer who doesn’t have the cash at 
hand to move his cattle, which costs up to $90 a head? If the 
government is going to put in place a program, that program is 
needed now. And we urge the government to come forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is as bad, that they have attacked working 
people across this province. Yes, gone are hundreds of highway 
workers — an opportunity to work in the private sector. Dismissed 
were approximately 400 qualified health care workers. Gone are 
some 200 more jobs, and the security of families as a result of the 
government’s decision to close down Cory mine. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, they miss no one. 
 
They are now attacking small-business community in both city 
and small town Saskatchewan with their store hour legislation. 
The small-business community across this province is indicating 
that they want the provincial government to set aside one day of 
shopping, closing on Sunday. That’s what they say. And this 
government disregards the voice of small business both here in the 
city and across the province. 
 
And they go on in their undemocratic way destroying the 
democratic process by eliminating the ward system, against the 
opposition of the council here in Regina, the city council over in 
Saskatoon, in Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, and the urban 
association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has undermined the security of our 
young people. They have undermined the security of our seniors. 
They have failed to meet the problems of the farmers. They have 
attacked the workers by dismissals. Our small-business 
community they won’t listen to. They miss no one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government no longer governs for ordinary 
people of Saskatchewan. It is a government characterized by 
incompetence, waste, mismanagement, and wrong priorities. It is a 
government totally out of touch with the real aspirations of 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, it is a government that must 
be defeated. It is a government that will be defeated. Mr. Speaker, 
this budget and this session illustrates the true Tory agenda, and 
the people of Saskatchewan don’t like what they see. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan don’t like what they 
see, and I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatoon Eastview and 
Elphinstone sent a message clear and loud 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2646 
 

to this government. In Saskatoon Eastview, where the government 
opposite had won the seat overwhelmingly in 1982 by over 3,000 
votes and rewon it again in 1986, the people of Saskatchewan 
spoke. And in Saskatoon Eastview, the Tory candidate lost her 
deposit. 
 
And over in Regina Elphinstone, the people of Elphinstone spoke, 
and they sent a message. And the member from Elphinstone 
received over 77 per cent of the total vote — almost 80 per cent of 
the vote. Yes, the people of Saskatchewan will indeed have an 
opportunity to speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude with a few remarks in respect to 
where this government is going in respect to its economic policy 
of privatization. And I say, Mr. Speaker, when our pioneers came 
and they built this province, they were not the captives of their 
own doubts; they were not the prisoners of their own price tags. 
Their motives were not every man for himself, what’s in it for me 
attitude; their motive was for a common cause, to seek out a life 
for themselves and their family and for their neighbours. And 
those same pioneers, they survived the drought, the depression, the 
grasshoppers, the exploitation of the open market. They survived 
the Premier Anderson, the last Tory government from 1929 to ’34 
— they survived that government which never loomed its head on 
the horizon for another 50 years. And all I can say, Mr. Speaker, is 
that history will repeat itself. 
 
But I want to say that in 1944, Mr. Speaker, when conditions in 
Saskatchewan were almost as bad as they are today, filled with 
hope for the future and secure in their belief that they will be able 
to serve . . . would be well served, they elected a premier by the 
name of Thomas Clement Douglas as premier. 
 
While the members opposite like to talk about Tommy Douglas — 
and I want to say that only last week the Premier said that if 
Tommy were alive he’d support the Tory policy of privatization. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why they’d say that. They 
wouldn’t say it, I’ll tell you, and get away with it if Tommy 
Douglas was alive. 
 
Well perhaps they say it simply to make those who respected Mr. 
Douglas so much, rather angry and irritated. Or perhaps in some 
pervert way they might even believe it. But as George Orwell said 
once, that Conservatives’ mind was a perfect example of a 
double-think, or the power of having two contradictory ideas in 
one mind and accepting them both. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Tommy is no longer with us, but I want to say 
that his words remain. 
 
And I would like to look at the new Tory buzz-word, the new Tory 
slogan, that of privatization, and the policies that it has justified, as 
Tommy would have seen them. The thrust of privatization has 
been that benefits will accrue to the people of Saskatchewan if we 
take assets from the public sector and privatize them by direct sale 
to private corporations or by stock and bond offerings. What we 
have here is what has been called peoples’ capitalism. Well in a 
speech that he gave entitled, “That Freedom May Flourish,” Mr. 
Douglas addressed this idea of peoples’ capitalism, and this is 
what he had to say. he 

said: 
 

During the 20th century, laissez-faire capitalism has 
developed into corporation or monopoly capitalism in which 
ownership has been separated from control. Yet just because 
some workers and farmers are in possession of a few 
industrial stocks or bonds . . . (Yes, stocks or bonds) . . . the 
fact remains, (he says) that these thousands of small 
shareholders have nothing whatsoever to say about the 
management of the companies in which they have invested. 

 
Yes (Mr. Douglas went on to say), it is still as true today as it 
has ever been that he who controls the means by which I live 
controls me. (He said), we hear much from the newspaper 
columnists, the radio commentators about the danger of 
government controlling business. But . . . 

 
He went on to say: 
 

. . . but what about the danger of a society in which business 
controls government? 

 
(1515) 
 
And let’s not fool ourselves, that’s the main thrust of privatization 
in this province, is to turn over as many functions of government 
as possible to the private sector. This government is trying to undo 
everything that Tommy Douglas, the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation), and the New Democratic Party ever 
achieved in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is more than ironic when the members opposite 
claim Tommy Douglas would support them in their endeavours. 
How, Mr. Speaker, can members opposite claim that their policies 
of shifting the tax burden from corporations to ordinary people is 
in keeping with Tommy Douglas’ philosophy, when he said: 
 

That they who are strong ought to help bear the burdens of 
the weak. For after all, we are thy brother’s keepers, he said. 

 
How can they claim that Tommy Douglas would stand up and 
support the destruction of the children dental care program — the 
privatization of that valuable program? How could they possibly 
claim that Tommy Douglas would support the destruction of the 
prescription drug plan and the firing of hundreds of health care 
workers and hundreds of instructors from technical schools and 
major cuts in the funding for education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas said it all for us when he said: 
 

The philosophy of our movement is humanity first. We 
believe that the measure of any community is the amount of 
social and economic security which it provides for even its 
humblest citizens. 

 
No, Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas would not support those 
policies. They are in opposition for everything for 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2647 
 

which he fought, and you know, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier 
says Tommy Douglas would be supportive of his endeavours, he 
not only deludes himself, but he is seen by many to be rather 
ridiculous. 
 
Does he really believe that Mr. Douglas would ever hand over a 
cheque of $21 million to Peter Pocklington? Does he really 
believe that Tommy Douglas would give $1.7 billion in tax breaks 
to the oil industry while increasing the tax burden on ordinary 
Saskatchewan people? If the Premier really believes that, then I 
think he should read the history of Saskatchewan and, more 
particularly, the accomplishments of T.C. Douglas. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, and in case they do not find time to do so, let 
me conclude by giving you the words of T.C. Douglas, some free 
and unsolicited advice, when he said: 
 

Never be afraid of something new just because it is new. All 
history demonstrates that the human race has advanced on 
the shoulders of those who have seen beyond the lean 
horizons of their years. (And as he said), a leading political 
figure once said to me, you’re 25 years ahead of your time, 
Mr. Douglas, and my reply (Mr. Douglas’ reply) was the real 
tragedy for me would be if I were 25 years behind my time. 

 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the tragedy of this government here 
today. They are trapped by an ideology that was discredited by the 
Great Depression, but which has never again, which has emerged 
again to wreak havoc on ordinary people of this province. But let 
me continue, Mr. Speaker. Tommy’s second precept was, and I 
quote: 
 

Never discard something just because it is old. In our 
eagerness to discard what is redundant and irrelevant, we 
must take care not to throw overboard the moral and social 
values without which human society would become a 
ruthless jungle. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would do well to hold with 
Tommy’s dictum: 
 

To test all things but to hold fast to that which is good, or we 
will become a sick society living in a moral waste land, 
bereft of those things that make life worth living. 

 
Yes, Tommy’s third proposition is perhaps the most important, 
and is the one that surely divorces him from the philosophy and 
the practices of the members opposite, when he said: 
 

Measure your life not by what you get, but by what you give. 
Wealth and power do not always bring peace of mind and a 
sense of personal satisfaction. Some of the most radiant 
personalities I’ve ever known have been teachers, doctors, 
social workers, and others in humble walks of life who have 
given of themselves in the dedicated service to their fellow 
man. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close in the words of the poet great, Frank 
Scott, who dedicated this poem to Tommy 

Douglas, and let him have the last words when he wrote: 
 

From those condemned to labour 
For the profits of another, 
We take our new endeavour 
Till power is brought to polling 
And outcasts share in ruling 
There will not be an ending 
Nor any peace for spending 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government will find no support from the 
memory or from the works of Tommy Douglas. We’re still for 
you. You will find no support — no support from the hundreds of 
thousands of people, ordinary people in Saskatchewan, who you 
have hurt, who you’ve betrayed, and who you’ve deceived. 
 
Yes, I say to you members opposite, the people of this province 
will have their turn. Their turn shall come, and their judgement 
will be, in my view it will be nasty, brutish, and short. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those reasons and for many more if time would 
allow, we will not be supporting the Appropriation Bill. We 
cannot support the budget. We cannot support the priorities of this 
government, which has wreaked havoc on ordinary people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if, with 
leave of the Assembly, I may introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the 
members of the opposition for granting me leave. 
 
Seated in the west gallery today, Mr. Speaker, are two wee fellows 
I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly. They’ve come all the way from Dublin, Ireland, and 
they’re here on vacation. They are Damon and Conor Barrett. 
Conor is 12 years old and Damon is 10 years old. And I’d like to 
say, Mr. Speaker, they made the journey entirely unaccompanied, 
came all by themselves and were met here in Regina by friends 
and relatives. 
 
They’re accompanied in the gallery by my son Brig, and my wife 
Cheryl, who are escorting them around the legislature this 
afternoon. If the boys would like to stand and be acknowledged, 
I’d just like to say that we all hope, here in the Assembly, that you 
have a very good summer and a good vacation. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you. I found it somewhat fitting 
listening to the opposition Finance critic that he spent about the 
last half-hour of his remarks talking about the 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2648 
 

old days. And he certainly talked about Tommy Douglas and what 
Tommy wouldn’t have done. And he expressed the fact that he 
was very upset that the Premier alluded to the former premier, 
Tommy Douglas. 
 
I’ll tell you what Tommy Douglas wouldn’t have done and didn’t 
do during the years that he was premier of this province. Tommy 
Douglas didn’t buy farm land to keep farmers as serfs of the 
government of this province, Mr. Speaker. Not once did he ever 
advocate that, not once did he ever do it. Tommy Douglas never 
nationalized a potash mine or the potash industry, Mr. Speaker — 
never once. Never advocated it, and never did it, Mr. Speaker. 
Tommy Douglas never bought a pulp mill, Mr. Speaker. Never 
advocated it, and never did it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t referred to by the member from Quill 
Lakes because he knows full well, Mr. Speaker, that Tommy 
Douglas was a populist and not a socialist, and he was a CCF and 
he was not a New Democratic Party member, Mr. Speaker. When 
the NDP formed up in this province, Mr. Speaker, Tommy 
Douglas left and went to British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what he did, and that’s what he thought of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found it somewhat humorous when I heard the 
opposition finance critic talk about building hospitals. Oh, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of this province laugh when they hear an NDP 
talk about building hospitals. Did they build that expansion to the 
University Hospital? No, they did not. Did they build the new City 
Hospital in Saskatoon? No, they did not. Did they build the 
Wascana rehabilitation hospital in Regina? No, they did not. Did 
they build a new hospital in Lloydminster? No, they didn’t. Did 
they build a new hospital in Melfort? No, they didn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would they build nursing home? No, they wouldn’t. 
They are the only part and the only government that ever lived and 
existed in Canada that passed a moratorium in writing to build no 
more nursing homes in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, they are the only party in 
Canada, the New Democratic Party that’s populated by the 
remnants of that government that are still controlling it in the front 
benches, that have to their legacy, Mr. Speaker, they built more 
liquor stores than they ever built nursing homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And I can take you to my riding — more 
liquor stores than nursing homes. My riding, the community of 
Fort Qu’Appelle, tried for years to get a nursing home, Mr. 
Speaker, and an expansion. Not done by the NDP; done by the 
Progressive Conservatives. But they built a new liquor board store 
before the 1982 election, Mr. Speaker. That’s where their priorities 
were, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what the legacy was. 
 
Government office building were built — the Sturdy Stone 
Building, the SaskTel building, the SGI building, McIntosh centre. 
Mr. Speaker, all over this province there 

were government office buildings, and there was a moratorium on 
nursing homes, Mr. Speaker. When they talk about building, Mr. 
Speaker, their legacy was a shameful one, and still remembered by 
the people of this province today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talked about homes, in passing. Did they talk 
about protecting home owners against high interest rates? Not a 
word. Did they talk about protecting farmers, Mr. Speaker? Not a 
word. Did they talk about protecting the home quarter, Mr. 
Speaker? Not a word. No. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the speech of the hon. member, the hon. member 
brought home a fundamental fact of this session and a 
fundamental fact of the new leadership of the New Democratic 
Party. Mr. Speaker, the thing is, and the key issue is, and the issue 
that the people of this province will well remember, is that they 
haven’t changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
They still oppose building hospitals. They still oppose record 
expenditures on health care. They still oppose helping the farmer 
on protecting the home quarter, Mr. Speaker. They still oppose the 
government’s efforts to diversify this economy. They still oppose 
a Meadow Lake pulp mill. They still oppose a new paper mill in, 
say, in Prince Albert. They still oppose a heavy oil plant in the city 
of Regina. They just reiterated again today that they still oppose 
expansions to the meat packing industry in the city of North 
Battleford. They still oppose Vanguard mobile homes in North 
Battleford. Mr. Speaker, they oppose and they oppose and they 
oppose, and stand for absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, opposition parties have been doomed to failure for 
the last 100 years, Mr. Speaker, when all they do is oppose and 
stand for nothing and support nothing. And, Mr. Speaker, when 
you have an opposition party that can only oppose, you have an 
opposition party that’s doomed to failure, Mr. Speaker, and 
doomed to opposition for a long period of time. And, Mr. speaker, 
that is being seen by the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I want to talk, Mr. Speaker, about what the 
hon. member didn’t talk about as well. Did he talk about seniors? 
No, he didn’t talk about seniors. They haven’t talked about seniors 
this whole session, Mr. Speaker. The NDP didn’t talk about 
seniors. They wouldn’t let the word “seniors” pass through their 
lips during this session, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 
that more time was spent on the NDP defending the ward system 
than they ever spent talking about seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can check the record in Hansard that more 
words came from the opposition opposing changes to the ward 
system, defending the old ward system, than they ever spent 
talking about farmers, Mr. Speaker. More questions in question 
period opposing changes to the ward system than defending 
farmers and helping farmers in a drought. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2649 
 

Mr. Speaker, more time was spent by the NDP defending the ward 
system than they spent talking about education in this session, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what happened to their attack on SIAST is 
now receiving the support of educators around this province. 
Where was their support for distance education? None, Mr. 
Speaker, because they’re more concerned about their political 
organization in the cities than they were concerned about 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more time was spent by the NDP in this session 
defending the old ward system than talked about welfare reform, 
Mr. Speaker, which is creating opportunities for those on welfare 
and jobs for people on welfare, Mr. Speaker, and yet they wanted 
to talk about the ward system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a drought — the most serious drought in the history 
of this province, Mr. Speaker, and more time spent talking about 
the ward system than about the drought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it tells you, it tells you where their priorities are, Mr. 
Speaker. It tells you, Mr. Speaker where fundamentally they’re 
coming from. And it tells you fundamentally what’s more 
important to them, Mr. Speaker, their organization in Saskatoon, 
Regina, and Prince Albert, than the farmers of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And the farmers of this province know it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talked about the deficit. And they didn’t talk, 
Mr. Speaker, that if they hadn’t have taken and robbed, robbed the 
Heritage Fund of this province when there were record oil prices 
and potash prices and wheat prices, when they stole that money 
and robbed that money and took it away, Mr. Speaker, and they 
put it into buying potash mines that were already here, Mr. 
Speaker. If they hadn’t bought the potash mines, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said, by 1986 there would have been no deficit in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They made a choice. They made a choice, Mr. Speaker; they were 
going to take that money away, Mr. Speaker, and put it into 
buying what was already there. And one of the great tragedies of 
the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, was when they had that 
opportunity, when they had that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to take 
the wealth from potash and the wealth from oil and the wealth 
from uranium, to create something new, Mr. Speaker, to build 
something new, to diversify the economy, they chose, Mr. 
Speaker, to buy what was already there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all we heard today from the Finance critic of the New 
Democratic Party was that he would do it all over again. He said it 
was the right thing to do, and that’s what he said from his seat this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. He stood up and reiterated their belief that 
government ownership and government acquisitions of farm land 
and the economy was the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said it once, and I’ll say it again, the speech in this 
House today, the debate throughout this session shows again that 
they haven’t changed. And, Mr. Speaker, they stand for the same 
old thing of government ownership of farm land, government 
ownership of resources, and government ownership of the 
economy of this province. Mr. Speaker, they were wrong then, and 
I 

say that they’re wrong today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, what the 
opposition said, this government, in spite of a drought, the worst 
drought in the history of this province, we will continue to build, 
Mr. Speaker. We will continue to build pulp mills, and we will 
continue to build paper mills, and we will continue to build 
upgraders, and we will continue to build manufacturing plants, 
Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding that every action of this government 
to build and diversify the economy is stalled and opposed by the 
new Democratic party and its leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are against the Meadow Lake pulp mill. They have been 
against the P.A. paper mill since the day the shovel was turned to 
build that project, Mr. Speaker. They have opposed this 
government co-operating with the co-operative movement to build 
the largest heavy oil upgrader in Canada. They wouldn’t do it 
when they were government; they wouldn’t do it today, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people of this province know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a tremendous opportunity, in diversifying 
our economy, to take and walk through that open door of 
opportunity on free trade, Mr. Speaker. There’s a market below 
the province of Saskatchewan that we can access. No province 
trades more per capita than the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. We are world traders, and we will continue to be world 
traders, Mr. Speaker, and this government, under the leadership of 
our Premier, takes a leadership role in promoting free trade and the 
opportunities that it gives to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And it’s not only free trade with our 
neighbours to the south, Mr. Speaker — our neighbours to the 
south hated by the members opposite — but it’s freer trade around 
the world because, for the first time, Saskatchewan government 
members attend the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
meetings, Mr. Speaker. For the first time, this province, this 
government, and these people attend and participate in the efforts 
to lower the barriers to trade around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have opposed because they fundamentally 
disagree with it, the efforts of this government, and the members 
of our party, to let the people of this province have a direct 
participation in the economic development of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. They oppose privatization and public participation, Mr. 
Speaker, because they still believe, and they said it today, that the 
only way the NDP have is government ownership, not people 
ownership, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a fundamental difference, and 
that shows up in the debate and the comments of the members 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated what the tenor of 
the debate has been throughout. And there are some fundamental 
differences. Mr. Speaker, there are 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2650 
 

differences in who should own the economy. We believe the 
people should own it; the NDP say the government should own it. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that farmers have to be helped in this 
difficult time, not . . . Drought shouldn’t be seen, Mr. Speaker, as 
just an opportunity to buy cheap farm land. And that’s what the 
NDP stand for. We believe, Mr. Speaker, in trying to help the 
farmers and not take advantage, and not look upon drought as just 
an opportunity to grab land for the land bank, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re really seeing, the NDP have a bit of a 
Christopher Columbus syndrome, Mr. Speaker. They don’t know 
where they’re going; they don’t know where they are when they 
get there; they don’t know where they’ve been when they get back 
home, and they’re upset to find out they were financed by foreign 
money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, that sums up, that sums up the 
NDP. They have shown no leadership, Mr. Speaker. They have 
not shown one positive proposal through 70 days, Mr. Speaker. 
They haven’t shown one change from the Blakeney years, Mr. 
Speaker, of government ownership. 
 
It’s the same old gang giving the same old tune, singing the same 
old song with the same old people with the same old idea. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been a disappointment this session, Mr. Speaker, to 
see that they’ve had the opportunity as they have new leadership 
to make some changes and all we’ve seen are the same old people 
moved up to the front, Mr. Speaker. Any possibility of new ideas 
are shunted to the back, Mr. Speaker. Nothing new for anyone, 
Mr. Speaker. I urge all hon. members to support this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, the 
Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

TABLING OF PAPER 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before we move on to further business of the 
House, I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral 
Officer a certificate of the following elections and returns: of 
Dwain Lingenfelter as member for the constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone; of Bob Pringle, as member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes I would, Mr. Chairman. Seated beside 
me is Dan Kuss, the legislation adviser, corporate law department, 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance); and seated beside 
me, to my right, is Byron Hindle, assistant vice-president of 
customer services. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, I don’t expect to take much time with this Bill this 
afternoon, but I would be interested in your clarifying for me the 
need to add to subsection 5 (1), the subsection (1.1) please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Basically, this amendment is to allow us to 
deal with unique circumstances. That would be different kinds of 
models that we don’t traditionally list. There’s a lot of different 
types of mobile homes, for example. There’s new imported . . . 
different kinds of import cars come on the market. I believer there 
are also some types of cars built from kits, things of this nature, 
and this allows us to deal with those type of things rather than 
having to wait for regulations every time something new would 
come along. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is highly unusual, as I 
understand it from some of my colleagues who have been in this 
legislature for a good deal longer than I have and you have, that 
it’s unusual for the government to give itself the authority to make 
regulations retroactively to a one-year period. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m interested in knowing what little bind 
you’re in right now that you need this legislative authority. What 
regulations have you . . . or what fee increases or something to that 
effect have you introduced that you now need the legislative 
authority to take these regulations back one year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This is to allow us to assess rating points for 
high-risk drivers, bad drivers, and so on that we can assess these 
rating points to them. As I said, problems arise with new vehicle 
models that don’t fit into the classification. so if you look at the 
Act, it pertains to both vehicles and drivers. So the best way for 
me to explain it is for new and different type of vehicles that 
weren’t traditionally registered before, they will be able to be 
registered under this section of the Act, and also for the driver 
rating points, where we would be able to put other charges on 
high-risk drivers. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, Mr. Minister, as of January 1 of this 
year, I understand it, your government, through the SGI, brought 
in a change to drivers’ licences where you would go back a period 
of time and assess what a driver should be rated at as a result of 
driving infractions that they may have had, highway traffic 
infractions, speeding tickets, seat-belt infractions, that sort of 
thing. 
 
I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: did you have the 
legislative authority through The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Act to do that? And is this legislation and this provision that 
allows you to make regulation retroactively to one year, is this 
really there because of the changes that you made in January of 
this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m informed that this allows us to 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2651 
 

assess the points to high-risk drivers, and I wanted to point out to 
you that really 90 per cent of the drivers in Saskatchewan this 
wouldn’t affect at all, and previously they would be subsidizing 
these type of people. So what we’re able to do with this change in 
the legislation is to assess those points to high-risk drivers so that 
the good drivers are not subsidizing them. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Just so I’m clear, Mr. Minister. I am advised by 
some people who are drivers in this province that they may have 
had a driving while impaired charge several years ago. They paid 
their fine at the time. They had their licence suspended, and for 
many of the drivers that I’ve spoken to and there are — I shouldn’t 
say many; there are some — they are no longer involved with 
alcohol; they are part of the AA program, and they were quite 
shocked this year when they saw a huge assessment to their 
driver’s licence because of the changes that you’ve made that go 
back some time, and you’re now assessing people or you’re 
penalizing people for poor driving records, driving while 
impaired, that sort of thing. 
 
And you didn’t answer my question, Mr. Minister. I asked you 
specifically: did you have the legislative authority to introduce 
those changes when they were introduced a few months ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The officials indicated to me that the system 
of assessing points hasn’t changed, but the number of points has 
changed — that was changed. 
 
In your question about the legislation, yes, this legislation will 
permit the regulations for the assessment of these points on bad 
drivers. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think what you’ve got 
yourself into is a bit of a pickle, and you’re trying to get out of it 
with this legislation. 
 
Now I just want to make it very clear to you, in terms of what I 
have had in terms of feedback from people who open up their 
driver’s licence and discover that they have a great deal of money 
to pay out this year in order to obtain a driver’s licence from SGI. 
 
And I’m thinking specifically of a few examples of people who 
had impaired driving charges several years ago, had paid the price 
— they lost their licences, they had to pay a high fee for their 
driver’s licence. They then revert back to what the rest of us, good 
drivers, pay for our licences, our driver’s licence, and all of a 
sudden they get a real shock in the mail when you apparently 
changed the way you assess points for driving. 
 
Mr. Minister, you didn’t have the legislative authority to do that, 
and what you’ve just brought in here today is a piece of legislation 
that allows you to make regulations retroactively. I’d be interested 
in knowing, Mr. Minister, when you changed this way that you 
assessed points, and when did it come into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It was changed January 1. And you’re 
asking about the people who had had an impaired charge, or 
whatever it may be. The period of when the penalty would be 
imposed is the same as it previously was, except we’ve got 
tougher on the bad driver. 

And I think if you . . . And I’d be willing to share these statistics 
with you if you’re not aware of them. But it’s about two to four 
times — I think four times more prevalent for the bad driver to 
have continuing accidents. And I don’t think, and I assume 
probably you are a good driver, that you should be subsidizing 
someone who has that kind of a record. 
 
So yes we have got tougher on the bad driver; and yes we did 
bring it into effect as of January 1. And yes, this is the legislation 
that will put that in place. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Minister, is this legislation to give you 
the authority to do what you’ve already done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: Well, Mr. Minister, so then really what we’re in is a 
situation where a number of people have been assessed additional 
. . . not additional points, but the point structure has changed and 
their driver’s licences have increased significantly, and they’ve 
done so when you haven’t had the authority to do it. And now you 
bring some legislation in through the back door to try and make a 
policy decision of yours legal, when it wasn’t legal when you 
introduced it in January. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have nothing further to say about this other than 
there are a lot of drivers in this province that realize that they have 
made mistakes; they realize that they’ve made mistakes; that 
they’ve had an impaired driving charge, for instance. They feel as 
though they’ve paid the penalty, Mr. Minister. They paid the 
penalty by having to go to a course. They’ve paid the penalty by 
losing their licence; they’ve paid the penalty in terms of having an 
embarrassment in terms of being caught drinking and driving. It’s 
socially unacceptable behaviour. They’ve paid the penalty in terms 
of having to pay for a driver’s licence that is at a significantly 
increased rate. 
 
And they thought they’d finished paying the penalty. But that’s 
not the case. Mr. Minister. You’ve just changed the system 
without any kind of forewarning. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I just want to put on record that I think that 
that’s a real sad state of affairs for yourself as minister responsible 
for Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and I guess I’ll just 
leave it at that. I’ve just put my remarks on the record and I guess 
we can now vote on this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 
 
Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation 

Act, 1979 
 
Mr. Chairman: —  Would the minister introduce his officials. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2652 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Along with Garnet Garven, who’s the 
chairman, is John McLean, senior vice-president, and Ted 
Thiessen, director of finance. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I’d just like to give notice at this point that I will be 
moving amendments to sections 15 and section 19 of the Bill, and 
I would ask a page to give a copy of those proposed amendments 
to both the Clerk and to the minister so as to provide opportunity 
to review them before we get to that section. 
 
I anticipate, Mr. Chairman, that the minister will see them as very 
reasonable amendments. He will notice that both of these 
amendments relate directly to benefits provided for widows of 
workers who are killed on the job, and I want to provide him the 
opportunity to be able to review that in advance, and I anticipate 
he will see them as consistent with the intentions of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman, just to put this Bill into context, basically the Bill 
brings about a number of what I would consider positive changes 
— I made those remarks in the second reading debate — and 
changes that are forthcoming from recommendations made by the 
committee of review. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the minister will be aware, of course, that back in 
1985, in December of 1985, the previous minister of Labour 
appointed a committee of review to provide for public input into 
The Workers’ Compensation Act, and that that committee, in 
September of 1986, then filed its report, entitled Report of the 
Workers’ Compensation Act Review Committee. I would also 
point out, Mr. Chairman, that with those recommendations that 
came forth from that committee, it was a unanimous report, 
unanimously endorsed by Judge Muir who chaired that committee, 
as well as all of the employer and employee representatives on the 
committee. 
 
And so what the committee brought forth in summary then was a 
series of recommendations that were believed by Judge Muir, by 
employee representatives, and by employer representatives, to be 
good changes in the interests of The Workers’ Compensation Act 
in the administration of it. 
 
It’s significant to note as well, Mr. Chairman, that the costs related 
to The Workers’ Compensation Act, to the implementation of it, 
are borne by employers. And so it is a very, very significant thing 
to note that those recommendations were endorsed unanimously 
by employers, who saw the recommendations as being 
improvements for the systems and for protection of workers, and 
ultimately for their own protection, consistent with the basic 
principle of workers’ compensation, by which an injured worker is 
denied the right to appeal to court for compensation when 
experiencing an injury on the job. 
 
Related to that then, Mr. Chairman, my questions today, and my 
proposed amendments, are consistent with the recommendations 
made unanimously by that review committee. And I will focus my 
attention on some recommendations that the committee made 
which were 

not . . . which we do not find in this legislation before us now, as 
well as some . . . I will be proposing some amendments to bring 
the changes within this Bill, in light of the reading of the spirit of 
the recommendations as I understand them. And so it’s clearly in 
that context that I approach the committee consideration of this 
Bill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Let me begin then. There are three major recommendations that 
were put forth by the unanimous recommendation of the 
committee that are not found in this Bill, and I would appreciate 
some explanation from the minister as to why they’re not found in 
this Bill and also would be most receptive, Mr. Chairman, for the 
minister to bring forth some changes to the Bill to bring it in line 
with the recommendations of the committee. 
 
First of all, I refer to the report, recommendation No. 56, and I 
would anticipate that the minister and the officials would have that 
recommendation there. When I’m making reference to the report, 
I’ll advise you as to where I’m speaking from so as to provide for 
you the opportunity to review it for yourself. 
 
Recommendation 56, as can be seen, and I think can be stated no 
more simply or briefly, Mr. Chairman, than as written in the 
recommendation, reads as such, and I’ll quote two paragraphs 
preceding recommendation 56, entitled, “Composition of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board.” And it reads as follows: 
 

The legislation stipulates that the Workers’ Compensation 
Board is to consist of at least three members, one of whom is 
to be appointed as chairman of the Board. Traditionally, the 
Board has consisted of a chairman and two other members: 
one representative of labour, the other of management. 
 
This system is based on a balance between labour and 
management in order to ensure that both sides have 
confidence in the Board’s ability to function as a fair 
adjudicative mechanism. The committee contends that this 
system should be enshrined in law. 

 
Now I simply want to underline that sentiment, Mr. Chairman, 
because the committee in its recommendation spells out very 
clearly the importance of having a board of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board that is composed with equal representation 
by both management and labour to ensure the confidence of both 
of those parties in the Saskatchewan economic system. 
 
And I would ask, then, Mr. Minister, in light of the . . . this is not 
just the theoretical question, because, as you’re aware, your 
government has had at one time four members on the board and 
has broken that balance of representation between labour and 
management. And I would appreciate an explanation as to why it 
was not seen fit, in light of the committee’s unanimous 
recommendation, to enshrine in law that the board should have 
equal representation of both management and labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, what in fact exists 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2653 
 

now, as I’m advised, is that the board, the make-up of the board, 
which is consistent with all boards across Canada — a 
representative of labour, a representative of the employer, and a 
chairman appointed by government. And that’s what we believe to 
be a fair balance; the rest of the provinces believe that to be a fair 
balance, and that’s where we will stay. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I share that sentiment, and 
that’s the exact point that I was making. It hasn’t always been the 
practice of your government to honour that principle in the 
composition of the board. And the committee is recommending 
. . . Like, let me quote again: “The committee contends that this 
system should be enshrined in law.” 
 
It had, until you placed the fourth member on the board some 
years ago, it had been the consistent practice. But that precedent 
had been broken, and the committee recognized the significance of 
that and is recommending that it “should be enshrined in law.” I 
quote those words. 
 
Mr. Minister, why was it not seen appropriate, in light of your 
support for that principle. to enshrine that principle in law with 
these amendments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I simply say that, you know, we’re 
back to the situation where there is the two sides and the 
government-appointed chairman, and it is the view of this 
government that we will continue on that path without needing it 
enshrined in legislation. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well I hear what you’re saying; I hear it’s agreeing 
on the principle. It still doesn’t answer my question as to why you 
specifically decided not to enshrine it. If it’s a good idea and if the 
concern was raised because that precedent had been broken and 
the committee unanimously was recommending it, again I hear 
you saying that’s your intention to continue that practice. 
 
And let me ask just the last time. I suppose we can repeat this over 
and over again, but I would appreciate an explanation — I don’t 
think I’ve heard one — as to why you specifically decided not to 
enshrine it in law with these amendments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I understand it’s not enshrined in law in 
other jurisdictions, so we will stay with where it is in other 
jurisdictions, stay with that course. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well moving along then, Mr. Minister, I would 
simply point out that the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation 
Act is really a model Act that has been reviewed and in many 
cases adopted, and most recently just in Ontario some days ago, 
the principles of The Workers’ Compensation Act of 
Saskatchewan, and I would see it as being most appropriate that 
we would provide in this province again some leadership in 
protecting the principles of fairness, both in practice and in 
appearance, by enshrining that in legislation. And I would 
certainly ask that the next time the review is undertaken, that 
consideration be given to that recommendation of the committee 
because I suspect it will come forth again. 

If I can refer you to recommendation no. 62, Mr. Minister, and I’ll 
quote that recommendation; it’s just one simple sentence: 
 

Full-time domestics (those working for one employer for 
more than 24 hours a week) should be included under the 
scope of The Workers’ Compensation Act. 

 
Again that recommendation was given unanimously by the 
committee, represented by both employers and employees, and 
again that recommendation is not found within the Bill before us. 
Can you explain why that recommendation was omitted from the 
legislative changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Again, I guess this debate has been around. 
The two jurisdictions that have the mandatory coverage here are 
Ontario and Manitoba. Manitoba have had some problems with it, 
and to date they only have 38 people registered under that. Now as 
that particular clause that you referred to there you wish to make 
mandatory, and our view is that clearly that’s . . . there would not 
be more than that likely in Saskatchewan, and therefore it doesn’t 
seem to us that that pressure is perhaps there yet, and would create 
additional work. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well again, Mr. Minister, that’s strikes me as being 
a bit of a weak explanation, again in light of the fact that this was a 
unanimous recommendation of the committee. I raised this point 
with the Minister of Labour in Labour estimates earlier in this 
session, and he made some reference to dealing with it through 
legislation, although it was unclear to me to what he was referring, 
and again I would hope that the committee’s recommendation will 
give serious consideration next time round. 
 
Finally, the section that was recommended for change and again 
excluded from the legislative changes before us, Mr. Minister, was 
recommendation no. 71. Recommendation no. 71, and again let 
me just read that to make it clear as to what it refers to. It says, and 
I quote: 
 

Section 162 of the Act should be amended by adding a 
provision requiring the Board to file each year with the 
Minister a report to be tabled in the Legislature showing the 
progress made by the Board towards implementing the 
recommendations of the present and subsequent committees 
in so far as it is within the power of the Board to implement 
such recommendations. The report should also include an 
explanation for any delay in implementing the 
recommendations. This report should be submitted to the 
Minister before the anniversary date on which the review 
committee’s report is made public. 

 
Again this is not a recommendation, Mr. Minister, that was made 
lightly. Again I reinforce that it’s a unanimous recommendation 
by the review committee. Before you respond as well, let me point 
out that I do recognize that there was such a report made this year. 
Although I point out that the committee is recommending that this 
report . . . the requirement to do this should again be enshrined in 
law, not just as a matter of practice or when convenient, 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2654 
 

but enshrined in law. And it also says that this report should be 
submitted to the minister before the anniversary date on which the 
review committee’s report is made public, which would have 
required that report to be tabled n the legislature, Mr. Minister, by 
September of 1988. As a matter of fact it was received about one 
or two months ago . . . sorry, September of ’87, and wasn’t 
received until just a couple of months ago. 
 
So although part of the spirit was honoured, in fact it wasn’t 
completely. And it’s also significant, Mr. Minister, because the 
review committee . . . if you look through all the 
recommendations, the bulk of the recommendations, as a matter of 
fact, were not for legislative change, they were for procedural 
change within the operations of the board. 
 
And so therefore in terms of public accountability and confidence 
of both employers and employees, it does become significant that 
that report be made annually and completely, with explanation as 
to why changes of the committee were not honoured. Again I 
point out that this is again a unanimous recommendation. 
 
Could you please tell me, Mr. Minister, why that recommendation 
was not included in the legislative changes? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I’m advised, and I think the hon. 
member mentioned, that in fact it was included in this year’s 
annual report; that it’s the intention to include it in each annual 
report hereafter. I’m further advised that the board in fact met with 
Judge Muir and some of the people, and he suggested that this was 
a satisfactory way of proceeding with it. So even Judge Muir 
acknowledged that this process here was satisfactory. That’s the 
advice that he gave back to the board. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m satisfied with these as 
questions and, number one, I have some specific questions as we 
proceed through the Bill and a couple of amendments that I’d like 
to propose. So prepare to start moving through the Bill, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Related to clause 10, 
which has to do with section 73 of the Act, it has to do with setting 
the review period for injured workers, for review of their loss of 
earnings capacity, and so on. I understand, through the explanatory 
notes, that the current practice is to do that annually. And what it’s 
recommending here is that it would be done on some basis other 
than annually — I think at the discretion of the board, is how it 
looks to me. 
 
Could you please be a little more definite as to how frequently it’s 
intended to hold those reviews. I’m assuming not more frequently 
than annually, but I’m assuming there’s also the other end of the 
time period. Are 

we talking one to three years, or some time period in which those 
reviews will be held. And could you also explain what the impact 
of this would have on employees, of changing the review time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised the one to three years would 
be, as you indicate, one to three years is the time period that would 
be, I’m further advised, less disquietening for the employees, and 
for that reason the one to three year review. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And the second part of my question is: what do 
you see as the beneficial impact for injured workers by moving it 
from one year to the one to three, with discretion of the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well you can set the rate for the three-year 
period. If they’re back to work, they’ve got that rate set. You don’t 
then have to come back to them each year and say, what are you 
earning now, and go through that process. That’s why it’s 
designed in the interests of that employee. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s a House amendment to clause 12 of 
the printed Bill, moved by the Minister of Justice. Is the 
amendment agreed? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry. I just received this 
when we began. I haven’t had a chance to read it over. Would the 
minister just please explain for me the impact of the proposed 
amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised the following: that this 
amendment here would clarify the recommendation of the 
committee and put it the following is that . . . clarify the ability to 
purchase an annuity — and I’m going here from just my advice — 
is the balance is $5,000 or less, it can be paid out, otherwise you 
can get into the annuity pay-out. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And how is that different from the section 12, the 
impact of section 12 as it is printed in the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The committee recommendation, as I 
understand, was the following: if it’s under $5,000, the worker can 
just have his money paid out to him; if it’s over 5,000, you can opt 
to the annuity. That is what the commission recommended, and 
this just simply clarifies that in the manner of drafting to get that 
intent that the committee has recommended. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, clause 14 refers to 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2655 
 

moneys provided for funeral expenses and simply amends it by 
changing it from 3,000 to 3,500. I would ask the minister how you 
concluded — I recognize that the committee recommended a 
figure, but in recommending a figure the committee said that they 
really weren’t all that certain as to whether it was the right figure 
or not, but just that it should be something higher than the 
previous 3,000. Mr. Minister, how did you conclude, or how did 
the Minister of Labour conclude, that $3,500 is the right figure to 
cover the costs of a funeral? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The officials advise that their reading of 
the report indicated that they believe the recommendation of that 
committee was to raise it to $3,500. That was a recommendation, a 
solid recommendation, and that recommendation was followed. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 15 of the printed 
Bill, moved by the member from Moose Jaw North. Would the 
members take the amendment as read? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, just for the record so that it 
can be known what the amendment is, if I may just read that for 
the record: 
 

Amend section 15 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) In clause 83(4)(b) as being enacted therein, by adding 
immediately after the words “capable of earning” the 
following words: 
 
“after the board has made reasonable efforts to provide for 
vocational rehabilitation, appropriate training and 
assistance”; and 
 
(b) In subsection 83(5) as being enacted therein, by striking 
out all the words after “pursuant to subsection (4)” and 
substituting the following: 
 
for a period exceeding 24 consecutive months from the date 
of the fatality, the board shall set aside an amount equal to 10 
per cent of all compensation paid to the dependent spouse on 
and from January 1, 1989, and of that compensation as it is 
paid, and that amount, together with accrued interest, shall be 
used to provide an annuity for the spouse at age 65. 

 
Mr. Chairman, in reviewing the section 15 and taking a look at the 
recommendations of the committee — and this refers to 
committee’s recommendations, number 3 and 5, Mr. Chairman — 
let me summarize . . . the shortest way of doing that is to simply 
read those, and I see the amendment consistent with the 
committee’s recommendation. Recommendation 3, and I’ll read it 
in part, the significant part: 
 

The spouse’s income at the expiration of the initial period of 
benefits is to be compared to the entitlement the deceased 
spouse would have had had he or she been totally disabled 
(updated for 

inflation). Continuing benefits are to be based on the 
difference between the spouse’s income at that time and (in) 
the deceased spouse’s entitlement. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that recommendation does 
really not imply the deeming will take place in determining 
widow’s benefits. However, I do recommend . . . I do recognize 
that the final phrase before that, the committee made the reference 
to, a more equitable system would see the spouse treated in the 
same way as an injured worker after the expiration of the initial 
period of entitlement, which does imply the use of deeming to 
some regard. 
 
However, when I read section 15 of the Bill, Mr. Chairman, it 
seems to me to impose deeming then on the benefits that a widow 
receives, but in a way that is different from deeming as it’s applied 
to an injured worker. An injured worker who is deemed does have 
the opportunity to have rehabilitation or training for occupation 
that the worker is capable of doing with the limitations of the 
injury. 
 
And what it seems to me is that section 15 proposes that deeming 
will be applied to — in most cases we’re talking widows — would 
be applied to widows without there being any opportunity for that 
widow to have some occupational training to enter the work-force. 
So the first part of the amendment is an attempt to address that, to 
provide the assurance for the widow that when deeming is being 
done, that she will have opportunity for occupational training. 
 
The second part of the proposed section 15 of the Bill, Mr. 
Minister, seems to me, when I read it, to say that annuities will 
only apply to benefits that a widow receives after the five-year or 
18-year statutory period. And again the recommendation is to be 
consistent . . . I’m sorry, the amendment that I put forth is to be 
consistent with recommendation number 5, which I will read 
verbatim: 
 

When benefits have been paid to a surviving spouse for a 
period exceeding 24 consecutive months from the date of the 
fatality, an amount equal to 10 per cent of the payments that 
have been made and are being made should be set aside by 
the Board, to provide an annuity for the spouse at age 65. 

 
So I’m simply wanting to ensure, with the second half of that 
amendment, that that annuity being set aside for the widowed 
spouse will apply to benefits from the very beginning of the claim 
for any spouse who’s had a claim of more than 24 months, that 
they won’t just start for benefits earned after the five-year or 
18-year statutory period. 
 
That’s the rationale for the amendments, Mr. Minister, and I 
would appreciate your consideration of that amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay, I will read to the hon. member as to 
what is provided now, with the rationale being that the widow 
would be . . . or the survivor would be treated the same as the 
injured worker and that they would receive the same type of 
treatment. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2656 
 

The spouse will receive full non-taxable benefits for a 
minimum of five years, and a maximum of 18 years with 
children; full vocational rehabilitation assistance; dependant 
children will continue to receive all costs of tuition, books, 
etc. while in post-secondary education; dependant children 
will also continue to receive $200 per month between 18 and 
21 while in school. 
 
Following the five- to 18-year statutory periods, spouse will 
receive the same earning loss benefit as the injured worker. 
Following the five- to 18-year statutory period, the spouse 
will receive the same earnings loss benefits as injured 
workers. These earning loss benefits will be indexed 
annually and paid until age 65. The additional 10 per cent of 
the earning loss payment will be set aside and paid as an 
annuity at age 65. 
 
(While referring to an incoming amendment 19) Spouses 
will also be able to retain the employee’s benefit of Canada 
Pension survivor benefits. Spouses currently receiving undue 
hardship benefits can continue under the current program or 
elect for benefits under the new program. Current Act, 
spouses not receiving undue hardship benefits will also be 
eligible to apply for the new program. 

 
So I’m advised that the reason why the amendment as you propose 
would be difficult, is it could find us in a position where the 
surviving spouse could end up receiving more than the injured 
worker would have received. And that was the recommendation of 
the committee, that they should become level and equal. 
 
And so I would recommend against the amendment as proposed. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Again, Mr. Minister, it’s not clear to me how the 
amendment would put the surviving spouse, the widow, in a better 
position than the injured worker, should the injured worker still be 
alive. All I’m suggesting is that the surviving spouse be provided 
opportunity for training, and that the annuity being set aside 
applies for the whole period of the receipt of benefits, not just that 
period beginning after the five- or 18-year statutory period. That’s 
not clear to me. 
 
Or are you assuring me that the intent that I’m proposing in the 
amendment is currently being honoured and will be honoured with 
this legislation, by the board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that the situation could exist in 
the following way, that for the 18 years without reductions in the 
benefit that would go to that surviving spouse, a new job could be 
obtained at a higher salary, or you could continue working at your 
existing job at the same salary. You could remarry and that could 
put you in a different position as well. So those three, one of those 
three could in some way contribute to a higher amount. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, I hear your response and I assume 

that that means that the amendment will not receive with approval. 
I would simply point out that the reason for the 18-year statutory 
period is to recognize that for that period, it only applies for a time 
in which the child is at home and going to school. 
 
And respecting the intent of workers’ compensation, Mr. Minister, 
I don’t think there’s anything about my amendment that 
contradicts the ability of the widow to still raise the family and 
then after the family has reached the 18-year age to then get out 
and look for work in the market-place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m further advised that the amendment as 
proposed . . . or the amendment as contained in the Act will put 
Saskatchewan in a position where the surviving spouse will 
receive higher benefits in Saskatchewan than any other place in 
the world under this. So from that point of view, I think that is 
commendable. I would suggest . . . number one. 
 
And number two, you asked, to perhaps add to that a little bit 
more, I simply say that I think if we’re the highest in the world, 
perhaps, that’s pretty good. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 15 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 16 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to Clause 19. Moved by 
the member from Moose Jaw North. 
 

Amend Section 19 of the printed Bill by striking out all of 
the words after “is amended by” and substituting the 
following: 
 
striking out all the words after “the injury”, and substituting 
the following: 
 
one-half of any disability benefits relative to the injury that a 
worker is receiving under the Canada Pension Plan or the 
Quebec Pension Plan, as amended from time to time, shall be 
considered as wages that the worker is capable of earning in 
calculating the compensation to be paid by the board for loss 
of earning capacity. 

 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I bring forth this amendment 
in recognition of the relationship between the recommendation of 
the committee and the proposal in the Bill. The committee 
recommended that widows should be entitled to retain all, 100 per 
cent of Canada Pension Plan benefits. The committee also 
recommended that injured workers should be given the option of 
taking those benefits or not, but if they did take them that they 
would lose an equivalent amount from their workers’ 
compensation payments. 
 
However, what comes forth in the Bill is a bit of a variation from 
that. In order to provide an incentive to injured workers, section 19 
of the Bill allows workers to retain half of the Canada Pension 
Plan benefits. However, 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2657 
 

it also only allows widows to retain half of Canada Pension Plan 
benefits, and that clearly was in direct contradiction to the 
recommendation of the committee, which recommended that 
widows should be allowed to maintain all of the benefits. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Chairman, would mean that it would honour 
the spirit of both the Bill and the committee, the Bill allowing 
workers to retain half of Canada Pension Plan benefits, but with 
this amendment, for the widow of a worker to maintain all of the 
Canada Pension Plan benefits. 
 
I simply would like to read into the record very briefly and 
quickly, Mr. Chairman, some indications of support for this 
initiative. A letter delivered to the Minister of Labour on June 22, 
signed by Dave Kjersem, president of the Saskatchewan Strip 
Miners Union, and he says in part: 
 

I have been instructed by our membership to urge that you 
change the Worker’s Compensation Board Law so that the 
widows of workers who have died on the job get to keep 
their full Canada Pension Plan without any deductions from 
the Workers Compensation Payments. 
 
We are told that you have a bill in the House, but on this 
point it is only going halfway. 
 
We respectfully urge that you go all the way on this 
amendment. There is no one that would begrudge seeing our 
widows getting their full entitlement to both plans. 
 
We have lost two Brothers at our mine. We do not want their 
widows to be two-bitted in this area. We are coal miners and 
are constantly aware that any of us could be next. 
 
Please change the bill to make it full for our surviving 
spouses. 

 
Another letter delivered the same day to the Minister of Labour 
signed by Randy Marchard, president of the Roche Percee Coal 
Miners Union, and again I’ll read in part: 
 

I am instructed by the June membership meeting of the union 
to write to you and urge, yet again, that your government 
enact legislation that permits the surviving spouse to keep 
benefits received from Canada Pension Plan without 
suffering any financial cutbacks from the Workers’ 
Compensation Board entitlements. 
 
We are advised that you have proposed an amendment which 
begins to recognize this principle, but that you have only 
gone halfway. No one would object to surviving spouses 
receiving the benefit of this payment in full. 
 
You will be aware that the review committee was unanimous 
in their recommendation and the employer with whom we 
negotiate has no objections. 

I also read into the record a letter from that employer, Mr. 
Minister, a letter dated May 5 and directed to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board regarding the appeal by a Mona Ganje, and 
it reads in part: 
 

As employer of the late Lester Ganje, we wish to indicate our 
support for the unreduced continuation of Mrs. Mona 
Ganjes’ survivors benefits provided her under the Workers 
Compensation Act of Saskatchewan. 
 
In view of the unanimous recommendation of the Workers 
Compensation Act Review Committee which reads as 
follows: 

 
And I’ll just quote one sentence that’s related: 
 

The committee disagrees with the practice of deducting 
fatality benefits awarded to a surviving spouse under the 
Canada Pension Plan because it believes that benefits 
received by surviving spouses should not be subject to 
deduction . . . 
 
We respectfully request that until such time as the Minister 
has dealt with this recommendation, a moratorium be placed 
on such reduction. 

 
And it’s signed by K.D. Mahoney, manager of human resources 
for Prairie Coal Ltd. 
 
And finally I’d like to read into the record in support of this 
amendment as well, Mr. Minister, a letter from Mona Ganje dated 
January 22 of this year to the Premier. And in part she says: 
 

The purpose of my meeting with you is to yet again request 
that your government bring in amendments to the Workers’ 
Compensation Act to amend (the) legislation so that the 
widow’s benefits I currently receive from the Workers’ 
Compensation Board are not reduced because of the $284.46 
I receive as a widow’s benefit from (the) Canada Pension 
Plan. 

 
She goes on to say: 
 

In September of 1986, the Workers’ Compensation Board, 
Committee of Review filed a report with the Minister of 
Labour which made a number of recommendations. One of 
the recommendations was that a surviving spouse in my 
circumstance should not lose widow’s benefits from 
Workers’ Compensation Board simply because I am also 
receiving surviving spouses’ benefits from the Canada 
Pension Plan. 
 
My information is that to carry out this recommendation 
requires legislative changes and, while your government has 
had the report from some 16 months now and while there 
have been no amendments to improve my lot or the lot of 
other surviving spouses, I’m increasingly encountering 
financial hardship and really need this money. You may not 
appreciate this but when you are widowed and have three 
children, there are increased costs for me in raising my 
family that 

  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2658 
 

one would not encounter if our family were still full. 
 
She later concludes by saying: 
 

In the year that my husband died, so did 28 others; most of 
them were likely men leaving widows such as myself. Under 
the circumstances, we think we have a right to expect that 
your government would implement changes that have been 
recommend by a Committee established under your 
government. 

 
Mr. Minister, these people explain the rationale for the amendment 
more effectively than I could. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I make a couple of observations. Number 
one, I think the hon. member would have to admit that 
Saskatchewan benefits under these amendments will be the 
highest there are in the world. 
 
With this committee recommendation, what the board wishes to 
do is to maintain, as I indicated before, at equal level, the benefits 
of the surviving spouse with what the worker would receive. And 
that’s exactly what this would do. It recommends that the injured 
worker would get his contributions to Canada pension and the 
spouse would get exactly the same amount. And that’s why we put 
it that way — keep them equal. And I would suggest that it is 
appropriate to keep them equal, and the benefits are in fact the 
richest in the world. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 19 agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I just wanted to ask a question, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
saddened by the two amendments to see the members of 
government voting against widows, in effect. That’s the effect of 
that vote. And I’m surprised that with the Premier sitting in the 
House as well, that it didn’t give . . . wasn’t given . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member is not to make reference 
to absence or presence of members in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, section 20 is an amendment to 
section 104 of the Act, and it seems to . . . it is explained as 
providing the discretion for the board to withhold payment of 
benefits to workers in certain cases. Now it’s interesting that in the 
amendment that’s in the Bill, it says: 
 

The board may suspend payment to a worker or a dependent 
spouse of a worker . . . 

 
And I underline that — or a dependent spouse of a worker. And 
then it goes on to say, for a cause unrelated . . . if the worker “is 
unavailable for employment for a cause unrelated to the injury.” 
 
Mr. Minister, in the interests of time, can I just give you two or 
three questions at the same time and ask you to respond to them 
all. Why was it seen appropriate to 

include the phrase “or a dependent spouse” in this amendment? 
That’s a significant change from the previous legislation, and 
you’re not impacting only on workers, but their dependent spouses 
as well. 
 
And can you also answer, Mr. Minister . . . do you want these 
together? Would you prefer them together? Okay. What cases . . . 
the example that’s used in the explanatory notes, it refers to 
incarceration, etc. My question is: what’s etc.? What’s the rest of 
the list? Because this is obviously giving discretionary powers to 
the board to withhold payment. So what other cases besides 
incarceration? 
 
And I ask, would you please define for me those other cases and 
why it’s felt that the board needs to have this prerogative. 
 
Would you also just answer a very basic question for me. Does 
this mean that a worker with a broken leg, for example, has to sit 
by the phone waiting for a job offer for an employer who’s 
looking for a guy with a broken leg to come and do a job for him? 
That may sound facetious or ridiculous, but when I look at the 
wording of the clause here before us, it does seem to leave itself 
open to that potential interpretation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This is, I’m advised, would be used in rare 
situations, as the explanatory notes talk about incarceration. Or 
let’s take a case of somebody that was deported, or something like 
that — that type of situation. Very rare case, but it’s a . . . would 
be broad enough to cover that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Can you think of anything else then, besides 
incarceration or deportation? This is a question that is of concern 
to some people because it gives discretionary powers to the board 
and doesn’t define what causes unrelated to the injury are. You 
said incarceration, you’ve said deportation. Can you think of any 
other possible reasons that the injured worker and the dependent 
spouse — and would you please explain that too, Mr. Minister — 
why they could be deprived of benefits? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would like to ask, Mr. Chairman, for the 
approval to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1645) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce a 
special guest in the House today, Miss Noreen Coghlan from 
Ireland, who teaches at the Montessori school here in Regina. 
She’s been teaching here for the past year and Noreen will be 
leaving to go back to Ireland at the end of the term. So I just want 
all members to join with me in welcoming her here today and 
wishing her a safe return to Ireland. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2659 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation 
Act, 1979 

 
Clause 20 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the main focus of this, 
as I indicated to the hon. member was the incarceration type 
situation, deportation was another one. Nothing else is really 
available to me at this point in time. I would . . . Perhaps the best I 
could do is when the Minister of Labour returns. I could have him 
undertake to perhaps answer that question to you in writing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the reason for dependent spouse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The reason for dependent spouse is the 
same type of situation. Dependent spouse falls into that same 
category herself or the individual falls into the same category, not 
the injured worker. The spouse then has to be the one that would, 
let’s say, was incarcerated, for example, and that would be treated 
exactly the same . . . only after the 18-year period, not during that 
18-year period. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — . . . (inaudible) . . . If an injured worker is receiving 
benefits, is incarcerated during that period of time, but it’s within 
that 18-year period, that will not deny the spouse of receiving 
those benefits that are being, in effect, paid to the family. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The only thing is, the spouse to get the 
benefit, the injured worker would have to be deceased. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The injured worker is alive but in jail . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In that case the benefit goes to whoever is 
getting the benefit, not to the spouse. The spouse only comes into 
it when they become a survivor. 
 
Clause 20 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 21 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 84 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

Certain Acts and the Passing of Certain Orders and 
Regulations pursuant to The Government Organization Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, my official is Ron Hewitt 
from Executive Council. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I do not propose to hold this 
Bill up for any great length of time, but I do have 

some questions that I will ask of the minister, and I’m sure that the 
answers will not be difficult or take any long time to answer. 
 
The point that I make, again, is that the damage has already been 
done, and when a bill is referred to as consequential amendments 
to another Bill more commonly known as Bill 5, I think it’s pretty 
clear to all members of this House that these are amendments 
which are apropos to a Bill which was passed here in 1986, I think 
in the fall session of 1986 or ’87, which gave powers to the 
government which no government ought to have, totally 
contradictory to the principles of parliamentary democracy. 
 
And the period of time leading up to the budget of 1987, in which 
time the government devastated programs in Saskatchewan, 
devastated programs like the school-based children’s dental plan; 
destroyed whole departments like the department of co-operation 
and co-operative development because of the authority it gave 
onto itself without ever coming to this legislation — I think all of 
those examples speak for themselves. 
 
They were debated at great length when the Bill 5 was in this 
legislature, you will remember, and the member from Meadow 
Lake obviously remembers. That Bill took a long time to pass 
through this Assembly, and I think the damage of it all has been 
very clear. 
 
I want to just ask the minister on different clauses, as we proceed 
through this Bill, some specific questions rather than doing a lot of 
debating on section or clause 1. But one general question I have is 
an example of what one might call sloppy draftsmanship, or 
sloppiness in putting together this legislation, in that in sections 57 
and 60 there is some reference to amendments to four different 
liquor laws. 
 
Now as far as I can recall, when the new liquor control legislation 
was introduced in the House and passed, some of those laws were 
eliminated. Therefore, Mr. Minister, do you have . . . will you 
have before this House, amendments to repair some of those 
sections because, as far as I am able to determine, they’re not 
going to be relevant any more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What the member says is right except that 
the draftsman has to draft to take into account the existing 
situation. We didn’t know that you were going to support The 
Liquor Act for instance; we thought you might beat us on that one, 
in which case, had he drafted in anticipation of The Liquor Act 
going through, he would have been, you know, drafting 
inappropriate legislation as you’re accusing him of doing now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I’m accusing you. He’s a nice guy; 
he’s a nice guy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Oh, you’re accusing me. I’m sorry. Okay, 
and I’ll talk to him about that. And so, while it’s still appropriate 
because that legislation you’re talking about hasn’t been 
proclaimed. But the minute that it is proclaimed, yes, more 
amendments will have to come back, as I understand it, to deal 
with the consequential to government reorganization. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2660 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think that answers my question, Mr. 
Chairman. It’s obviously a make-work project for the government 
so that the minister can bring back another piece of legislation in 
next session to correct this one. But with that assurance, Mr. 
Chairman, I’m prepared to let us move through clause by clause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder, in the circumstances, unless the 
member has some specific questions as we go through, can we go 
page by page? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s quite all right with me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you. 
 
Pages 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Page 3 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, here’s the first example of 
what’s happening under the administration of this government. 
There was a time when the statute law could be referred to by 
lawyers, and by the public when they were wondering, or needed 
to know, what the status was with regard to powers of government 
in certain departments, or what legislation provided ministers 
certain powers to do certain things; in fact, legislation which 
required ministers to do certain things. 
 
Here we have an example of how that is being totally destroyed 
and unknown powers given to ministers and Executive Council, 
because in section 19 here, clause 19: “The Department of 
Advanced Education and manpower Act is being repealed.” I have 
here in my hand the Act respecting the department of advanced 
education and manpower which has a number of important 
provisions which put constraints on the minister, which give 
direction to the minister of manpower and Education. That is all 
gone. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you tell me, with the repeal of this Act, 
where the provisions that we find in this Act will now be found, if 
it’s found later in this Bill, which I think is very possible. Are all 
of them there, or just certain portions of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — They’re all there. It’s section 19, and 
we’re dealing with The Department of Advanced Education and 
Manpower Act is repealed. One point, section 17, is dealt with in 
the government re-organization Act that we dealt with last session. 
Section 8 is in The Education Act as section 8(1). Sections 9 and 
10 are in The University of Regina Act, and so on. And I can take 
you through the whole list if you like. And if you go over to 
section 83 on page 16 in this Bill, you’ll see that: “The Education 
Act is amended in a manner set forth in this section.” And it sets 
that out there. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I’m looking at 
section 9 of the department of advanced education and manpower 
legislation, which you may or may not have with you, but I think I 
heard you say that this will be provided somewhere else, and I 
would like you to make a specific reference to this because this is 
very important. 

In this Act, which you’re repealing, there is a provision titled: 
academic freedom, section 9 or clause 9: 
 

The universities shall exclusively exercise the powers 
conferred on them in relation to: 
 
the formulation and adoption of their academic policies and 
standards; 
 
the establishment of their standards for admission and 
graduation; and 
 
the selection, appointment, suspension and removal of their 
staff. 

 
Now, needless to say, universities that do not have this kind of 
academic freedom, but may be subject to governmental or other 
outside interference, I think no longer can be classified as 
universities in the truest sense of the word, as they must be. 
 
Now can you tell me specifically where I can find that exact 
provision so that I don’t have to leave this Assembly in the 
greatest of fear that you or one of your colleagues will interfere 
with the academic freedom of our universities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There is nothing would cause me more 
discomfort than to cause my honourable colleague . . . cause him 
discomfort. So I invite you to go to page 42 and 43 of this Bill and 
look at section 106, The University of Regina Act, and section 
107, The University of Saskatchewan Act, where those very 
provisions were taken out, directly out of the previous Acts, 
continuing education, or whatever it was, Education Act, and now 
put into The University of Regina Act and The University of 
Saskatchewan Act. 
 
Page 3 agreed to. 
 
Page 4 agreed to. 
 
Page 5 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, there is another issue there 
that I think fits into the overall debate of . . . over your plunge into 
privatization at the expense of everything else that’s important in 
Saskatchewan. This is the repealing of The Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development Act, which is a 
department in Saskatchewan that has been very significant and an 
important department. This now no longer exists. I think that 
clearly indicates the priorities, or the lack of priorities, that your 
government puts into the co-operative movement in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s regrettable because the reason, as my leader has often said 
so eloquently, why Saskatchewan is the way it is because we’ve 
used every single economic lever available to us to build this 
province to something special. We’ve used the private sector and 
we’ve used the public sector and, importantly, we’ve used the 
co-operative sector. Now here you are, doing away with 
Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development Act. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2661 
 

Now you may say that it’s found somewhere else, and if you do, 
I’d like to know where it is. But the point that I’m making is this: 
that even just having the separate piece of legislation is significant 
in itself because it truly shows the priority that any government 
would give to the co-operative system in Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact that you feel compelled to do away with this legislation 
that establishes a department, even though you bury some sections 
of it in some other bigger piece of legislation, I think clearly say 
that the priorities that your government has given to the co-op 
movement are very low, if they exist at all. And I think that’s very 
regrettable because that’s a very important economic level that we 
have always had in Saskatchewan, and I hope we’ll have for a 
long time to come. 
 
So can you tell me where this may be covered, and whether all of 
it, as it is here in my hand, is covered in some other section of this 
Bill or some other Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In the old Act, department of 
co-operation and co-operative development is repealed; while in 
that Act, section 5(a) of the old Act is found in the Act, Economic 
Development and Tourism, 9(1). Or maybe it’s (i) — I think it’s 
got a dot over it. 
 
Old 5(b) is now found in 5(f) of The Consumer and corporate 
(Commercial) Affairs Act; old 5(c) is now 5(e) in The Consumer 
and corporate (Commercial) Affairs Act. And so on. I can go 
through the whole list if you like. 
 
The responsibility of the old Act was essentially split, and those 
areas dealing with regulation relative to business registration and 
so on are in consumer and Commercial Affairs, as is the case with 
other businesses, and those businesses relative to co-operative 
development are in Economic Development and business and 
trade, whatever we call that new department. And I guess, suffice 
to say that actions always speak far louder than words, and our 
record in co-operative development, I think, deserves some 
comparison. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — One item, and I will ask it on this bill . . . I 
could do it on The Department of Culture and Recreation Act, a 
department which . . . Act which you are doing away with; I could 
ask it on The Department of Education Act, an Act which you are 
doing away with; an Act to continue Department of the 
Environment, an Act which you’re doing away with in your 
wrecking-ball approach to government. 
 
In all of those there is a provision, as I see, in clause 7 of this 
Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development Act, 
which limits the amount of grant of money that the minister can 
make to a certain amount. In this case the minister can make 
grants up to $5,000 subject to the approval of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you tell me where that restriction is 
provided now that this legislation is going to be gone? 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. In the old scheme of things, in 
almost every department that limit was $10,000; some 
departments were 5. In the new scheme of things, it’s been 
standardized across the board at 10, and it’s found in the 
government reorganization Act, Bill 5 of the previous session. 
And I don’t remember the section, but I think 16 or 17. Thank 
you. 
 
Page 5 agreed to. 
 
Pages 6 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 12 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, no doubt there is a quick 
answer to this one. It is indicating here in subsection 12, section 43 
of, I believe, The Education Act, is repealed. Section 43 of The 
Revenue and Financial Services Act is repealed. 
 
Section 43 is that provision which required the tabling of an 
annual report for the department of revenues and financial 
services. Can you tell me where this requirement will now be 
legally found in order that the Minister of Finance cannot hide his 
annual report in the same way that he has tended to hide his Public 
Accounts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, in all cases this is covered by Bill 
5, The Government Organization Act. Okay. Except in the old 
scheme of things, Finance, Executive Council, and Provincial 
Secretary were not required to table an annual report. Since 
revenue was rolled into Finance, we took the view that it was part 
of Finance and therefore does not have to table an annual report. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m looking at your Act, which was An Act 
respecting the Organization of the Executive Government of 
Saskatchewan, Bill 5, and it is indeed found in clause 21, requiring 
the tabling of annual reports. 
 
Let me just get this clear though. Are you saying that there will no 
longer have to be a report tabled for the department of revenue and 
financial services, or that portion of a new department which 
involves the revenue and financial services function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told that it’s been covered off in 
regulation, that those three departments, Finance, Executive 
Council, and Provincial Secretary . . . I’m told have never filed 
annual reports, ever. And so . . . but it’s covered in regulation, not 
in legislation. Legislation, I think, tells you that we file annual 
reports, except we’re exempted. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — But the department of revenue and financial 
services has always has had a report tabled. It has been a 
requirement that it table a report. It was in the legislation. That part 
of the Act is being repealed, Mr. Minister. Why? Why is it you 
would no longer want to be required to table an annual report for 
the department of revenue and financial services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The position taken by Finance, and of 
course it follows that we do, or we wouldn’t have done it this way, 
is that Finance, Executive Council and 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2662 
 

Provincial Secretary have never filed annual reports. Finance’s 
annual report, in effect, is the economic statement done by the 
Department of Finance, the Public Accounts documents, and the 
budget and Estimates done here in the House. 
 
And so it was determined for those reasons, that since revenue is 
now part of Finance, that they would not file an annual report and 
are therefore excepted. Finance, Provincial Secretary and 
Executive Council, I’m sorry. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I understand why Provincial Secretary 
no longer files a report. There is nothing in it but your political 
operation. For that, I’m sure, I would not want to file an annual 
report either. 
 
But I want to express my concern about taking a department, 
which was in this case the department of Revenue and financial 
services, putting into another department which was part of 
reorganization — and I accept that — but automatically at that 
point then saying it will no longer have to table an annual report. 
Because that’s just another piece of information on government 
expenditures and government collecting of taxes which will no 
longer be available to the public in the form that it was — easily 
accessible and easily understood. 
 
Now your Minister of Finance is going to take that information, 
bury it in his budget somewhere, probably not include most of it 
there, keeping information from the public which the public ought 
to have the right to know. Now that’s no way for a responsible 
government to function. That may be the way your government 
functions, Mr. Minister. I can certainly assure the viewers and for 
the Hansard record for those who may check it some day, that that 
would not be the position of our government when we are sitting 
on the other side of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, there are some things that 
make us different, there’s no doubt about that. Let me say that the 
questions that you raise show up in detail in Public Accounts, and 
you have the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . never wanted it. I’m not chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You have, your side. And so I think we’re 
on one of those courses where we’re just going to slip past one 
another in the night without really coming to agreement on this 
issue. 
 
Page 12 agreed to. 
 
Pages 13 to 45 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clauses 115 and 116 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


