


















































June 24, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 24, 1988 
 

2513 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, through you, and to the members 
of the Assembly, I would like to introduce a couple, Tanley and 
Peter Klassen, and Ron Klassen from the Glenbush area in the 
north-west part of my riding. They’re here for the farm progress 
show, and I hope that they find this morning and plus the 
entertainment of the progress show and the Assembly 
interesting and entertaining. 
 
And I’d like to ask all members to please welcome my guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I have two groups I’d 
like to introduce to you this morning, and through you to the 
other members of the House. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and to the other members, a group from 
Marian High School in Regina, 28 students from grade 11. 
They are with their teacher Erwin Ottenbreit, as well as Denise 
Barrette-Morasse and Jocelyn Moisan. 
 
I’d like to point out, Mr. Speaker, to you, and I’m sure many 
people know that Marian High School has not only an excellent 
academic record but is also noted for its athletics, as well as arts 
and music. We’re delighted to have the students from grade 11 
in Marian High School with us today. 
 
I’ll be joining them later for pictures and for discussions. So 
please welcome our friends from Marian High School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — And, Mr. Speaker, a group of youngsters from 
St. Andrew Elementary School. There are 23 plus 18, I guess, is 
41, and we have grades 3 and grades 4. They are with their 
teachers Lorraine Ferrara and Patricia Fox; chaperons Joan 
Lichtenwald, Giena Ludwig, Alma Dizy, and Stephanie Molloy. 
These students are from St. Andrew Elementary School. 
 
I’ll be joining them at 11 o’clock for pictures. I certainly hope 
you enjoy yourself here today. I’m sure you’re looking forward 
to just the next couple of days — school must almost be out, I 
would think, at this late stage in June. At any rate, enjoy 
yourself here today. I’m looking forward to speaking to you 
later this morning. 
 
Please join me in welcoming our students from St. Andrew 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contracts with Dome Advertising 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Acting 
Premier. Mr. Minister, can you tell me if it’s the policy of your 
government to enter into contracts with Dome Advertising to 

pay advertising fees for services that aren’t rendered, and if this 
is not the case, Mr. Minister, can you tell us why the traffic 

safety services branch did so for at least six months in 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, a detailed question like 
that is difficult for a person to understand. I think the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, let me put it to you this 
way. The government, like all governments and governments 
before us, have one or two agents of record to do with the 
advertising, and that should not come as a surprise to anybody 
in this Assembly. It’s been going on for perhaps 45 years in this 
province. The members like to flog about that. 
 
With regard to the exact details, with regard to the details of the 
particular question, I will undertake to look into that, Mr. 
Speaker. Dome provides advertising. They are paid for their 
advertising. They are not paid for advertising they do not do. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Well, Mr. Minister, I’m very 
surprised by your answer. I have here a series of invoices from 
Dome, dating from January of 1986, billing that part of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) a $4,500 monthly 
consulting fee. I also have here a letter from the head of that 
department saying that there’s no service rendered for that 
money and that he no longer wishes to pay for it. 
 
Given that information, Mr. Minister, how can you stand in 
your place and deny you know nothing. That kind of creative 
bookkeeping is going on, and it seems to me that you don’t care 
enough to be concerned, Mr. Minister, what are you covering 
up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier that 
we have to be very cautious . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. We’re having a little difficulty 
hearing the minister, and I’m sure we all want to hear his 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, one learns in this 
Assembly not to take what the members say at face value. 
Earlier this week we had the member from Regina North 
talking about a perfectly good Highways building that was no 
longer being used, and a new one being built. Now we found 
out following question period that in fact the building had been 
condemned and torn down, Mr. Speaker, months ago. 
 
And so that’s the type of information — misinformation they 
advance before this House. I told the hon. member I would look 
into the invoices that she is alleging, look at them, and I am 
sure, Mr. Speaker, I am sure, Mr. Speaker, we will find her 
evidence, her allegations and her information wanting, just like 
we saw wanting in the member from Regina North. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2514 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I’d like to quote from a letter signed by a Mr. D. R. Kuss, 
legislative adviser to SGI, dated August 15, 1986, and that letter 
says: 
 

Having paid the invoices under the mistaken assumption 
that we owed the debt set out in the invoices, we would be 
entitled in a civil action to recover the money so paid as 
money paid under the state of fact. 

 
Mr. Minister, your government has paid at least $27,000 to 
Dome Advertising for services that were never rendered; that is 
a fact. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to know what steps you have taken on 
behalf of the taxpayers of this province to recover at least 
$27,000 to Dome Advertising, who we all know is the 
advertising agent of record for the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I once again say: (a) we 
have learned many times over not to take what the members say 
in question period at face value. They have consistently, 
consistently said something in question period, only to find out 
the day later their facts were all wrong. I suspect in this case 
that’s exactly what is going to happen. 
 
I told the member that I would undertake to look into this. I 
would guess, Mr. Speaker, that the information they have is 
wrong once again today. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Acting Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, can you tell this House how many 
other government departments and Crown corporations are 
making payments to Dome Advertising for services that are 
never rendered? What is the amount of those payments, and 
what exactly is Dome doing with this money that’s being paid 
for services that are never rendered? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, every 
government in the last 45 years in this province has used agents 
of record. In their case it was Struthers Associates and Dunsky. 
Okay. And they spent, on a 1982 dollars, more in advertising, 
clearly, than we have used in advertising, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 
fact. 
 
The reality, Mr. Speaker, is we employ people to provide 
advertising for the government. That’s been going on for some 
time. And we pay them, Mr. Speaker, according to the work 
that they’ve done. And that’s, I’m sure, the case in this 
situation. 
 

Health Care Crisis 
 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister of Health and the Premier, I direct my question to the 
Acting Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, for some three months now my colleagues 
 

and I have been bringing to this House case after case of 
Saskatchewan people who are suffering because of the health 
care crisis that your government created. These people have 
urged us to bring these matters before the House for public 
scrutiny and because they see it as the court of last resort. But 
they can’t get satisfaction, not from the Minister of Health, not 
from the Premier; in fact, not from any members on that side of 
the House. 
 
One last time, Mr. Minister, I’m going to raise the case of Mrs. 
Klotz, a 76-year-old woman from Unity who needs a total hip 
replacement. I first raised this question on April 27 and a couple 
of times since. And this woman still has no bed, Mr. Minister. 
 
Her daughter writes that: 
 

The constant pain, together with the present temperature 
and weather conditions, give cause for her to sleep very 
little. We can see her determination fade and despair set in. 

 
What are you doing to do for her, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. I 
believe you said the name was Mrs. Klotz, and there’s other 
people out there as well. I think the Minister of Health has said 
on several occasions that there are pressures on two key areas in 
waiting lists that they are trying to come to grips with. One is 
for hip replacements and the other one is for cataracts. 
 
Now the minister has indicated that there are additional moneys 
were going to Saskatoon, that the hospitals were going to be 
staying open longer, attempting to come to grips with that 
particular question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can only say to the hon. member and to the lady involved, is 
that we are doing as much as we can. We are attempting to deal 
with those issues as quickly as possible. I will look into the 
particular matter of this particular case, if you would send this 
over to me, and I will see what we can do to expedite it even 
further, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you’re not acting quickly enough. People are suffering in the 
interim. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  

Everybody Wins 
 
Ms. Simard: — But meanwhile, tomorrow you’ll be holding a 
gala event in Saskatoon to kick off your new healthy life-styles 
program entitled “Everybody wins.” Now I agree, a life-styles 
program is necessary, Mr. Minister, but why do you need a gala 
opening to announce it, Mr. Minister? 
 
And I ask you: who wins? Is it Mrs. Klotz who wins? Is it Anna 
Wudrick, the Saskatoon cancer patient we raised? Is it Betty 
Shaw, the Saskatoon woman with cataracts in   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2515 
 

both eyes? Mrs. Skerrett of Saskatoon, who couldn’t get her 
prescription drugs paid for? Is it Mrs. Shepherd, who couldn’t 
even get prescription drugs, Mr. Minister? Is it Isabel Couch, 
the cancer patient, who writes: help, help, I need help. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, who wins? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say two 
things: I would encourage the member from Regina Lakeview 
to watch TV tomorrow and she will find out whether her 
predictions are in fact true, and I would ask her as well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask her as well, as she’s looking at that, see if 
any of the health organizations, whether they’re nurses or 
doctors or people working in various fields of health, are in 
support of the program or against the program. 
 
Now clearly the NDP are on record as being against any kind of 
move that we would do to encourage healthier life-styles. Now 
that seems to be out of sync with many, many people in society 
that believe healthier life-styles lead towards more preventative 
medicine, more preventative measures, and that in the end 
encourages everyone to live a healthier life-style on the one 
hand, Mr. Speaker, and on the other hand takes less out of the 
health care system and budget so there’s more to be applied to 
others. 
 
So I’m not sure what this program is, but if she says everybody 
wins, I suggest to the hon. member that to encourage healthier 
life-styles there are few people that lose under that type of a 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’ll 
tell you who wins, it’s Roberts & Poole and companies like 
Dome Advertising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I have here your fancy, lipstick, 
heart-embossed invitation to your gala event tomorrow to 
launch your “Everybody Wins” program. And I note, Mr. 
Minister, it’s an RSVP invitation. 
 
Instead of spending all this money of self-congratulatory praise 
and promotion on gala events, why don’t you use the money for 
the people who need it, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, on 
behalf of the many thousands of people in Saskatchewan who 
are losers under your health care policies, here’s my reply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, order. Order, 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 
Lakeview is in a snit because she gets an invitation, and she’d 
be in a snit if she didn’t get an invitation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would hope the member 
from Regina Lakeview would listen even to some of her other 
colleagues that have called . . . I’d look at the member from 
Saskatoon University, who has called for this back in 1978 and 
’79. Mr. Speaker, I would hope that she would even talk to 
some of her own colleagues that don’t subscribe to (a) that type 
of a tactic, but also believe that healthier life-styles and the 
promotion of healthier life-styles is in fact a modern technique 
used in the field of medicine. And I would hope that she would 
get her head out of the sand and look into the future as things 
that you can do in a forward-looking way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contract of CEO of Develcon 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question was for 
the minister responsible for SEDCO, and in her absence I’ll go 
to the acting minister, whoever that is. 
 
It concerns the . . . It follows up on the lack of answers Tuesday 
in question period . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The Minister of Finance is in a frisky mood. 
Maybe he can answer this question. It follows up on a question 
asked Tuesday of the Minister of Science and Technology, who 
didn’t have the answer then. 
 
Can the minister responsible confirm that the new president and 
chief executive officer of Develcon, whose name is Richard 
MacPherson, has been given an employment contract which 
sees him collect the following: a base salary of $150,000 a year; 
a minimum $75,000 a year bonus; a minimum salary of 
$225,000 a year; plus $50,000 in relocation costs and a Cadillac 
with all expenses paid and up to $50,000 for leaving his former 
employment early, and a $225,000 severance package — all 
this to head a company which receives $7 million in taxpayers’ 
money from SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation) and then turned around and laid off 32 employees. 
Is this in fact, Mr. Minister, the compensation package signed 
between Develcon and Mr. MacPherson, and how in the world 
can that be justified? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
says that I didn’t answer the question when it was asked back 
on Tuesday. And I will give him the same response that I did at 
that time. But I will, however, add just a little bit more to it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the first place, I’m sure, as the member opposite knows, that 
the salaries of management within companies certainly is an 
internal matter and nothing to do with this government, but I 
would also point out the fact that it’s our understanding that the 
salary that’s being paid to Mr. MacPherson is not out of line 
with the industry norm, given his qualifications, experience, and 
background. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. MacPherson left 
one of the Fortune 10 companies at a 30 per cent   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2516 
 

reduction in pay to take up this challenge. And we think that 
we’re pretty fortunate to have a person of this calibre involved 
in our high-tech industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would just say in a conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll stack 
this man up against the David Dombowsky’s and their salaries 
under the previous administration any time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — New question to the minister. I guess we 
could class Mr. MacPherson as one of the winners, couldn’t we. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I want to know, Mr. Minister, whether your 
government approved that employment contract with Mr. 
MacPherson. And I ask that question in light of the agreement 
between Fairfax and DEI Holdings Limited and SEDCO, which 
contains the clause: 
 

All new employment agreements entered into with 
existing management employees must be on terms 
acceptable to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
I want to know specifically whether the government approved 
that contract with Mr. MacPherson, and how do you justify 
such an outrageous contract to the taxpayers who bankrolled 
Develcon to the tune of $7 million, and to the 32 employees 
which Mr. MacPherson almost immediately laid off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the 
member opposite that when you look at the past record of the 
company Develcon, that over the last three years that they have 
lost in excess of $16 million. I would think that one of the first 
things that any management would want to do would be to take 
a look at the general operation of the company and, in fact, take 
steps to make sure that the company again becomes a viable 
operation. 
 
So the fact that there were some employees laid off certainly is 
unfortunate. But at the same time, we have to consider that 
Develcon has now centralized their operations in Saskatoon. All 
of the members of Develcon or employees of Develcon that 
were laid off certainly are not in Saskatoon, or were not in 
Saskatoon. They were from other arms of the operation. 
Everything has now been centralized within the city of 
Saskatoon, and in fact I think that we’re very fortunate that 
Develcon is going to be maintaining its operations in Saskatoon 
and that it has centralized everything there. 
 
There’s no doubt about it, that it’s a good company. It has good 
products and excellent employees, and we certainly look 
forward to it being a good operation in the future. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I take it, Mr. 
Minister, from your two answers, that the government knew 
about this employment contract and approved it in advance. 
And it’s small wonder indeed that you refuse to 
 

make public the details of management contracts throughout the 
system, if this is the amount that you’re approving for 
management jobs in this province — small wonder indeed. 
 
Your government likes to claim that it protected the jobs of 
Develcon workers with this refinancing, and ministers of the 
Crown have said so. The fact is, in the agreement you did the 
exact opposite. On page 8 of the agreement you signed with 
Fairfax holdings, it is provided as follows: 
 

the prior consent of the Government of Saskatchewan shall 
be required in any reduction in excess of 25 per cent of 
employees resident in Saskatchewan so long as the 
SEDCO debentures remain outstanding. 

 
In other words, Fairfax could cut loose up to 25 per cent of 
Develcon’s work force and still keep the $7 million paid out by 
SEDCO on behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why in the world did SEDCO sign a deal 
which sells out 25 per cent of the Develcon work force in this 
fashion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 
of course, seems to have a good deal more information about 
this particular deal. And as I understand it, the Leader of the 
Opposition was provided with a good bit of information. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that the agreement does state that the 
number of employees must be maintained at a rate of no less 
than 75 per cent. And I would hope that as time goes on, that as 
Develcon gets back on its feet, that in fact that they will be 
increasing the number of employees that they have. 
 
I would also point out to the hon. member that he’s well aware 
of the fact that Develcon is a private company; it trades on the 
stock-market, and certainly it is not their responsibility to 
divulge all of the details of contracts that they have between 
their management and themselves. 
 

Death of Assiniboia Child 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Acting Premier. The members of the House will know, Mr. 
Minister, of the tragic death this week of a four-year-old child 
from Assiniboia after a tonsil operation, and I’m sure we would 
all want to extend our sincere sympathy to the bereaved family. 
 
There have been suggestions, Mr. Minister, that in some way 
our health care system, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, 
failed in this tragedy. And I would like to have your assurance 
that every aspect of this tragedy is going to be fully investigated 
to determine what went so tragically wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I thank you for the question to the hon. 
member. I was apprised of that unfortunate tragedy this 
morning, and I think we all would share, with that family, 
sympathy for the loss of their young child. 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2517 
 

I think in fairness, even to the hon. member, that clearly this is 
most likely something that would be investigated through an 
inquest into that type of situation. Certainly we would all want 
to see what in fact happened and what we could do in the future 
to prevent any recurrence of that. If it in fact related to 
equipment, as one saw in the Leader-Post this morning, then 
clearly those types of things have to be grappled with. 
 
I would want not want to (a) because of lack of knowledge, and 
(b) because of perhaps further action to be taken, would not 
want to get into speculating any further on that, but I would 
share with you the sympathy to the family and, I would think, 
from all members of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the minister’s 
response. As the minister has noted, it has been reported that 
there was a problem with anaesthetic equipment that hasn’t 
apparently been working for some period of time in the local 
Assiniboia hospital, and that if it had been working, that the 
circumstances might have been different. 
 
In view of that reported information, Mr. Minister, and all of 
the tragic circumstances around this case, could I ask you to 
ensure that it is brought immediately and directly to the 
attention of the Minister of Health, and that no stone is left 
unturned to get to the bottom of this situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Clearly, the Minister of Health apprised 
me of that issue this morning prior to leaving for Lloydminster. 
I had an opportunity to briefly read the article in the 
Leader-Post, indicating that the anaesthetic equipment had 
failed, that it has in disuse for some four years. That certainly 
raises questions, I think, in anybody’s mind as (a) why was this 
equipment not used, and then, when used, why it was not 
properly checked over a period of time. 
 
I mean, there’s many questions that are raised, and certainly the 
Minister of Health is looking and prepared to try to find an 
answer and get to the bottom of why that was in fact happening. 
And I again only try to assure the member, and to his 
constituent and family of the unfortunate accident, that we will 
do what we can to get to the bottom of that and try to solve that 
for any future opportunities. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Advanced Forage Payment 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just have a 
brief announcement I believe is important to the farmers of rural 
Saskatchewan, and I would just like to take a moment of the 
House to do it. 
 
On behalf of the Hon. John Wise, federal Minister of 
Agriculture, and the Government of Saskatchewan, I am 
pleased to announce the following change to the Saskatchewan 
crop insurance in response to this year’s severe drought 
conditions throughout much of the province. This year, because 
of the widespread loss of forage crops, advance payments on 
these crops will be made. 

The advance payment will be in the amount of 50 per cent of 
the insured’s liability and will be sent to the producer on June 
30. The total amount of this pay-out will be approximately $3.7 
million. No premiums will be deducted for advance payment 
accounts, and no interest will be charged on the forage 
premiums. 
 
A statement of indemnity will be prepared in September. At that 
time, final indemnity amounts will be paid for the advance 
payment, and any balances owing on each customer’s crop 
insurance amount deducted. 
 
I’d like to also urge all contract holders who have questions or 
concerns regarding this change, or any other crop insurance 
related matter, to contact their local customer service office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next week we’ll be making some further 
announcement sin regard to crop insurance and feed. But I’d 
also like to say at this time that the crop insurance corporation 
has been, and will be working continuously over the next few 
weeks to put together these programs. The change, and others 
which we are considering, are a result of consultation with 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
Saskatchewan stock growers, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and 
other interested groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to consult closely with these 
groups as they work to respond efficiently and effectively to the 
problems caused by this year’s drought. Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance corporation, the federal government, and the 
Government of Saskatchewan remain deeply committed to 
providing the best possible service to farmers and to the 
agriculture industry in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
welcome another tidbit of announcement from the government 
on the drought problem. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s long 
overdue and it’s insufficient. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The program will help those people who are in 
that situation, and they need help. But there’s thousands of 
other beef producers out there who have been waiting for 
months to hear something about this drought and what this 
government was going to do about it. And what have we got 
here? Another morsel of an announcement. As they’re on their 
knees waiting for something, they’re just throwing out the 
crusts. Because this government believes they let them go right 
down on their knees and then they give them something so they 
appreciate it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Mr. Upshall: — And while I welcome this announcement, I am 
just sick and tired of waiting for this government to do 
something about the drought problem that’s been ongoing in 
this province. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2518 
 

This government and the federal government are not responding 
to the needs, and they should be thoroughly ashamed of 
themselves. Where is the program for adjusting crop insurance? 
Where is the program for hogs and poultry people? Where is the 
program to ensure there’s enough feed grains in Saskatchewan? 
Where is the program to possibly get the . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. I don’t believe that 
this ministerial statement is an opportunity for a wide-ranging 
debate on agriculture policy. I think the . . . Order, order, order. 
Order, order. Order, order. Ministerial statements are intended 
to be brief and factual, and responses are intended to relate to 
that statement, of course. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again, as you will know, 
we tired to get an emergency debate on this. The government 
stopped it. We tried again, and you stopped it. And I’m sick and 
tired of this going on because the farmers in this province need 
help. And it’s disgusting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — We have a number of programs that have been 
. . . the government has been asked to bring forward. This does 
not address the problem. This is something that is necessary, 
that should be included in a full program that we haven’t seen. 
It should be included in a long-term program that we haven’t 
seen. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I simply say that, despite the fact that this 
will help some people, I am thoroughly, thoroughly ashamed of 
watching those people over there leave farmers out on a limb 
and not give them any support that they need in this drought 
situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, because of the profound 
importance of this particular issue in my constituency, I wonder 
if there would be leave of the House for an opportunity for me 
to respond briefly to the minister’s statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? I don’t hear any dissenting 
voices. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 
all hon. members, and I assure you I will be brief. 
 
I would welcome this small change that the minister has made 
with respect to the crop insurance program in so far as it applies 
to forage coverage in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the minister will know, that is a very small part of the crop 
insurance program in Saskatchewan, and the minister has on 
other occasions rather candidly, I think, admitted that there have 
been grave difficulties in Saskatchewan getting a good forage 
program up and running as we would all want to see it, and 
certainly the kind of program for forage that we have in 
Saskatchewan 

falls far short when it’s compared to the program in some other 
provinces; for example, in the province of Alberta. 
 
And I would simply want to advise the minister today that in 
estimates yesterday I asked specifically the Premier of 
Saskatchewan if the drought measures that would be coming 
forward from the government would be based upon some 
expansion of, or modification in, or topping up of, the forage 
provisions within the crop insurance program. 
 
The Premier gave me the assurance yesterday that he did not 
view that as a solution in Saskatchewan because of the 
differences in the program. It might be a solution in Alberta; it 
certainly would not be a solution in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I trust the minister will wait no longer than 
Monday to come forward with the additional changes and the 
additional programming that is obviously required because this 
very, very small change will be of assistance to only a very 
limited few. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, today 
being June 24, I would ask the Assembly for leave to 
acknowledge briefly St. Jean Baptiste day, which is especially 
significant in the life of Saskatchewan’s Fransaskois 
community. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

St. Jean Baptiste Day 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Merci Monsieur 
l’Orateur. 
 
The past several months have, of course, been a turbulent time 
for the Fransaskois in Saskatchewan. 
 
Il y a eu des ordonnances concernant les droits de la minorité de 
la langue officielle et sur la question gouvernant l’éducation 
française. 
 
Il y a eu la profonde déception suite à loi 2 adoptée par le 
gouvernement, et il y a eu le tragique incendie du Collège 
Mathieu. 
 
Il y a également eu, tout récemment, l’annonce d’un accord 
fédéral-provincial concernant les services dans les domaines de 
la langue et de l’éduction en Saskatchewan. 
 
What we’ve seen, of course, Mr. Speaker, is a mixed collection 
in the last number of weeks and months, of good news and bad 
news affecting the Fransaskois, producing a range of emotions 
from excitement and exhilaration to frustration and despair. 
 
En ce jour de 24 Juin, fête de la St. Jean Baptiste, je crois qu’il 
est particulièrement important que la législature s’arrête un 
moment pour réfléchir sur le rôle des Fransaskois dans l’histoire 
de la Saskatchewan et sure leur contribution linguistique et 
culturelle dans notre province. 
 
Souhaitons-leur une bonne journée et un avenir dont ils   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2519 
 

pourront être fiers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may we wish the Fransaskois a happy day on St. 
Jean Baptiste day, and a proud and satisfying future in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, may I also, on behalf of the 
official opposition, join the member who has just spoken in 
extending our best wishes on this day of importance to the 
Fransaskois, St. Jean Baptiste Day. 
 
I rise, Mr. Speaker, having said that, on another very serious 
matter which I think needs attention of the House and yourself 
in particular, Mr. Speaker. And before the orders of the day, I 
rise, pursuant to Rule 6 of the Legislative Assembly, to raise a 
question of privilege. 
 
In accordance with the rules of this House, I did advise you 
earlier today of my intention to do so within the time 
prescribed. I believe, Mr. Speaker, as you I no doubt know — 
believe — that there’s a growing disregard for the legislature 
and for the legislative process by the government that sits 
opposite. It is a matter that’s become more serious as the days 
pass. 
 
The issue, Mr. Speaker, is the set of unacceptable and critical 
and insulting remarks made by the Minister of Justice about an 
officer of this legislature, the Provincial Auditor. 
 
As all members know, Mr. Speaker, a question of privilege is a 
grave and serious matter in this legislature or in any other 
legislature, and such questions of privilege should only arise 
very rarely. 
 
The learned parliamentary authorities have defined privilege as 
follows: 
 

The sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House 
collectively . . . and by members of each House 
individually, without which they could not discharge their 
functions . . . 

 
And further, Mr. Speaker, and I quote again: 
 

It may be stated generally that any Act or omission which 
obstructs or impedes either House of Parliament in the 
performance of its functions, or which )and I stress this 
point particularly, Mr. Speaker) obstructs or impedes any 
member or officer of such House in the discharge of his 
duty, or which has a tendency, directly or indirectly to 
produce such results may be treated as a contempt. 

 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, one last citation, and I quote: 
 

Both Houses will treat as breaches of their privileges, not 
only acts directly tending to obstruct their officers in the 
execution of their duty, but also any conduct which may 
tend to deter them from doing their duty in the future. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there can be no doubt whatsoever that the 
Provincial Auditor is an officer of this Legislative Assembly. 
The Provincial Auditor Act is explicit on that point, and section 
2 of that Act states that, and again I quote: 
 

The provincial auditor is an officer of the Legislative 
Assembly . . . 

 
Now unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has 
violated the privileges of this Assembly by his unacceptable and 
insulting criticism of the Provincial Auditor, which was 
published in the June 15 edition of this year of The Kindersley 
Clarion, a copy of which I sent to you this morning. 
 
The newspaper report states, and I quote again, and it’s the 
Minister of Justice, because I can’t use his name — and it goes 
on to say, “ . . . doubts the credibility of the auditor.” This is a 
quote, and these are the words attributed to the minister himself, 
in a direct quote: 
 

Auditors are people who bump against reality once a year. 
They live in that jungle-zoo and call themselves 
bureaucrats. They wear thick glasses because they are 
looking at the fine print to see if every ‘i’ is dotted. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister . . . and the members opposite laugh, and 
there are other people in this building who laugh. I think the 
matter is more serious than that. And I submit, Mr. Speaker, 
that those totally inappropriate remarks by a member of this 
Assembly about the competence and professionalism of an 
officer of this legislature is a clear and unequivocal breach of 
privilege. 
 
And regrettably, this is not the first occasion that that member 
has attacked in the press an officer of the legislature. I refer you, 
sir, to the ruling that you made in this House on that previous 
occasion last year, in which you stated the following in page 
697 of Hansard. And here, sir, I am quoting your conclusions: 
 

. . . it is clear that any action which may tend to deter a 
parliamentary officer from doing his or her duty may be 
considered to be a breach of the privileges of parliament. It 
is vital, if parliament is to get fair and impartial service 
from its officers, that these officers must be defended from 
intimidation while conducting their duties. 

 
End of your quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so to sum up, the auditor is an officer of the Legislative 
Assembly, and all members have a solemn obligation to protect 
the office and the incumbent from attacks which would 
undermine and destroy his ability to perform his function and to 
serve the Assembly itself. 
 
The minister’s attack on the auditor was prompted by the 
auditor’s conclusions and observations formed with respect to 
his duties to the Assembly. Those remarks by the minister were 
unacceptable, they were insulting, and must not go uncensored. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2520 
 

I therefore submit that the minister has committed a breach of 
privilege not unlike the breach he committed one year ago, and 
I respectfully ask you, sir, that you rule that in this case, as on 
that previous occasion, there is indeed a prima facie case of 
privilege. And at that time I shall move an appropriate motion 
in order that the Assembly may take the appropriate action in 
this matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just speak to the 
point by saying that not all that shows up in the media is gospel. 
And I think it’s unfortunate that members opposite haven’t at 
least given the member, as a matter of courtesy, the prior notice 
to at least allow him to determine whether or not the quote was 
in fact correct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is unfortunate that that prior notice 
courtesy wasn’t indicated at this particular point. However, I’m 
not here to defend the member. I think he can do that quite 
adequately himself. But I do make the point, Mr. Speaker, that 
not all, I know from bitter experience, that shows up in the 
media is gospel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I quite frankly have been 
taken quite by surprise. I have not seen this article in the paper. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You know what you said. You 
remember saying it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I did not say what the member read 
out. I categorically say that I did not say that. I would like an 
opportunity to (a) read the newspaper, and then be able to 
respond. But until I do that, Mr. Speaker, I find myself not 
knowing exactly what to respond to. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the point of privilege raised. 
I have also heard the response from the Minister of Justice and 
the Deputy Premier . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Decide on the face of the evidence 
reported. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes, I’ve heard the comments. On the basis of 
what I have heard, I will have to defer my decision. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 

Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 — Statutory. 
 
Items 7 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 10 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 39 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good 
morning. ladies and gentlemen. Welcome to the estimates. I’d 
like to introduce to you Doug Cressman, my deputy minister; 
Allan Appleby seated directly behind me, who is assistant 
deputy minister, renewable resources; Keith Rogers, assistant 
deputy minister, heritage, sport, and arts; Dick Bailey seated 
behind me to the right, assistant deputy minister, support 
services; and Ross MacLennan, executive director of 
operations. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
we’ll try and move through your estimates fairly quickly this 
morning. If there are answers that you will have to take time to 
look up, if it’s okay with you, we could agree to pass that 
information over in writing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — This year, yeah. And this should speed up 
the estimates. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, if you could, and pass that over in 
writing, the names of the political staff and their positions that 
you have in your office — and that is your political staff, your 
executive assistants — the salaries that they’re being paid, and 
if there has been any increases in the last year. Also, Mr. 
Minister, if you could provide me with the information on the 
trips out of the province by yourself and your staff, the 
destination, and the cost of those trips. 
 
And also if you could provide for me the amount of money that 
you spent on advertising for your department, and if you could 
give me the name of the agency that you used. And it’s fine 
with me, Mr. Minister, if you want to pass that over in writing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member. In 
anticipation of your questions, and following Hansard to see 
what was happening with previous estimates, I noticed that you 
were asking a question of minister’s political staff position and 
salary as of December 31 and then as of March 31 to determine 
changes, increases, reclassifications. So I’ve prepared that 
information for you. 
 
I’ve also prepared total out-of-province travel starting in this 
last fiscal year, of April of last year, with a trip to Edmonton, all 
the way through to March of this year. The last time I was out 
of province was Chicoutimi, performing some functions on 
behalf of the province and the city of Saskatoon at the brier. 
And total money is also on this, that has been expended in that 
year. So I’d ask one of the pages to provide it to you. 
 
On advertising. It’s headed, communication services — major 
ad and print campaigns. The grand total is on here, as well as a 
breakdown by division, by branch, with everything we’ve done 
in the last year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I now 
want to turn to the provincial parks, and I wonder if   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2521 
 

you could give the House an update on the status of the 
grasslands park, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d be delighted to 
discuss this one. There’s been ongoing negotiations, as all 
members would know, for a long period of time. We ran into a 
few difficulties with the federal government who wanted us to 
give up water rights, and energy exploration, and a few other 
things that we found unacceptable to the provincial government, 
and indeed to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We believe we have successfully negotiated an agreement with 
the federal government. I’d said some time ago that I fully 
expected an announcement would be made some time in July 
with the federal Minister of the Environment, Tom McMillan, 
coming out here for a ceremony of declaration of the grasslands 
national park. Nothing has happened in the last few weeks to 
alter that timetable or to change my opinion that that indeed will 
happen sometime this summer, preferably in mid-July. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, you indicated the last time 
we were doing your estimates that there would be an 
announcement quite shortly on the grasslands national park, and 
I refer to the estimates. You indicated at that time that there 
would be three major announcements of parks in Canada, and 
as you are aware, the federal minister has now lost West 
Moresby, or there will not be a park there, or no major 
announcement. 
 
(1100) 
 
And I think that most certainly the grasslands park is a park that 
has been discussed and planned for many years in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and a very important park. And I would just 
ask you to use your good offices to speed up that process, and if 
you could just be more specific and indicate whether or not 
you’re sure that there will be announcement on the grasslands 
national park in July. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, 99.9 per cent sure 
the announcement will come in the middle of July. We’re 
extremely close to actually formalizing the agreement itself. 
There’s some technical stuff; that’s in the hands of the lawyers 
and those folks. The minister, my federal counterpart and I, 
have already agreed in principle. As far as we’re concerned, 
we’ve resolved all of the outstanding arguments over water and 
energy and exploration and anything else of that nature. 
 
There was one little wrinkle crept in a month ago to do with 
grazing that affected some local ranchers in the area, and I had 
called his office and asked him if his staff could look into this 
and resolve that difficulty. I believe that one has been taken care 
of, and there’s absolutely no reason, as far as I’m concerned, 
not to go ahead with the agreement that we’ve been negotiating. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — One final question there, Mr. Minister. 
Then there’s no more land to be allotted for the grasslands 
national park. You have your full allotment of lands for the 
plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, it’s the original 350 square 
 

miles that was initially agreed upon, and that’s what will be in 
the agreement. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, has there been any plans in 
the last year for any other provincial parks in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we’ve looked at 
several areas that we think could be worthy of park designation. 
As the hon. member would know, we’re also in some 
discussion on interprovincial parks with the Government of 
Alberta, primarily Meadow Lake, Cold Lake, and the Cypress 
Hills park in the South. 
 
That would not necessarily constitute a new park, it would just 
be working together to avoid some duplication and to provide 
better resource management. Elk don’t know provincial 
boundaries, as an example, neither do forest fires, neither do 
infestation of forest, and we think by having an interprovincial 
park in those areas we could have better resource management 
of what is in there. 
 
We have been looking at two other areas, Mr. Chairman. The 
Athabasca sand dunes, which I feel, because of the unique 
topography of that area, would be well worthy of a designation 
at least as a protected environmental area, if not eventually a 
provincial park. It takes some time to declare a provincial park, 
as members would know when we did the last provincial park, 
Clearwater wilderness park; it took some time to put that 
together. We’re looking at the Athabasca sand dunes, and we’re 
also looking at The Great Sand Hills over on the west side of 
the province. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not too sure what 
the advantages are of forming interprovincial parks. Whether 
you have a park adjacent to Saskatchewan, and you used the 
Cold Lake area as an example, if you were to form the 
interprovincial parks, it would seem to me that we would still 
have our park attendants and enforcement officers working 
strictly within the borders of Saskatchewan. I wouldn’t want to 
see an interprovincial park where we have our resource people 
crossing into another park. 
 
You talk about an interprovincial park. It would seem to me 
then that we would have officers from both parks which would 
be able to enforce the laws or bring the services that are needed 
into Saskatchewan and vice versa. 
 
It seems to me, as far as fire fighting is concerned, we have 
always had interprovincial agreements to fight fires. We know 
that fires have no boundaries. But that’s fine. We all use the 
Canadian Forestry Services aircraft in both provinces. We’ve 
always traded equipment. Saskatchewan has now got some 
equipment being sent in from British Columbia, I believe, to 
fight fires. 
 
But I’m not too sure whether the interprovincial park system is 
the best system. It seems to me that we should retain the 
provincial park. You have the Saskatchewan parks, regardless 
of where they are, and they should be able to retain that. 
 
And I just would like to get your opinion on that. But I’m   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2522 
 

not too sure whether we should be taking a look at going into an 
interprovincial park. It’s a Saskatchewan park, and I think we 
would want to maintain that independence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member makes 
some good points. Nothing in finalized on this yet. In fact we’re 
in the process right now of holding a series of public 
consultations to see if the idea does in fact have any merit. And 
obviously if the public don’t like the idea, then we won’t pursue 
it any further. 
 
It’s really just an idea that we think whose time has come, and 
no final decision has been taken. That’s why we’re soliciting 
public opinion. 
 
But we think the thrust would be to improve co-operation in the 
development and management of those particular areas. We 
think there’s a good role to be played there. For example, 
marketing efforts, promotional efforts could be co-ordinated; 
we could have a joint park brochure and advertise the park that 
way. 
 
In the case of the northern part of the province with Meadow 
Lake and Cold Lake, the idea was born on the Alberta side 
where they want to do some development on Cold Lake. And a 
couple of years ago when I was up there, we had an agreement 
— and this touches on the enforcement the hon. member 
brought up — that it was very difficult for people who were 
angling on the lake to know if they were on the Saskatchewan 
side or the Alberta side. So we decided that one angling licence, 
either Saskatchewan or Alberta, would be good for the entire 
lake. 
 
From there — and that’s been very successful — from there we 
got talking about a water-based interprovincial park, including 
Cold Lake. On their side, they’re looking at a development of a 
golf course and a ski hill, which seems, you know, it’s 
something that we’d kind of like to tie into. And I’d also say 
that resource management programs could be co-ordinated to 
protect significant resources, such as the lodge-pole pine in the 
Elk and Cypress Hills; and I mentioned a fishery resource in 
Cole Lake, Meadow Lake. We would obviously retain 
jurisdiction over our park, and Alberta would retain jurisdiction 
over their park. 
 
The senior officials have been looking at our respective park 
sites to see which parts are compatible and which are not 
compatible, and if we would require any changes for 
enforcement, which is exactly a point the hon. member brought 
up, because we do have different regulations regarding some of 
the activities that can take place in either park. 
 
In the northern area, we see a tremendous tourism potential 
because we have that big market, the Edmonton market, which 
has been moving east, but they’ve been moving in the wrong 
direction, coming east. They haven’t been going north, then east 
and into the Cold Lake area, and the folks in that area think they 
could attract that huge market. And if they came to an 
interprovincial park and there was a road joining, I think they’d 
go right through and we’d see that tourism thrust go into 
Meadow Lake. 

Similarly in Cypress Hills — that’s one of the best kept secrets 
in North America. It just seems that people don’t understand 
what we have there — very beautiful park, the highest range of 
land from the foothills all the way out to the lakehead, trees, 
forest — it’s a beautiful area. And I think it would be great if 
we could get people who are flashing over No. 1 Highway, 
saying what a drab prairie it is, to get off No. 1, go 15 miles 
south, go through Cypress Hills, connect a road to the other 
side, the west block on the Alberta side, and see something 
scenic. I think they’d spend a few days there and enjoy it and it 
would just promote tourism. And that’s the kind of thing we 
could promote jointly between the two provinces. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I’ll give you another example of where we 
should be tapping the tourist resort, and that would be the 
Clearwater Valley. We have a beautiful park there, and as I’ve 
indicated before, if there isn’t a move made fairly quickly — 
and I’ve indicated to you last year that there should be a logging 
operation, selective logging operation, that goes into that 
Clearwater Valley to take that timber out of there before a forest 
fire destroys it. And as you’re aware, Mr. Minister, this is a 
very serious season for forest fire, and what is going to take 
place, we’re going to end up losing that complete valley if we 
don’t get in there and selectively take that timber out. I just give 
you that in an example. 
 
And you talk about the tourist traffic moving away from the 
Meadow Lake area, and I think — and proposals have come in 
from the community of La Loche, to make that lake or the road 
link-up between Fort McMurray and La Loche and eventually 
move down to Meadow Lake and Big River and The 
Battlefords. The Minister of Highways has not really moved on 
that. There has been a small project into Black Point at La 
Loche, but really no major move to get that link put in between 
McMurray and Saskatchewan, and I think that would really 
improve the tourist trade to the north-west side of the province 
where we should have it. We’ve got many, many thousands of 
people travel to Fort McMurray, but then they can’t come east 
of McMurray and north, as you indicate, into Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would urge you to push for that road link-up and to take a 
serious look at how we handled the Clearwater Valley, because 
I think that Clearwater Valley right now is very vulnerable with 
the type of situation that we have in this province, with the low 
water situation, the muskeg’s dry, and the forest fire season that 
we have already, that we should go in there with an emergency 
program and selectively take that mature timber that’’ in there, 
take it out, and that would solve many of those problems. And I 
think that’s a good example of an interprovincial . . . not an 
interprovincial park, but the two provinces working closely 
together, because Fort McMurray and La Loche, the Clearwater 
Valley runs right from La Loche right into Fort McMurray. 
 
You talk about the protection of the . . . and to designate the 
Athabasca sand dunes. I think that that is a good idea because 
that most certainly is a unique situation in our province. It may 
not be unique if the weather keeps up like this and the winds 
that we have, we could have another sand dune right here in the 
prairies, but hopefully   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2523 
 

that won’t happen. 
 
But I think that that is a very beautiful part of the country, but 
one that I think could be put on the back burner in comparison 
to the southern ones like the Clearwater Valley. As you know, 
it’s pretty hard to get into the sand dunes. One has to have a lot 
of money to be able to travel up there because you have to fly in 
and then get a helicopter to go in there. So I think that 
preferably I would like to see expansion go into the Clearwater 
Valley and such parks like that, and access to Alberta through 
an interprovincial road from McMurray to La Loche. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, there’s a lot 
of merit in exploring an interprovincial road. Some work has 
been done in that area already. There is a crew that’s working 
there. The road itself would not run through the Clearwater and 
won’t go through the valley. It’s actually south of La Loche. 
 
I think that we could increase the number of tourists going to 
that area. Obviously, we have to market and promote the 
Clearwater River wilderness park. Given that it is a wilderness 
park, there is a certain degree of protection afforded under The 
Parks Act to the area. And at the moment, something like 
logging would not be a compatible activity; however, we . . . 
and I appreciate the argument that overmature timber is prone to 
disease and is prone to forest fire, and, I agree, it should be 
selectively logged. I’ve no quarrel with the hon. member about 
that one. I think it would be good for the economy of that 
particular area, and it can be done. We’ve demonstrated we 
have the technology to winch things out now. It can be done in 
a way that does not scar or deface the park in any way, and 
would allow for fresh growth, which of course is necessary for 
ongoing support for wildlife. 
 
We do have a management plan for the park that’s being 
worked on, and that is one of the suggestions that we’ll take, 
and my officials have just indicated to me they will examine 
that potential and possibility when the park plan is presented, 
and we’ll let you see it then. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member from Yorkton on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate leave to 
introduce some guests that have just arrived in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It’s 
my pleasure and honour today to, on behalf of the member from 
Estevan and the Premier of our province, to introduce 38 grade 
4 and 5 students from the Pleasantdale School in Estevan. 
They’re in the Speaker’s gallery and they are accompanied 
today by their teachers Jane Moriarty and Michelle Ward, 
chaperons Rick Rohatyn, the principal, and I think he’s 
doubling as the bus driver today according to my sheet here, 
and Karen Conquergood. We welcome you to the Assembly 
today, students. 
 

You’re witnessing estimates of the Parks, Recreation and 
Culture department. The minister is answering questions from 
the member from Athabasca who is questioning the various 
aspects of Parks and, of course, the budget. 
 
We hope you enjoy your stay here in the Assembly today, and 
I’ll be meeting with you for pictures at 12 o’clock and some 
refreshments and to answer any questions that you might have. 
 
So I would ask all members to please welcome these students 
from Estevan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1115) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 39 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d also like to 
take this opportunity to welcome the group from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I didn’t get all your answer there, but you talk 
about the road being south of La Loche. That road is going to 
Black Point, and it’s only seven miles south of La Loche. And 
regardless of where the connection goes, it still would be 
benefit to the complete north-west side of that province, and I 
speak specifically of the Buffalo Narrows and all the way down 
to Meadow Lake, Big River, and North Battleford, and Prince 
Albert. So I would urge you to discuss with your colleague, the 
Minister of Highways, to put some money into that connection 
and get that road through. 
 
You also could put the connection from La Loche across to 
McMurray and across along side the Clearwater Valley which 
would give access to the Clearwater Valley. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Minister, that that should not be a wilderness 
park, but rather a provincial park so that everyone in the 
province will have an opportunity to enjoy it. It can be 
developed as a provincial park and be beneficial, not only to the 
folks at La Loche but to the rest of this province and to the 
tourists that are coming in from out of province. So I would ask 
you to consider that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate how many 
campsites, public campsites in the province that you have either 
privatized this year or have shut down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that last 
year 22 campsites that were leased to private operators; and this 
year the total is 23, the new one being at Borden bridge; and 
none have been closed. And if the hon. member would like a 
list of all the campsites and their location, it will take us some 
time to get that one together, but we’re quite prepared to put 
that together and send it to you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes, that would be fine, Mr. Minister, if   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2524 
 

you could provide me that. And also, I wonder, if you have the 
information at hand, could you provide me with the individual 
who has taken over the Borden bridge campsite, please, and the 
charge that has been imposed on that — how much is he paying 
for the lease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’ve got the name for the hon. member. 
I was trying to find you some excess information. I thought you 
wanted a few other things. There were five proposals received. 
The best proposal was for $1,000 and it went to Margie Perron 
and George Caper from 902 Avenue O South in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you indicate what the $1,000 is for. 
Is that for the yearly rental fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, that’s the yearly rental fee they 
pay to the department. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. I just want to close off on that by 
indicating that you now have leased out 23 of our public 
campsites, and I indicated my opposition to any privatization of 
public campsites. They’re for the public, they’re administered 
by the public, and that’s the way it should be. 
 
Here we see the Borden bridge campsite — and I might add, 
Mr. Minister, that is a very large campsite — and that has been 
leased out for $1,000 a year to a couple from Saskatoon, two 
individuals. And I think that that campsite, if you took the 
capital costs to build that, that is one of the bigger ones and one 
of the busiest ones that we have. That’s on the Yellowhead 
Route on Highway 16, and that is a very important public 
campsite which should have remained within the hands of the 
Department of Parks. 
 
And I would just ask you, Minister, in closing off — I’m not 
going to carry on too long in this — but I would just ask you to 
reconsider privatizing any more of our public campsites. After 
all, they provide the service to the tourists that are going in and 
out of our province and for our people in this province. It’s a 
public service and they’re public campsites, and I would urge 
you to reconsider that. Especially when you take the Borden 
bridge on the Yellowhead Route, which is a very, very 
important one and a very busy one, and you lease that out for 
$1,000 a year. I think that that is just a bad deal for the 
taxpayers of the province. 
 
I just want to leave it at that, Mr. Minister. If you want to 
comment, you can comment on that, and then I want to turn to 
the fisheries. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I would just comment 
that we’ve had this discussion in the past, and obviously we just 
agree to differ on it because we have a different philosophical 
approach to this particular issue. We’re cognizant of the fact 
that we require those camp grounds to be operated in a good 
fashion in order to serve tourists coming through our province 
— definitely, we agree with that. 
 
The fact is, that camp ground was losing $16,000 a year of 
taxpayers’ money. By leasing it out for $1,000 a year, it is being 
run privately. They will accept any losses, or if they 
 

can break even, good for them. And as long as those camp 
grounds we build into the lease are being run in a good manner 
in the interests of the public, then we’re quite happy to let the 
public run them on behalf of the public. So just a comment on 
that; I realize that we differ on the philosophy of doing this. 
 
We have no major plans, by the way, for anything else in the 
works right now. There was only one this year. I’ll send you the 
list. I had a list here, but it’s not accurate because there was one 
change to it, so we’ll update that list and I’ll make sure you get 
it within the next week. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. You 
say that that campsite was losing $16,000 a year. You lease it 
out for $1,000 a year. You sort of indicate that the Parks 
personnel who were operating that somehow must have been 
doing a bad job. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that’s not 
true. They always did a good job. It’s a busy campsite. If it lost 
$16,000 under your jurisdiction, I would say it’s going to lose 
more under the private, or the same. So I don’t know what the 
difference is there. I’ve stopped at that campsite on many 
occasions, and I tell you that is a well kept campsite, well run, 
and I just want to commend the personnel from Parks who 
operate that campsite. And I just don’t see any reason why you 
would want to get rid of it. 
 
I now want to turn to the fisheries, Mr. Minister. And we have a 
number of problems that are cropping up, and they’re cropping 
up on a continual basis. And I have the latest letter that I got 
from you and it’s regarding the species limits that you 
continually keep imposing upon the commercial fishery in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I have a letter here, and for the life of me, Mr. Minister, I don’t 
know why you would write a letter and use the type of 
comparisons that you used in this letter. When I talk about 
species limits, we talk about a lake that has a limit, it’s a 
gazetted limit, and it has so many pounds on that lake, and if 
you take it out, then the lake is closed down and that’s the end 
of it for the year. 
 
But you now have imposed a species limit where you put 
10,000 pounds of jacks; 10,000 pounds of pickerel, and 10,000 
pounds of whitefish. That lake would have a 30,000 pound 
limit. So commercial fishermen have been fishing that lake for 
many, many years. And I’m using one lake as an example, Mr. 
Chairman — a lake with 30,000 pounds on it. Those fishermen 
have always harvested 30,000 pounds. Biologists go in and they 
check that lake and they determine what the limit is going to be, 
and they say well, that lake can handle 30,000 pounds. 
 
And I want to add, Mr. Minister, that we have thousands of 
lakes in northern Saskatchewan. So what you have done now is 
said to the commercial fishermen, well you take 10,000 jackfish 
out of that lake, or northern pike, then you have to quit fishing 
and you’ll leave the other 20,000 pounds that they should be 
harvesting. 
 
That’s like telling a farmer who has three quarters of land — 
one has wheat, one has oats, and one has barley. He takes the 
barley off and then the government comes in and says, you have 
to leave the wheat and the oats; you can’t harvest the other two 
quarters. That’s exactly what   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2525 
 

you’re doing to these commercial fisherman, and it’s hitting 
them just as hard as it would hit a farmer who you went in and 
told him that he couldn’t harvest the other two quarters of land. 
 
Then you write me a letter when I ask you to change that, and 
you use the comparison of moose. You say, well we have those 
species limits in this province. We use it with moose; we use it 
with birds. Well what a comparison. You buy a licence in 
Spiritwood to hunt moose, and you can hunt moose wherever 
you want, whenever the zones are open. 
 
You buy a bird licence in this province and you can hunt 
Hungarian partridge in Estevan, or you can hunt Hungarian 
partridge in Shellbrook. Or if you buy . . . if you’re out hunting 
ruffle grouse, you can hunt them down in the South or in the 
North or in Fond du Lac; it doesn’t matter where you go. And if 
you’ve got a moose licence, you hunt moose wherever you want 
to go, and the same applies to deer. 
 
But you write me a letter and say you’re using the same type of 
policy that you use for game birds. Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t 
think you did your research. And I don’t really blame you for 
this, but my gosh, there is absolutely no comparison. 
 
We have lake limits in northern Saskatchewan, or any other 
part, and we fish those limits and they’re on a lake by lake, 
specifically. When we deal with Doré Lake, we deal 
specifically with Doré Lake and the fishermen who fish Doré 
Lake. And if the limit on Doré Lake is 200,000 pounds, those 
fishermen govern themselves accordingly. 
 
Now you may want to use the argument that the tourist operator 
is putting pressure on. And I don’t think that that’s a fair 
argument because the tourist operators and the commercial 
fishermen have always got along. Sure they’ve had their little 
bickerings. Some tourist operators don’t want to see nets in the 
water at a certain time. 
 
(1130) 
 
But most tourist operators realize that those commercial 
fishermen have fished those lakes ever since commercial 
fishing began in this province. That’s how they make their 
living. That’s how the farmers in the South who homesteaded 
their land, that’s how they make their living on that quarter of 
land, or that section of land, whatever it may be. 
 
Commercial fishermen have the same thing up there. They have 
a licence to fish a lake and that’s just like their homestead. The 
fishermen in one area have so many lakes and nobody else from 
another area can come in and fish those lakes. They fish them 
every year and that’s how they govern themselves accordingly, 
and that’s how they make their living. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you keep imposing these species limits, and 
in the type of arguments that you’re using, and I see this, Mr. 
Minister, when you take and you compare that to big game and 
to birds. I think, Mr. Minister, the research that you have, 
you’re going to have to reassess that, because that just does not 
apply and it’s not a good 
 

comparison. Absolutely not. 
 
And we have many fishermen up North who rely on the lake, 
they rely on that limit; it’s always been 30,000. I just use that as 
a comparison. Some lakes have 50,000, some have a half a 
million pounds. But the fishermen, they fish those lakes 
accordingly. If a lake has 30,000 pounds on it, they know that if 
they go in there the third week in August and they fish that 
30,000 pounds, then that’s it; that’s over. 
 
You sell a licence to an angler, a tourist fisherman. It doesn’t 
matter if he’s living in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan or if he’s 
living in Turtleford or Spiritwood or if he’s living in Black 
Lake. He can fish any lake in this province with that licence; he 
can go to any lake. 
 
Commercial fishermen don’t do that. They’re tied specifically 
to a lake. And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to reconsider the 
species limits. And I know you indicate at the end of your letter 
that you’re prepared to examine individual situations, and I 
appreciate that, because there are many individual situations in 
northern Saskatchewan and I think you have to be flexible on 
this. I would ask you to withdraw the species limit until you 
have a chance, Mr. Minister, to go out and discuss this 
thoroughly with the fishermen. There may be instances where 
some fishermen in some areas may agree that you could put on 
the species limits. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, it’s not good policy; the comparisons 
are just horrible. I just can’t believe that you would use these 
type of comparisons, and I would ask you to reconsider that and 
go out and meet with the fishermen. I’m prepared to attend 
meetings with you. 
 
I intend to go back and meet with more fishermen. but I have 
fishermen up there who are really concerned, fishermen who 
leave a certain amount of limit for the winter. Now, all of a 
sudden, the species limit’s on there and what happens is some 
of them are going to have 40 or 50,000 pounds of limit left and 
they’re not going to be able to take it. A lot of them, they take 
that certain amount of limit in the summer, they leave so much 
for the winter. 
 
But with the species limit it’s just been a real hardship on the 
fishing industry. It was imposed without any consultation and I 
would just ask you, Mr. Minister, to reconsider that. 
 
And you know, you talk about high grading fish. It seems to me 
that it would appear that it’s an attack on the commercial 
fishing industry in this province. And I say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that the commercial fishermen in this province have 
enough problems without having to be faced with other 
problems such as this. And I’d ask you to reconsider that and to 
withdraw your species regulations for the summer until you 
have an opportunity to go out and discuss it thoroughly with the 
fishermen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There are a number of points raised by 
the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, and I won’t dwell at great 
length on the, but I’ll just make a couple of observations. 
 
First of all, your invitation to meet up there — I have met   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2526 
 

already this winter in La Ronge with the commercial fishermen 
from that area. I will be in Buffalo Narrows either late summer 
or early fall. I’ve had an invitation to a meeting up there, and at 
that time I would avail myself of your kind invitation. If you 
want to set that up, I’d look forward to that to have that 
discussion. 
 
There actually was consultation that started in October of 1985, 
the discussion paper entitled Conservation Options for the 
Commercial Users of the Fish Resource was circulated and 
there were meetings held with the fishermen. And the upshot of 
that was June 1986 paper, Analysis of Conservation Options for 
Commercial Net Fishermen. 
 
Three options were discussed with the fishermen: one, retain 
commercial quotas; two, adopt species quotas; three, increase 
lake supervision. The majority of the respondents actually 
favoured options two and three, and they saw that yes, there is 
some need to look at species to prevent high-grading in the 
lakes. 
 
So if there’s a limit of 200,000 pounds on a lake, as an example, 
and there are several species in that lake, and the price of trout, 
lake trout, goes way up, people are going to try and take 
200,000 pounds of lake trout. And we have to look at what the 
tolerance of a lake is, otherwise the fishery will completely 
collapse, as has happened in several lakes in the past. We’ve 
had problems in Besnard, Canoe, Dipper, Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
Pinehouse, Primeau, Peter Pond, where a fishery collapsed 
there. 
 
What we are attempting to do is to try and ensure that there’s 
going to be a long-term resource available to the commercial 
fishermen, as well as anglers who use the northern waters. 
 
But if we allow the fishery to collapse because of high-grading, 
as an example, which is taking off the higher price fish, and that 
came about . . . And the member knows better than I do, 
although I deal with this every day. He’s a commercial 
fisherman; he deals with commercial fishermen. I know he 
understands the problems. 
 
But we have to be very cautious because the resource is fragile 
in those northern lakes. And I would like to see us come in with 
some kind of a plan that ensures a long-term viability so the 
commercial fishermen can, in fact, go on fishing as they have 
traditionally for many years. 
 
The fish could collapse. We know that’s a reality; that is a 
problem. We’re trying to cope with it. We think we’re coping it 
in a sane and reasonable fashion. The hon. member has other 
suggestions to make, and we certainly will take them to heart. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. With 
the permission of the member for Athabasca, I would like to 
beg leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s my great 
pleasure to introduce to you, and to members of the Assembly, 
27 students and four adults, representing grade 4 at Assiniboia 
Elementary School in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan. 
 
You may recall that I introduced a similar group from a 
different grade 4 from Assiniboia yesterday, and their 
counterparts are with us in the gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery, 
Mr. Chairman, today. 
 
Their teacher is Janice Erfle, and they are accompanied today 
also by Debbie Payant, Betty Peterson, and Wanda Deringer. 
 
I hope that the students enjoy their visit to the legislature and 
find the proceedings of the legislature to be interesting and 
educational. And, Mr. Chairman, I would ask all hon. members 
to join me in welcoming these young students from Assiniboia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 39 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also 
like to welcome the students and their teachers from Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m not going to belabour this because time is 
running short, but I do want to say that over the years you have 
worked from tolerances to species and each one creates a 
hardship for the commercial fishing industry. 
 
I think that it’s time that we started to work more closely with 
the commercial fishermen. They were the first up in that 
country, and they use those lakes . . . and you talk about the 
collapses of lakes. lakes go up and down. Fish run in cycles. 
You’ve got a biologist sitting right there. He knows that fish run 
in cycles. Canoe Lake is up. Big Peter Pond is up, right now. 
Little Peter Pond is up. There’s pickerel wherever you set your 
nets this year. They weren’t there last year, and that has 
happened over the years — fish run in cycles and they always 
have. 
 
And it’s not because of high grading or over-fishing. You can 
go to Delaronde Lake and that lake has been commercially 
fished for all these years. Or you can go into Dore Lake and it 
has its cycles with white fish and pickerel and jackfish. So that 
argument is not fair. And if you talk to a commercial fisherman 
who have been commercial fishing, and their fathers and their 
grandfathers, I think that’s the type of information that you 
need, Mr. Minister. And I ask you to go and get that 
information, and I look forward to your meeting in Buffalo. But 
I would just request once more that you withdraw those 
regulations because they are creating a hardship and a concern 
amongst the commercial fishermen who, I indicated to you, are 
having enough problems as it is right now. 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2527 
 

The time is running short and I have so much to get through, I 
think we’re going to have to probably wait till next year to get a 
lot of this through. I wanted to cover many other items, to talk 
about the article about the prairie fishermen hooking record 
cheques. 
 
I think, and you indicate in your letter, that there’s no certainty 
as to what is happening to prices. Prices are up and down with 
the . . . and you talked about one trout being up one year and 
down the next. And that’s what’s happening. 
 
And it’s happening under the freshwater fish marketing 
corporation. I indicated to you that it’s time that we got out of 
that fish marketing corporation. I don’t mind them being an 
agency, a selling agency, to sell our fish, but there is absolutely 
no reason why we should be taking the millions of pounds of 
fish from northern Saskatchewan and trucking it 800 to a 1,000 
miles, July and August, to Winnipeg for processing. We in 
Saskatchewan lose all the processing jobs, and as a result you 
have a poorer quality of fish. And I think you should have your 
biologist check into that because you just cannot handle fish 
and take them that far, especially in that heat. 
 
And I would ask you to consider setting up some processing 
plants in the province and leave the federal corporation there as 
a selling agency, but by all means let’s do our own processing 
in this province. 
 
Did you want to comment on that, Mr. Minister, at all, or 
should I move to another item. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We’re not disagreeing on that. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. So you give me the agreement that 
you will look into those concerns. And you’ve agreed that you 
will drop that species. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can’t drop the species lower, Mr. 
Chairman, because we’re into that as a fish management 
strategy. I am prepared to take another look at it and see if 
we’re doing the right thing. I’m advised we are. But obviously 
I’m going to listen to the fishermen as well as the officials and 
the biologist. But I really have a lot of problem with this species 
limit. I get very nervous when I think how fragile the resource 
is, and we want to make sure we’ve got it there in perpetuity. So 
we’re just trying to find the best way to ensure that. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, it is a fragile 
industry and I think that if we leave it to the commercial 
fishermen, they have always handled that resource well. 
Biologists go in and tell them what the lake can handle as a 
limit; the commercial fishermen, they adhere to those 
regulations, and I think that’s the route that we should be taking 
and continue to take. 
 
I did want to talk to you about the bear hunting in the province. 
Last year you imposed a limit. You actually said that lynx could 
not be trapped, then you changed your mind and you allowed 
trappers to produce one lynx. Could you indicate if that is still 
on? Also could you indicate if you are going to add any more 
on to that list, or are you going to take the lynx off? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
lynx population is still very low. Of the 134 accidentally caught 
lynx measured last fall, only five were kittens, suggesting that 
the lynx population does indeed remain very low. So we’ll be 
carrying on with the program again next year of no quota for 
lynx. We’ll work out a mechanism for accidentally caught lynx. 
 
One suggestion that’s being bruited about is that we take 
proceeds of money from accidentally caught lynx and put it into 
studies for humane trapping. And as the hon. member know, 
that’s quite an issue right now, fur trapping. 
 
(1145) 
 
The argument with Great Britain isn’t really over. That was just 
the first skirmish in what’s going to be a long and protracted 
war. And tomorrow morning in Winnipeg the wildlife ministers 
across Canada are meeting to discuss this particular issue and 
what we should be doing about it. I realize this is incidental to 
your question regarding lynx, but I think it’s part of the big 
picture. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Once again I disagree with you, Mr. 
Minister, when you talk about the lynx quotas being up and 
down. They also run in cycles. They run . . . when the rabbits 
are plentiful, then we have lots of lynx. They run up and down. 
 
Once again you’re putting a hardship on the trappers. All your 
policies have zeroed in on making it rough for the trappers in 
northern Saskatchewan. Either the trappers, the hunters, or the 
commercial fishermen — you’ve zeroed in on every part of 
their life, and I think it’s time that that came to a stop. 
 
There’s pockets where there’s lots of lynx, and there’s trappers 
who were caught in a vicious circle up there, didn’t know what 
to do. The lynx prices have dropped dramatically. You used the 
high price of lynx. 
 
Leave it alone. Let the trappers look after their own trapping 
blocks. They have their own zones. The type of information that 
you’re getting is wrong information. The policies you’re using 
are wrong-headed, and all you’re doing is creating a hardship 
on the commercial fishermen, the trappers, and the hunters in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to just touch on the meeting that you’re going to, Mr. 
Minister, in Winnipeg tomorrow. And I would urge you to urge 
your counterparts to take action. I ask you to become a leader. 
I’ve discussed this with you before. And I’m asking you to go 
down there and create a committee in this province, a 
committee of your officials, a committee of legitimate trappers, 
trappers who sell fur on a regular basis, and lots of fur. And I 
would ask you to let that committee work and to go out and to 
seek information on humane ways of taking fur in other 
countries and other provinces. 
 
And if I just could take a couple of minutes, if you take a look 
over the last 25, 30 years, there has been tremendous 
advancements made in the humane taking of fur in our   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2528 
 

province. And I could go on and on, and I wanted to, but the 
time is short. But there has been tremendous advancements in 
the humane way of taking fur. 
 
And I think that you should maybe get some of the animal 
rights groups to sit on that committee and tour other countries 
— tour the North and find out how the trappers operate, go into 
the Territories and see how they operate. 
 
And what is better? to let the animals increase to a point where 
they starve out . . . they clean out everything else — what 
happens — and then they get diseased and they die a cruel life ; 
or let the trappers control nature? And they’ve always 
controlled their areas. 
 
And I think you have to get that information, and that can be 
done through a committee. And maybe ask them to hold off for 
5, 10, years so you can bring that information forward. 
 
And have the animal rights groups involved because what 
they’re doing just doesn’t make any sense. They go after the 
trappers in the Northwest Territories and northern 
Saskatchewan where they don’t have a means of fighting back. 
I don’t see them going to Spain and going into the bull rings 
and trying to stop a bullfight, which I think is far more 
inhumane than anything that you could have. They don’t go 
near there because they know what would happen — the 
matador would probably turn on them. 
 
But let me tell you, I think it’s time that those groups realized 
that there’s a better way of doing this rather than destroy the 
livelihoods of trappers all over this country. And I would ask 
you tomorrow to ask them to consider a committee and to travel 
to Sweden and other countries and ask those groups to get 
involved. And maybe that we could work this thing out and to 
the betterment of the whole industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d just like to comment on the latter 
part of the hon. member’s remarks. Actually, I instigated this 
meeting tomorrow in Winnipeg. I also sent a telegram some 
time ago to Joe Clark, External Affairs, protesting the actions 
being taken in the British parliament. Two years ago, on the 
national stage in Ottawa, I was the only provincial minister who 
took a stand on fur trapping in the face of an argument with the 
animals rights folks. 
 
Since that time, other provincial ministers of wildlife have . . . 
whether they’re giving into pressure, I don’t know what’s going 
on in some of the other provinces. I know that the Alberta and 
Manitoba ministers agree with me, and they’re going to support 
the stand I’m going to be taking tomorrow, which is advocating 
precisely what you’ve been suggesting to me in the last number 
of weeks. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I congratulate 
you for taking that stand and, as you say, you instigated that and 
I think that you can continue to take the leadership role, and the 
province of Saskatchewan, if you can get those groups together 
and work in closely to try and solve that problem, and I 
congratulate you for that. And I also wish you success 
tomorrow because there are a lot of trappers in northern 
Saskatchewan and northern Canada who will be relying on what 
you do there 
 

tomorrow. 
 
I have a lot of other stuff that I’d like to go through with you, 
Mr. Minister, but in order to accommodate the time period and 
some of my other colleagues who have a few questions, I think 
I’m going to have to close off, and I would just ask you to 
consider what I’ve said about the trapping. I would ask you to 
consider the species limits. I would ask you to take that off and 
let’s have a cooling down period here. Let’s look at reality. I 
would ask you to reassess the lynx situation. 
 
And another situation I want to add, Mr. Minister, is the 
corridors. I see there’s no corridor between Glaslyn and 
Meadow Lake, and I don’t want to get into an argument over 
that right now. And I would ask you to take a look a these 
corridors, and either they become for everybody or let’s get rid 
of them from Meadow Lake north. Because that’s where they 
are; there’s nothing between Glaslyn and Meadow Lake. There 
were none there last year, and if there’s any there now, the signs 
are not up. 
 
But if you’re going to retain the corridors between Meadow 
Lake and up in northern Saskatchewan, then by all means make 
sure they’re put on in the southern part also. But I would prefer 
to see them lifted. I think that we have conservation officers up 
in that area and they do a good job, and they work closely with 
trappers and hunters. And I think that can be solved in another 
manner. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, I’m going to have to close off and turn 
it over to my colleague from Cumberland. But I do want to 
thank you, Mr. Minister, and your staff for the answers that 
you’ve given me today. I sincerely hope that you will consider 
what I have said. I have much more that I wanted to go over, 
but the time just does not permit. With your meeting tomorrow 
in Winnipeg, I want to close off by wishing you the best of luck 
down there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d like to thank the hon. member and 
also give you an assurance: if you have a number of questions 
there that you didn’t get around to today, if you send them to 
me in writing, I’ll respond in writing and you’ll have them back 
in two weeks. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would like to, Mr. Chairperson, I would 
like to direct some questions at the minister, and I’ll restrict my 
comments to the areas of trapping and fishing, because of the 
time factor. 
 
I would like to concur with the member from Athabasca, you 
know, as the other northern MLA, that the issues of trapping 
and fishing are extremely important for people in regards to 
their economic livelihood. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So is the uranium issue. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And the member, of course . . . the Deputy 
Premier, of course, talks about uranium, and we’ve always dealt 
with that issue on a more practical level than he has in his six 
years of government, but we want to stick to the issue of fishing 
and trapping. He doesn’t think that they’re important, but I feel 
that trapping and fishing are extremely important, so I want to 
stick to the fishing and trapping issue. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2529 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, you mentioned that you are going to this 
meeting in Winnipeg discussing, you know, the protection of 
the livelihood of trappers in Winnipeg in regards to a 
counter-strategy to the animal rights activists and so on. It 
appears that you are out there doing a lot of help for the trappers 
and so on. 
 
Now I look at it this way, in this province in the past six years 
— and I mentioned that last year, and the member from 
Athabasca has raised it — that in regards to help to the trappers, 
direct support to the trappers, a lot of that has gone down. We 
saw that in regards to the subsidy that used to go to the trappers’ 
organizations, and the fact that we’ haven’t seen something, 
let’s say in the area of humane trapping, as an example. That 
issue has been here for along time. It’s not only an issue in the 
modern day but an issue in the traditional Indian culture as well. 
 
I might add in that aspect, that there used to be a term, even in 
the Cree culture where the word “kuhochinan” was used to 
denote a protection and a balance of the harmony with people 
and the animals that they were taking, you know, to create their 
livelihood. And that word simply meant that if you indeed 
allowed an animal to escape from the trap, you ought to find it, 
otherwise what befell the animal in terms of sickness, the belief 
said, that you in turn would have that sickness. In other words, 
if you unnecessarily destroyed the animal in a cruel manner, 
that would befall you in the long run. So that there was this . . . 
in other words, there was this concept of humane trapping was 
existent in the Cree culture and I might add also, in the Dene 
culture as well. 
 
And so you are seeing this aspect as a modern day exercise. 
When I look at it as a person involved in trapping when I was 
born, people used to talk about the dead-fall traps of long ago, 
and people talked about snares and the importance of improving 
different ways of snaring, so that the suffocation method of 
snares was utilized so that the animal wouldn’t suffer, and also 
the fact that you had the aspect where you utilized leg-hold 
traps, you had improvements on the leg-hold traps to get a 
Stop-loss trap with a spring on it. Then later on there was 
improvements in regards to the Conibear trap. And there’s been 
a lot of other examples that have come, you know, on the 
wayside that are impractical to this date, and basically we are 
stuck with leg-hold and Conibear traps. 
 
So what I’m relating is a little bit of the overall history which I 
was involved in, in regards to the trapping. There seems to be 
an impression sometimes in the public that there hasn’t been an 
attempt in regards to getting more humane trapping methods. 
What I’m saying is that there has been, in the traditional culture, 
that concern, and there has been a concern in practice by the 
trappers in regards to changes in method that they have made in 
the past, you know 50-some-odd years in the trapping industry. 
 
So what I’m saying is that maybe the strategy the minister 
should be utilizing is working directly with the trapper. In 
regards to the heavy subsidies we see in forestry — 8 million to 
Weyerhaeuser — and we see the infrastructure that we build in 
regards to roads to the mines, tremendous amount of provincial 
money being used in that, there 
 

used to be moneys allotted for trappers and helping them out 
and helping them survive. But I saw that, in the past six years, 
disappearing. There seems to be an attempt at pushing out the 
traditional resource users so that forestry and mining companies 
can have free access to the bush, or the tourist outfitters. It 
appears that way. 
 
I want to get it straight from the minister whether or not he sees 
that in the long run, because that’s what I’m seeing and that’s 
the feedback I’m getting from the trappers and the fishermen. 
Could we get a more positive statement from the minister in 
regards to his real concern for the trapper and the fisherman? 
 
Now that he is going to Winnipeg, can we get a statement that 
when he comes back, he will not only in direct consultation 
with the trappers and the fishermen, but also in regards to 
providing the material basis for a move towards a more humane 
trapping system and that in the long run, that’s the direction that 
we’re moving. could we get a statement from the minister on 
that regard? 
 
Hon Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I’d be delighted to 
make a statement in that regard. I’d remind the hon. member to 
look at my record over the last number of years and the public 
statements I’ve made about trapping, the strongest of which was 
in Ottawa on the national stage, despite objections from several 
groups who were protesting. I said, as long as I am the minister 
responsible for wildlife in Saskatchewan, our residents, and 
primarily northern residents, and the members of our trappers 
association shall continue to trap in their traditional methods. 
 
Now having said that, we also put on 13 schools and trained 
328 students in the last year, in trapping. We’re taking the 
money which the hon. member talked about, which used to go 
directly to the fur blocs, and we’re putting the money now into 
the Fur Institute of Canada. And they are on a program to do 
several things: trap research and development, trapper 
education, public information — the very things we’re talking 
about to tell the public what is going on in the trapping 
industry; and fur bearing management. So we’re supporting 
those things. 
 
(1200) 
 
We’re also putting money into providing, because there has 
been research done as the member from Athabasca said, in 
other countries, on humane traps. Now I know the argument, 
there’s no such thing as a humane trap because eventually an 
animal dies. But we are providing what we consider to be 
humane traps. We’re paying for them and we are providing 
them. 
 
And just on the argument about trapping and there’s no humane 
way to kill an animal, George Erasmus, who’s familiar to all of 
us here, made an excellent point when he talked about what the 
animal rights activists are doing, is they are pursuing a policy of 
cultural genocide aimed against the natives and Metis and the 
Dene people and against the Inuit people for the very kinds of 
things that they are doing. 
 
They are saying it’s okay for us for breed animals in   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2530 
 

captivity — cattle, sheep, poultry, fish harvesting. We grow 
them for one purpose — to slaughter them and eat them. On the 
other hand, our trappers are not growing something, they are 
out actively pursuing something in the wild. They don’t grow 
them in captivity and slaughter them. So I think there’s quite a 
dichotomy here. In fact, I think the viewpoint of the animals 
rights is totally indefensible. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One last question in regards to . . . directly to 
the fishermen. I would concur again with the member from 
Athabasca in regards to re-examining and reviewing the case in 
regards to species limit and tolerances and so on, and getting 
back to the people and really consulting with people. 
 
And the point that I want to make in this regard is this. There’s 
a tendency that rather than consultation and working with and 
co-operation and dealing with fishermen, that there was 
tendency to hold back, and once you hold back, then the 
enforcement system, you know, comes to take precedence. 
 
And every year . . . last year, I mentioned this and I’ll mention 
it again, that some people who are utilizing the lakes in northern 
Saskatchewan are saying that there is a . . . they do not mind the 
enforcement aspect as long as it’s done on a fair and equitable 
basis. That’s one thing. 
 
One thing they’re telling me again this year is this. We see the 
special treatment being made to tourist people. And that’s what 
the people are saying. And I would like the minister in regards 
to when you do a more intensive process that you’ve started 
already, that you examine that issue again and make sure that, 
in regards to the question of enforcement, that it’s fair 
enforcement. people don’t want to see, you know, people in the 
tourist area being bypassed when they’re being stopped all the 
time. And that’s the feedback I’m getting. I would like you to 
check into that. 
 
And the other one is, I would like to see you look more at 
prevention and developmental aspect of it and greater 
co-operation with people rather than trying to edge into the 
enforcement, into the enforcement area. 
 
Enforcement will always be a necessary aspect of it. We know 
that. Ninety-two per cent of the problems of enforcement are in 
relation to the angling . . . in the angling record, and we know 
that 8 per cent are in the area of commercial fishing, so that 
over 90 per cent are in the area of angling, so that enforcement 
is always an important aspect of the overall strategy. 
 
But what I’m saying is that there’s a tendency to overshift that 
direction rather than going back to the overall conservation and 
development with and co-operation with people. And unless 
that strategy of co-operation is shared with people, the 
enforcement costs will climb without being effective. And I 
would like to see a more effective strategy in that regard, and I 
would like to hear you make another comment in that regard. 
And so with that, I will transfer it over, but I would like to hear 
you make a comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the whole area of 
 

enforcement, I’ll tackle that piece first. Obviously, when you’re 
dealing with public, you’re dealing with user groups, 
consumers, be they tourists or commercial fishermen, always 
has to be considered a very delicate matter and has to be 
handled with some tact. We are improving, in the enforcement 
areas, the qualifications of our officers who have been working 
at that, and in the dealings with the folks. 
 
You’re right. The vast majority of the violations that are 
occurring and the majority of the convictions that come out are 
in the area of sports angling; it’s not in the area of commercial 
fishing. And most of the commercial fishermen — I say most, 
not all, and we know this — most commercial fishermen realize 
that if they plunder the resource, it’s not going to be there. So 
many of them do practise conservation, and I know that they are 
policing themselves in many of the co-op groups, the ones I’ve 
talked to. 
 
We have done, I think, a reasonable job over the years of 
making sure that we consult with groups, be they commercial 
fishermen or the anglers. And I’d remind the hon. member that I 
took the unpopular move two or three years ago of reducing the 
species limit that could be taken by anglers as well, when we 
felt that there was undue pressure on the fishery and it could no 
longer support the kind of limits that we were allowing 
previously, so they were reduced. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
have a few very specific and short questions about the 
privatization of the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. I have here a 
copy of the development agreement and the commercial lease, 
and I want to congratulate you, Mr. Minister, for providing 
these documents to the public. 
 
Mr. Minister, a quick question. The development agreement 
sets out those facilities which are to be added to the park by 
course of this lease agreement that runs for the 21 years. It lists 
them in some detail, including an 18-hole miniature golf course, 
bumper-boat facility, go-cart, batting cage, the video arcade 
building, and so on. Mr. Minister, is this the definitive list of 
facilities that can be added to the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park 
under the terms of this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I think I’m understanding it to say, is 
this list of potential activity definitive, or if someone came back 
. . . if the proponents came back with some other idea, could it 
be considered? Yes, we would consider any other proposal that 
came in. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, have you considered, to date, 
any other proposal for another facility that is not currently listed 
in the development agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, proponents are currently 
in the process of constructing three items which are in the 
agreement — the camp ground, camp kitchen, and a 
recreational games area. And they have not asked to do 
anything else that is not already in the agreement; at least we 
can’t find anything. The officials say they haven’t approached 
us with any other ideas. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well then, Mr. Minister, let me refer you   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2531 
 

to the Wednesday edition of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 
Wednesday, June 22, in which it is reported, and I know from 
witnessing it, that under construction just now at the Moose Jaw 
Wild Animal Park is a 150-foot long slide with six runways. I 
have nothing against a long slide at all; it’s just that I didn’t see 
it in the agreement, and I understand that no approval has been 
given for that item of construction. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, on page 4 of the commercial lease 
agreement, section 5(a), it is indicated that the lessee, and I 
quote, “fast food, souvenir, and stroller rentals will not be 
allowed.” 
 
It is also reported in this Times-Herald article that the lessee 
now is planning to have an ice cream parlour on the property 
and an Indian handcraft shop, both of which would be described 
in my language as fast food and souvenir. So would you see that 
as a violation of the agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, they’re in 
compliance with a different agreement. They had purchased an 
existing facility in there which they were able to carry on, 
which already was there and it was in existence. 
 
I may say I’m not familiar with the Times-Herald article, but 
there is agreement for any portable facility to be brought in, and 
it may be a portable facility. I don’t know because I haven’t 
seen that particular article. Perhaps I could get a copy later and I 
could look into that one for you. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I hope you’ll do that. It 
doesn’t increase our confidence in this agreement with the 
developer to see these things happening that are not in the 
agreement. We begin to wonder, well what else will happen 
that’s not covered by the agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I read through the agreement, I find statements 
which I find to be a bit contradictory. I read in section 2.01 of 
the development agreement, in the first sentence: 
 

The developer agrees to design, develop, and construct, at 
its own cost and expense, the proposed new facilities. 

 
I turn the page to section 2.07.1, where I read that the province 
agrees to contribute 20 per cent of the total cost of phase one up 
to a maximum of $40,000. The province agrees to contribute 20 
per cent of the total expenditure for phase two up to a maximum 
of $120,000. I read that to say that the province is willing to 
invest $160,000 into these new facilities in the Moose Jaw Wild 
Animal Park. 
 
I ask, Mr. Minister, if you think that’s fair when other 
individuals in the community of Moose Jaw and the province 
are building their own amusement parks at their own expense 
without public assistance. In this case, you’re willing to provide 
another $160,000 for these facilities, while other business 
people are left with no support from your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, this isn’t 
 

inconsistent, and if you look at some of the other agreements 
that we’ve allowed, we’ve negotiated with people who are 
putting something into a park, what we do is we own the park 
and they lease, they pay a lease fee to us. So they don’t own it. 
So therefore we’re responsible for constructing infrastructure. 
So if it’s waterworks or anything of that ilk, that’s our 
responsibility because we own physically the ground. 
 
So that’s why that clause is in there, and that’s what we’re 
providing for them, is infrastructure. We do the same thing in 
other parks. So that really isn’t inconsistent. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, when the lease is complete 
in 21 years, will the province of Saskatchewan own those 
facilities that we’re paying for then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We’ll own the infrastructure, yes. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Own the infrastructure, Mr. Minister, last year 
in these estimates you assured us in this House that the park 
was not for sale. Mr. Minister, you’ve said, and I quote: 
 

We will own the parks. There’s no park for sale ever. It’s 
completely excluded by The Parks Act that that could ever 
happen. 

 
Mr. Minister, I read in this agreement that you are willing to 
sell, you’ve offered an option to purchase to the lessee, all of 
the buildings and improvements — cages, buildings, and so on 
— on the property. It’s in the agreement. you’re willing to offer 
those buildings and improvements to the lessee this year for a 
total of $174,000. But if he waits until the year 2004, he could 
have the whole lot for $1. Mr. Minister, why are you willing to 
sell the buildings in our publicly owned park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We won’t sell the land in the park and 
we won’t sell the park. But we don’t mind selling someone a 
building if they’re running an operation within there. We hold 
the hammer on it because we can renew the lease or choose not 
to renew the lease, as we see fit, depending on whether or not 
the proponent lives up to the terms of the lease. So we own the 
park, we own the ground, we own the infrastructure, and we 
don’t mind selling them some buildings because we have the 
hammer at the end of the lease period. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And so, Mr. Minister, at the end of the lease 
period, if we decide not to renew the lease, we’re going to have 
an animal park that has animals, land, and sewer pipes but no 
buildings or cages, because they will almost certainly then 
belong to the lessee who will be able to buy the whole lot for 
$1. 
 
Mr. Minister, another issue that we were concerned about and 
we fear happening, was accessibility to the park in terms of gate 
fee charges. I’ll just raise this with you and then defer to other 
colleagues who have other questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve set out in the agreement the gate fees that 
will be allowed under the term for the next five years. And I 
want to compare those with the figures . . . well I’m   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2532 
 

going to use 1985, before you raised the rates last year. 
 
In 1985, Mr. Minister, if a family visited the animal park — 
they didn’t have an annual pass; just came to visit — and that 
family consisted of two adults, three children, one grandparent, 
they could enter the park and enjoy all of the facilities of the 
park for $4.75. That same family visiting the park in 1992, just 
to enter the park, will be charged $22 just to get through the 
gate, and then will face a variety of other charges and fees once 
inside, for all the amusements. 
 
Mr. Minister, I submit that in fact what we’re doing here is 
creating a park for those of middle and upper income, and we 
will in fact be barring those of lower incomes from visiting the 
Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I think, Mr. Chairman, what we have to 
do is take the comparison from 1987 when the rates were 
adjusted, and not old rates prior to that in 1985, because as we 
know, last year rates were adjusted for all of the provincial 
parks, upwards, and left that way, and no rate increase this year, 
or none planned for next year either. 
 
So in 1987 the rate for an adult was $2, and the rate for a 
student was $1.50. yes, they’re increased in 1988 to 3.75 and 
2.50 respectively, and I think that’s the comparison that has to 
be made. 
 
I think it also has to be pointed out that the proponents are 
investing a very large sum of money in this park to put in new 
facilities that were not there before, which I think will make 
Moose Jaw really a tourist attraction, more so than it was 
before. I think a large number of people will avail themselves of 
the facilities there because there will be more things put in 
there. That costs money. 
 
When the government was operating the park, we were losing 
something like $250,000 a year of taxpayers’ money. We’re not 
losing any taxpayers’ money. These people are taking the risk; 
they’re putting in new facilities. And yes, the fees have gone up 
to reflect the fact that there’s increased number of facilities in 
the park. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d like 
to ask you a question regarding employment and the 
employment impact of the privatization sale of the wild animal 
park in moose Jaw. I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you will respond 
to two or three questions but I’ll put them together and if you 
would respond to them together as well. 
 
Could you please advise this House, Mr. Minister, how many 
employees were working at the park, were assigned to the park, 
just prior to the privatization sale of the park? And how many 
of those . . . which of those employees, Mr. Minister, which of 
those employees, Mr. Minister, which of those employees are 
continuing to work at the park to be employed by the current 
private owners? I would also ask you, Mr. Minister, are those 
employees continuing with the same rate of pay and benefits? 
And I would also ask you as well, Mr. Minister, what has come 
of the employees who are no longer there, and what 
undertakings or commitments have you made, or will you 
make, to ensure that those employees will not go without 
employment at the same rate of pay and 
 

benefits that they were privileged to prior to your privatization 
sale of the wild animal park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there were 12 
employees involved, seven permanent classified service 
employees and five permanent labour services employees. One 
took lateral transfer to Moose Jaw district; two resigned to 
accept other employment; two elected re-employment list to 
accept employment with the new operator. And I don’t know 
what their benefits are or what their pay is; it’s between the two 
parties involved. So I’m sorry, I really don’t have that 
information. I imagine we could find it, but I would not find it 
today; we would have to ask them for it. 
 
In labour service: three resigned to accept other employment; 
two elected to exercise bumping options and we placed them 
into vacancies in Buffalo Pound Park. So anybody that 
remained within classified service or remained within 
government would have no difference to benefits, they would 
just be bumping into another position. The ones I can’t tell you 
about are the people who elected to stay on with the new 
proponents. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, would you provide me that 
specific information within the month then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, unless they refuse to tell me how 
much they’re paying their employees. Certainly I can get that 
within a week, I would think. Do you want the list of all of the 
people who were involved and where they went? I can provide 
that for you too. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
have a couple of technical questions I’d like to ask you and 
your department officials. Recently in the newspaper there’s 
been a report that the Qu’Appelle lake has been . . . I guess the 
lake in which a number of cisco fish or tullibees have been 
found dead because of the heat and the lack of oxygen and so 
on, and the drought circumstances in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, how widespread is that in the lakes near Regina or 
the southern part of the province, and is it progressing into other 
species as well? I know the cisco or the tullibee are the first 
species to be affected by the lack of oxygen, but are there other 
species involved? And finally, what contingency plan does the 
department have in terms of assisting and resolving this 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the member’s correct. 
We are experiencing some severe problems. It’s limited for the 
moment to two lakes, Mission and Katepwa, and it is tullibee or 
cisco — it’s the same species of fish. It hasn’t affected the other 
fish, and we’re hopeful it will not be affecting the other fish. 
This is driven by nature. There are some things over which we 
really have no control, so this is out with our . . . I’m afraid this 
belongs to a higher authority than any government to deal with 
it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I suppose perhaps one of the contingencies 
would be to lift the levels of controls on the number of fish that 
could be caught, perhaps encouraging people to fish the lakes 
out and have some kind of restocking plan. But that leads me to 
another question,   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2533 
 

and you may want to comment on that point, Mr. Minister. 
 
There are some lakes in southern Saskatchewan, in particular 
the only I’m familiar with is Dead Lake at Midale, which has a 
very low, low level of water. Some fishermen have told me that 
they’re concerned that because of the low level of water that 
that lake and other lakes in southern Saskatchewan, come 
winter, will freeze and therefore all the species will die. 
 
Would it be appropriate for the department to encourage those 
lakes to be fished out and restocked before this happens, if 
indeed the levels of lakes are low throughout the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Currently we’re doing a major 
inventory study of all the lakes in southern Saskatchewan, and 
when we’ve completed the inventory, then we’re going to 
develop a contingency plan. We do, as you know, do a lot of 
stocking. We’ve really increased it over the last number of 
years. We’re also looking for other lakes that would lend 
themselves to stocking. 
 
You’re right about the winter kill. When the water level goes 
low and it freezes right to the bottom, there’s no oxygen for the 
fish. We have, in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, run aeration programs to get oxygen into those 
lakes to prevent winter kill. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A final question, Mr. Chairman, if I may. Has 
the department the capacity, or indeed the resources, to — if 
this was to happen, if the aeration program is not a possibility 
— to net the fish and move them to another location? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, I’m advised by the biologists that 
it just wouldn’t be feasible, Mr. Chairman. We couldn’t do it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The 
questions to the minister will be forthcoming. I just want to 
make a few brief announce . . . or, pardon me, a few brief 
comments regarding some of the issues that have arisen in the 
recreation and cultural areas of his department. 
 
I note with interest, Mr. Minister, that while the overall budget 
for Parks, Recreation and Culture has increased in 1988-89 by 
6.8 per cent or 5,359,200 that that percentage increase did not 
go to programs or services to the people of the province. 
Instead, it went to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation or, as some people call it, Sask fraud co. 
 
What we see instead, Mr. Minister, is basically a hold-the-line 
. . . it’s actually a decrease of $1,200 for services from your 
department. And I want to refer here to some of the individual 
programs and services, for example: sports and recreation, a 1.5 
per cent decrease; arts and multiculturalism, 4.2 per cent 
decrease; Western Development Museums, 2.2 per cent 
decrease; arts, multi, heritage and museum grants, 15.1 per cent 
decrease; sports and recreation programs and grants, 40.5 per 
cent decrease; provincial cultural and 
 

recreational facilities grants, a 15 per cent decrease, with the 
program ending on March 31 of this year. 
 
So that brings to my mind several questions, one which is a 
very general question, Mr. Minister, and that is that since the 
first year or the year that I’ve been appointed critic for this 
particular department, I’ve tried to find some kind of direction 
that the government is giving to the arts community and cultural 
community and recreational community in the province. And it 
seems to me that as I examine this, that I can’t find any type of 
overall philosophic direction or any overall developmental 
direction. I’m wondering if you could comment on that. 
 
What precisely, what plan do you have for the recreation and 
culture fields in the province of Saskatchewan over the next few 
years, or do you have any kind of plan in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to 
respond to that. We actually have a heritage strategy paper 
which will be released later this year. There is a recreation 
strategy paper being done. There’s an independent study done 
by the three umbrella groups. For those who aren’t familiar, we 
talk about the umbrella groups being Saskatchewan Council of 
Cultural Organizations, Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation 
Association, and Sask Sport. 
 
We’ve had consultations; they’ve done a major study with 
recommendations. Virtually I agree with all of their 
recommendations for the future, the way we’re going, the 
responsibility of the department vis-a-vis the volunteer groups, 
what kind of things we should be doing as a department, what 
kind of things best belong in the hands of the volunteer groups. 
 
A bulk of funding as we know for those organizations, comes 
from the lottery system, and they had the same amount of 
money last year as the year before, and they’ll have probably, it 
looks like, a growth in the trust fund for this year. So there’s no 
reduction in funding with those particular groups. The Western 
Development Museum, which the hon. member mentioned, 
received an additional $175,000 a month or so ago when I 
spoke at the Saskatchewan Museum Association meeting. So 
yes, we do have a plan in place. 
 
Oh, I should mention too, in the area of multiculturalism I’ve 
struck a task force to study multiculturalism in the province. 
They will be operational in July. They’ll make a final report 
back, having met and consulted with groups, probably in 
December, at which time we’ll be studying their 
recommendations with a view to bringing in a anew 
multicultural Act. So I think there are an awful lot of exciting 
things happening on this side of the portfolio. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, your answer leaves a few more 
questions. First of all, in the area of funding and the relationship 
to the trust, I notice that while last year the fees that were paid, 
licensing fees paid by the trust, for $75,000 there seems to be a 
slight increase this year of . . . from $75,000 to $7.8 million. 
 
And I’m wondering if you could please explain the rationale for 
that kind of increase in licensing fees. I must   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2534 
 

say that, while your government has raised auto rates and all 
kinds of other fees, park fees and everything, I don’t think we 
have ever seen that kind of a fee increase, a licensing fee 
increase, probably in the history of any jurisdiction anywhere in 
North America. 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Very simple explanation, Mr. 
Chairman. The lottery is actually owned by the government, 
and the groups who benefit from the lotteries receive the same 
amount of money as they had the previous year. What we did 
was, when the Finance officials got involved and took a look at 
the operations then, as we’re all aware, there was an extremely 
close scrutiny of all aspect of government in the last year, in 
1987. 
 
One of the things that was looked at was the lotteries, and it was 
discovered that there was a sum of money within the lottery 
system that was basically a reserve within their system. So they 
were left with enough money to operate, enough money to 
provide all of their groups precisely what they’d received the 
year before with no reduction, enough money to fund several 
other activities such as the Sask First program, Saskatchewan 
Express, fund a sports hall of fame, the admin centre for sport, 
and various other activities like that, grants to museums 
association. 
 
There was still enough money; the government felt we could 
take some of that money and use it for other operations within 
government. As the hon. member would also be aware, funds 
went into things like Jeux Canada Games and the Western 
Canada Games, and that was set up for the lottery system 
originally. The concept would be, it would fund sport, culture, 
and recreation, and that’s what it’s been doing. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t want to get into an 
argument with you today over whether or not some of the 
groups received the same amount of money or they didn’t. I 
read off a list earlier about some areas where in fact there had 
been cuts, had been decreases. Seems to me that when the folks 
from treasury board came along and did the increase in the 
licensing fee, that certainly there should have been at least the 
amount of money retained by the department that was equal to 
the costs of inflation. Because I know that there are groups in 
the province who in fact have contacted me, and who in fact are 
going to feel some kind of squeeze in their operation, carrying 
out their activities because of the cut-backs. 
 
But I want to turn to one of the programs which I had 
mentioned, and that was the question of the provincial facilities 
grant program. And I notice that that program which was 
announced in 1983 and had set aside a certain amount of money 
to the tune of $32 million for the construction of capital 
facilities for culture and recreational purposes in the province, I 
notice that at March 31 of this year, when the program ended, 
that there was something like $7.3 million; that there was only 
$24.7 million left over from the . . . or used out of that 
particular program. 
 
Now what I was wondering, Mr. Minister, that there was a $7.3 
million surplus left in the facilities capital grants 
 

program, and we had an issue develop throughout the province 
in regards to the arenas and the construction of the arenas or, 
pardon me, the end of the viable life span for many arenas in 
this province which were constructed during the centennial year 
program. 
 
And I could refer to a number of announcements that, for 
example, from the Star-Phoenix . . . pardon me, Leader-Post of 
January 23, 1988 where you made certain comments regarding 
the arenas and how many were in disrepair. I understand that 
your department did an examination of 145 arenas. It was found 
that 17 of the arenas should be closed, 32 used only with 
caution, and 78 of those arenas requiring modification. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, and I’m going to put forward a 
proposal to you, that given that there was 7.3 million left over 
the facilities grants program, would you not consider a program 
of spending that $7.3 million to upgrade those arenas that need 
upgrading and to repair those arenas which need repairing in 
those communities. 
 
I don’t have to tell you, Mr. Minister, that in fact that the arenas 
form part of the heart of many, many small rural communities 
in this province and that to see the end of an arena in fact takes 
out part of that heart, and hence part of the soul of that 
particular community, and just is another stake in the heart of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to propose to you, sir, that a program which would bring 
up to, either a provincial granting program covering 25 per cent 
of the cost or repair or replacement of an arena to a maximum 
of $50,000, or . . . and/or provincial assistance on interest rates 
for the arenas up to — and I throw out the figure of $200,000 
because I’m using the $7.3 million as the base funding figure at 
zero per cent interest rate — that they provide up to $200,000 
money or any combination of one or two or modification of one 
of the two, given the fact that we’ve got 7.3 million left over in 
that facilities grants program. 
 
I wonder, would you be in the position to consider that kind of 
program? It seems to me that it’s something that everybody in 
both sides of the House could agree on. I think everybody 
agrees that there’s a need for the repair of the arenas. 
 
I did take, however, exception to one of your comments which 
was that some arenas are only three and four miles apart. And 
I’d like to, as a subsidiary, as you: how many arenas did you 
find that were three and four miles apart that need repair? 
 
My basic question is: will you consider providing money out of 
the facilities grants program for the reconstruction or the 
replacement and the rebuilding of those arenas and repair which 
need it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Several points, Mr. Chairman. The first 
one is: the study that was done wasn’t done by my department. 
It was done by Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, 
which we subsequently received a copy for perusal. But your 
figures obviously are correct in what you said. 
 
We recognize that there is a problem with arenas, in fact   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2535 
 

with recreational facilities in general around the province. There 
are swimming pools that are in trouble, as well as arenas, 
curling rinks, a whole host of things. Lots of correspondence 
has been flowing in on that particular subject, and we recognize 
that there’s going to be a need for some help to these 
communities because the cost of building a new facility is just 
horrendous. So there’s going to have to be, in my view, some 
kind of a program. 
 
Now we’ve already, as a department, designed a program to fill 
this need on a priority basis, depending on the ones that are 
condemned, the ones that are in states of various disrepair. 
We’ve already designed a program, and it hasn’t been finally 
approved yet, and as you’re well aware, Mr. Chairman, you sat 
on that committee yourself and looked at the program design. 
 
There are all kinds of options within the program, whether we 
go matching grant with communities, whether we look at 
interest rates, which is a suggestion I hadn’t had before, but I 
thank the member for making it. There are all kinds of variables 
we could build into the design of the program, but we are 
anxious to come up with a program and fund it in such a 
manner over a period of years that these communities will, in 
fact, be able to take advantage of it and benefit from it. 
 
But I should point out to the hon. member that there isn’t any 
money left over in that recreational facilities grant, the capital 
grant. It’s going to be expended over the next couple of years. 
There are some applications that are, I believe, only just came 
in . . . the construction is not finished on some, so there will be 
pay-out to them upon completion of the project. So the money 
that was committed to that program is still committed to the 
program. 
 
What we’re talking about is a new influx of funds, a new 
program, new money. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Just on your last comments, Mr. Minister, am I 
to understand that the program didn’t finish on March 31, that 
people in fact still have the opportunity to send in applications 
for that money? No, you’re saying that the . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That was the application deadline . . .  
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. You received applications up till March 
31, and that there will be in fact the remaining 7.3 money 
disbursed out. could you tell me whether in fact the applications 
that have come in, do they take the $7.3 million . . . do they 
apprehend that 7.3, or will there be some funds left over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Depending on the total uptake now and 
exactly when they finish construction and what they end up 
constructing, we assume that all of the money budgeted will be 
spent. It could be that it won’t all be spent. We don’t know that 
yet, because there’s a couple more years to run before its 
program’s finished and how much we’ll be putting into it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m glad to hear, Mr. Minister, that your 
 

government in fact is considering the program to upgrade the 
arenas or to repair or replace those arenas and to find some kind 
of funding for that. I think that that’s a laudable effort and I 
know that those communities in which the arenas are in 
disrepair, or their recreational facilities are in disrepair, will be 
glad to hear that good news. 
 
I take it from one of your previous answers that you are now 
announcing the multicultural task force, the review task force. 
Is that right? Are you making the announcement now? And I 
wonder if you could outline who is on the task force panel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well I’m not really making the 
announcement today because the announcement was made last 
week at a function I spoke at in Prince Albert. And when I met 
the multi . . .  
 
An. Hon. Member: — Well you’re not getting much press. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It was not a big media event, I may say, 
where I met with the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. If 
the member for Regina Centre would just pay a little attention, 
he may hear something of value to his constituents. 
 
The Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, out of courtesy, I 
felt, should be informed first, before we make any big splash or 
big announcement. All of the people who have been selected, 
and I may say they were nominated by various multicultural 
groups from different parts of the province, all of those people 
have not yet been informed. We’re in the process of calling 
them and asking them if they will serve. I can tell you that 
we’re pretty close to having it finished and I think probably 
next week we can put out a news release with the names of the 
members on the task force. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I’m glad to hear that, Mr. Minister. That’s 
indeed encouraging news for the multicultural community in 
this province. they’ve certainly been looking forward to that. 
And we’re certainly wondering why it was that it took so long 
before the announcement was made. But, be that as it may, they 
were glad to hear it. 
 
I’d like to turn to a couple of other issues that are before us. 
One concerns the Big Valley Jamboree at Craven, which is one 
of the major cultural events, musical cultural events in this 
province. And there has been certain press and certain 
controversy has arisen regarding the operation of Bosco Homes, 
and people are raising questions about the . . . whether that 
means that Big Valley will go ahead, and precisely what’s 
going on. 
 
I’ve got two questions for you, Mr. Minister. First of all, does 
your department provide any money for the operation of Big 
Valley and the associated events; is there any money coming 
from there? And secondly, given the nature of the controversy, 
is the government contemplating holding an inquiry into the 
affairs surrounding Bosco, given the controversy that’s now 
erupted in Saskatchewan over the operation of that particular 
operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we don’t provide 
any funds to Big Valley or to the jamboree at all. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2536 
 

We’re not involved with it. In terms of an inquiry, that would 
be out with my jurisdiction. I’m not sure which of my 
colleagues’ bailiwick that would fall under, but it certainly isn’t 
under my bailiwick. And I haven’t heard . . . Nobody’s come to 
me and said, hey Max, I think we’re going to do an inquiry into 
Bosco. So I couldn’t answer that for you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, fine. Thank you very much. That will be 
sufficient on that particular issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, a little while ago you talked about putting up art 
in the legislature building here in Saskatchewan, giving 
Saskatchewan arts a permanent gallery which would be viewed 
by many, many people in this province. I wonder, as we walk 
through these bare halls, have you any date at which we’ll find 
Saskatchewan art beginning to adorn the marble palace? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I just took a moment to consult with my 
colleague responsible for the property management corporation, 
because we talked about this together. There are two displays 
that should be up fairly soon, certainly this summer. One is 
native art and the other one is Chinese art, and we’ll be 
displaying them in the hallways, in the corridors. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well that’s good, Mr. Minister. I hope that 
they’ll be up, and I would hope you will consider an idea, not 
providing just those kind of art opportunities for the people that 
visit the Legislative Building, but that in fact you’d consider 
some kind of permanent travelling exhibit of Saskatchewan art 
that could be taken to various communities around the province 
to help enhance the education of people in Saskatchewan, that 
in fact Saskatchewan artists rank among the best in the world, 
and that will provide the methods of exposure to the artists. And 
I wonder, sir, has your department considered any kind of 
permanent travelling exhibition funded by the province so that 
people outside Regina and people in the small areas of rural 
Saskatchewan can get an opportunity to view those kinds of 
shows? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, as a matter of fact 
we do have a granting program to organizations to do just that 
type of thing. In fact OSAC, the Organization of Saskatchewan 
Art Councils, with which I know you’re familiar, does in fact 
do this. 
 
We also have the Saskatchewan Arts Board who have a 
permanent collection which from time to time does go out. It 
can be loaned out and it does go out travelling. 
 
And I’d also like to mention that just very recently, a couple of 
months ago, our department sponsored a wildlife art 
competition with prizes for the winners. I’m happy to say I 
bought one of the pieces personally. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to turn now to another 
area in the arts which is of particular interest to myself, and 
that’s the question of the promotion of live music in the 
province. 
 
And before I say this, you talked a little earlier about 
 

setting a direction for the arts and cultural community in the 
province. Having said that, it seems to me that the department, 
the government, is not getting the word out enough that culture 
and art are big employers in this province. for example, the 
cultural field in Saskatchewan employs more people than 
potash or uranium mining combined, and that it represents a 
major employer and a major economic activity within the 
province. 
 
And among those are the festivals and the people who put 
together some of the festivals. I refer particularly now to, for 
example, the folk music festival recently held in Regina which 
had some 18,000 people attended — at least in the nightly 
concerts, the three nightly concerts — in total. And there was 
funding provided by your department for that. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I under that the Saskatoon jazz festival, 
which is a major tourist attraction for Saskatoon and which in 
fact employs musicians from around Saskatchewan, and 
participates, applied for . . . it is my understanding that they 
applied for a grant from your department and failed to receive 
it. 
 
And I wonder if you would first of all outline what criteria, 
what criterias that you grant money to festivals of this type . . . 
The Regina folk music festival, which I support, got money, 
and I’m glad to see that. But the Saskatoon jazz festival applied 
and didn’t get money, it’s my understanding. 
 
I wonder if you could outline the criteria, and in this particular 
instance why it was that the Saskatoon jazz festival, which is 
the largest jazz festival in western Canada, didn’t receive 
financial support from your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, we actually don’t grant 
money to programs that are for community-run events. And in 
the case of Folkfest, my assistant deputy minister says, if they 
received a grant, he never approved it. And I certainly didn’t 
see it either. 
 
So what it may have been was they got funding for a workshop 
or something of that nature. We have programs for that. But 
we’ll find the . . . It just happened, so obviously it’s hot off the 
press, that one. We’ll get the information on that one. I’ll be 
pleased to send it to you within a couple of days. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, the funding was granted because 
the people who helped organize the festival in Regina are a part 
of provincial organization to the Saskatchewan Cultural 
Exchange Society, I believe. Okay. And I think that that’s 
where the money is coming from. 
 
However, there are people involved, there are people involved 
on a provincial level with the organization of the Saskatoon jazz 
festival. And it seems to me that we have here one of those 
cases where a bureaucratic rule is getting in the way of, you 
know . . . which is being applied in a very, very strict manner, is 
getting in the way of the promotion of something which is 
beneficial to the whole province and which involves musicians, 
and involves in fact organizers and people involved with jazz in 
the   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2537 
 

province on a provincial basis. 
 
And I’m asking you, sir if you would look at providing ways to 
assist the Saskatoon jazz festival in developing that particular 
festival — if you would look into it, give me assurance you’d 
look into it, and if there’s a way to try to overcome that 
bureaucratic hurdle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I say this is 
something we are looking at and through a lottery program or 
the TIP program — T-I-P— Trust Initiative program, and they 
could qualify for funding for a community event through there. 
They may also be eligible to go after the trust for that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I wonder if the 
minister would grant me some indulgence. I’m going to raise a 
question which doesn’t come squarely within his estimates, but 
which is very relevant to the area of culture. It has to do with 
the question of the fine arts building on the University of 
Regina. 
 
I know that that is . . . the funding would probably come within 
the funding of the Minister of Education, that’s right; however, 
those estimates are through and the issue has once again come 
to the attention of members through what I thought was a very 
effective presentation to a dozen . . . to a half a dozen or a dozen 
members, Thursday of last week. I think all the members who 
attended the presentation by the University of Regina were 
impressed by the serious state of deterioration in the building, 
were impressed by the very effective program put on by the 
University of Regina, and I think we were . . . and I think it’s 
fair to say members on both sides of the House were also 
impressed with the crucial role that a fine arts program must 
play within a well-balanced university. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could comment on your 
government’ intentions with respect to the fine arts building. I 
think in particular we would like your assurance that your 
support would be lent to the efforts of the University of Regina 
to get the funding necessary to replace the building. 
 
There are some serious problems with buildings on that 
campus, and I won’t go into those in great detail, but they’re 
getting worse. And there’s a number of things that should be 
done, but I think, among a nest of serious problems, the fine arts 
building is undoubtedly the most crucial. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, if we could have your comment on 
that, and your assurance that, so far as you have influence on 
the matter, those of us who are seeking to get additional funding 
for this fine arts building can count upon your support. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member’s 
correct; it doesn’t fall within my jurisdiction, but I would like to 
comment on it. Back in the days when I was minister of 
advanced education, there was a discussion taking place 
between our two universities that perhaps there should be one 
fine arts program in the province and it should be located in the 
fine arts building down here. 
 

There’s also been discussion in the city of Regina to make it a 
heritage property, and then it would qualify for some funding 
through that route, but it wouldn’t be nearly enough. I am 
advised that they’re looking at something like $13 million 
worth of work on that building. 
 
There’s no question it’s a worthy project. Whether or not $13 
million is going to be available this year or next year, you 
know, it is a moot point. But I think it’s worthy of designation, 
it’s worthy of preservation, and I think it’s an asset to the city. 
And I know that my colleagues, who were over there, cam back 
and said precisely the same thing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think, Mr. Minister, what I think the 
University of Regina was seeking was not so much a 
recognition that it’s worthy, but a recognition of its urgency. 
And I’d like you to comment on that as well. 
 
The building is such that they’re going to have to begin within a 
relatively brief period of time, probably before the end of this 
legislature, I mean before the end of . . . before the next 
election, they’re going to have to begin winding down the fine 
arts program if they don’t have some commitment. 
 
So I’d like a comment, Mr. Minister, as much on the urgency of 
this project as on it worthwhileness, if you can pardon that 
tortured syntax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Certainly it’s something I’d bring up 
with the Minister of Education. On his way out, he just 
mentioned that the university has set their priorities, and then 
his department has to respond to their list of priorities. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m just going to make one final comment. 
I know the hour is late. I would just point out that there has 
been no buildings built on that campus since 1982, a date . . . I 
just picked that date out of the air. Mr. Minister, it isn’t enough 
to say that the Minister of Education is going to look at the list, 
because he hasn’t done anything with the list for some time. It 
is essential that at least one of those projects receive the go 
ahead, if not in this fiscal year, certainly within the next fiscal 
year. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Just 
before we wrap up the estimates, Mr. Minister, I got two 
technical questions, I guess, or ones that can take a pretty direct 
answer. 
 
I notice that in the estimates, that $300,000 was allotted in 
’87-88 to the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts; however, in the 
supplementary estimates, an additional $742,000 was made 
available. I wonder if you . . . I can’t find out why that 
additional sum was made available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to respond 
to that. That’s a very expensive building to operate and to own, 
and as we all know, the Government of Saskatchewan does own 
the Centre of the Arts. It operates at a fairly healthy deficit. 
However, I believe there’s a cost of doing business in the area 
of primarily culture in this province. 
 
And we’re looking for ways to reduce that deficit. We’re   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2538 
 

looking at things that we can do to make it a more profitable or 
. . . It’s not going to be profitable; I don’t think it’ll ever break 
even. But we’re looking for a way to try and cut the losses over 
there but at the same time, we don’t want to detract from the 
service that it’s providing to this city. I think there is a cost of 
cultural activity, and if that cost is 500,000 or whatever that the 
government’s going to be putting into it, then we’re just going 
to have to put it in. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I recognize that there’s a cost. I’m glad to hear 
what the minister’s statement . . . the content of the minister’s 
statement. It seems to me that that same content would apply, 
for example, to the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park or to any of 
the provincial parks around; that there’s a cost to providing 
services. 
 
But the other side of the coin, Mr. Minister, the other side of the 
coin is that in fact there is assets, and there’s assets provided, 
some of which are tangible in the form of buildings, and some 
which aren’t in the form of cultural experiences, if you like. But 
I’m glad to hear that you will admit, at least for the 
Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts, that that’s not up on the 
auction block. 
 
My second question relates to the recreational field, and that’s 
to the Young Athlete Saskatchewan program which receives no 
funding from the money available for recreation from the 
province. And I was wondering, Mr. Minister, have you talked 
to the folks from YAS (Young Athlete Saskatchewan) because I 
know that they’ve certainly approached your office on many an 
occasion asking that funding be provided for this program 
which allows for mass participation by literally hundreds and 
hundreds of young people in Saskatchewan through their 
sporting activities program. 
 
Speaking from personal experience, and I know that other 
members and other members of this side of the House, and 
maybe other members on that side of the House have had their 
children participate in some of the YAS programs. I’m 
wondering, would you consider or have you considered or will 
you consider providing some kind of a form of funding to 
enable this program to grow. because it’s at the basis of mass 
participation, which is to develop the skill levels of a great 
many people in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there’s no question 
about the merits of that particular program to which the member 
has just referred. They do in fact receive funding from 
Basketball Saskatchewan, which is a provincial sport governing 
body. The provincial sport governing bodies — I think there’s 
75 of them — are all funded, and they choose how they will 
spend their money on subsidiary groups or their own client 
groups. so if we were to fund something like the YAS program, 
we would end up funding every group around the province 
involved in any way with sport at any level. 
 
The way the system’s evolved . . . and it’s a very good one and 
I know the hon. member sitting over here from Regina North 
East was the minister of this department; he was partly 
instrumental in this program, and this program coming in. And 
those were the good days and these are better days, because 
we’re spending even more money 
 

on these programs these days, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But the way this program was set up, it’s a good system, it’s 
probably the best system in Canada, as the provincial sport 
governing bodies are funded and they in turn choose who they 
will fund. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I realize that. It seems to me that 
the terms of the direction of Basketball Saskatchewan is aimed 
at an elite sports program, where the aims of the Young Athlete 
Saskatchewan tends to be more on the basis of mass 
participation. What I’m asking you is, is there some way that 
you or your officials can direct some funding available, out of 
either the lottery funding or some other area and if find another 
mechanism, if you like, outside Basketball Saskatchewan to 
enhance and encourage this kind of activity? 
 
(1300) 
 
Given the number of volunteers involved, given the locations 
around the province involved, and given the number of 
participants in the province involved, and given your own 
words that indeed it is a worthwhile program, it seems to me 
that we should be able to encourage people to develop these 
kind of programs on a volunteer basis. But even the volunteer 
basis needs some kind of funding base for ongoing . . . for an 
operation. And I’m asking you if you will, in fact, endeavour to 
look at some way of finding funding for Young Athlete 
Saskatchewan. If Basketball Saskatchewan can’t do it, then 
surely there’s other mechanisms available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There actually is an avenue that does 
exist currently, Mr. Chairman, through the TIP program, Trust 
Initiative Program, and I may say for the benefit of members 
that we have agreed on the lottery licence this year. That’s 
already been taken care of with Sask Sport (Inc.) and indeed the 
TIP budget will increase by about a million dollars, from 2.5 to 
3.5. And I would encourage YAS to explore that avenue, 
because that’s precisely why TIP was set up, to assist groups at 
the community level. And as far as we can tell, they would 
certainly qualify for assistance from that program. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much. I’m quite sure that the 
Young Athlete Saskatchewan group of volunteers will be glad 
to hear that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve got no further questions, given the lateness of 
the time. However, I want to assure the people involved in the 
recreation and culture field in the province that the shortness of 
the estimates in no way reflects either your or my particular 
interest in the many, many activities and valuable activities that 
are carried out by the groups and individuals, you know, in 
these fields and that unless other members have questions, I 
have no further questions of the minister. 
 
I’ll thank in advance the officials for their co-operation in this 
regard. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2539 
 

Item 8 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question 
with respect to time no. 8. In 1987-88 there was an allocation of 
$5.913 million; this fiscal year an estimate of $3.183 million, a 
quite significant decline in the amount of money that you’re 
spending this year on forestry. 
 
Could the minister explain why there is such a difference? As 
well, there’s such a difference in person-years, 130 down to 72. 
Could you explain that as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 
member, those person-years, the money has been transferred, 
and it shows up under the forest renewal development fund. I 
don’t believe the person-years show against that fund, but the 
money does. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that all of that 
money has been transferred to the forest renewal fund? Does 
this have any impact on the tree planting in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, it has been transferred, and yes it 
does have impact on tree planting. We are going to be planting 
more trees than ever before, thanks to that particular fund and 
thanks to the money we collected off the 15 per cent export tax. 
That’s where the money is going, and unfortunately our spring 
planting is getting messed around with the hot weather 
conditions. The trees would not survive. We’re hoping to 
transfer it into the fall if cooler conditions prevail, and we’re 
going to be planting more trees than we ever planted before. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 18 — Statutory. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 
 
Item 20 — Statutory 
 
Items 21 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 24 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A question to the 
minister with respect to item 24, grants in support of sport and 
recreation programs. Again the amount of money that’s been 
allocated towards this expenditure has declined significantly 
from last year to this year. Could you please explain why that 
is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there was a reduction of 
$510,000 and that was due to three programs. I’ll give you the 
details. Provincial coaching assistance grants transferred to the 
lotteries for $180,000; athlete assistance grants transferred to 
lotteries for $180,000; and the municipal innovative grants to 
cities has been eliminated. And the reason for that, the uptake 
wasn’t very strong and some of the grants that were being given 
out for programs or projects under that particular item were 
something less than commendable, and in 
 

some cases they tended to be very weak and most of them could 
be taken care of through other funding mechanisms. 
 
I’ll give you an example. There was a program manual which 
was being developed and we just didn’t think that you know, a 
program manual belonged under that particular item. So the 
bulk of this is transferred to lotteries. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, how much was cut to the 
municipalities, and where were these grants aimed at? Were 
they aimed at the larger municipalities, the urban 
municipalities, or were they general throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It was $150,000, and it was to the cities. 
That’s all of the cities. 
 
Item 24 agreed to. 
 
Items 25 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 34 - Statutory. 
 
Item 35 agreed to. 
 
Vote 39 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 39 

 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 39 agreed to. 
 

Forest Renewal and Development Fund 
1988-89 Financial Summary 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Agreed. I’d like to thank 
the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like 
to thank the officials for their usual good work in preparing for 
the estimates, and their loyal dedication to the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d also like to thank the members of the opposition for their 
line of questioning. I found it very interesting. I found it 
stimulating. In particular I’d like to thank my two critics, the 
member for Regina Rosemont and member for Athabasca, and 
of course, the other northern member from Cumberland, for 
their questions. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to 
my right is my Deputy Minister, Doug Cressman; behind Doug 
Cressman is Hugh Hunt, the   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2540 
 

Superintendent of Wildlife; and directly seated behind me is 
Heather Sinclair, who is our lawyer from the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, dealing with Bill No. 47, The 
Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, I wonder, sir, would 
you please outline to the people of Saskatchewan what criteria 
area is set aside as critical habitat, and how is it that land which 
is designated as critical habitat can be designated non-critical 
habitat? I think that’s the first question I’d like to ask. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, the designation initially is carried out after 
careful assessment by the biologists within the department. 
We’ll look at inventory and we’ll look at the habitat and assess 
whether or not that habitat is critical to the support of various 
wildlife populations or upland game birds or, indeed, 
water-fowl. So on that basis, designation is made. 
 
Sometimes, and we were guilty of this earlier this year when we 
had to do some changing around at our own caucus, we found 
that we had included, by mistake, some land that should not 
have been designated critical in the first place. There are also 
sometimes changing conditions — climactic or soil can make 
changes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’ll be dealing with the 
House amendment a little later, involving quite a bit of land 
which had been designated as critical wildlife habitat, 
particularly in the Souris valley. We’re talking about the land 
which will be . . . some of the land which will be hurt by the 
construction of the Rafferty dam. 
 
Someone has yet to explain to me, satisfactorily, and to the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, and to the Canadian 
Wildlife Federation, and the Canadian Nature Federation, and 
to other groups who are interested in wildlife and conservation, 
how it is that the reports that they have done, and the studies 
that they have done on wildlife in that area, and the kind of 
habitat which exists in that area, which they originally had 
agreed with the government was, and the government had 
agreed with them, was in fact critical habitat; how it is that on 
the political whim of your government, that that land which was 
critical now becomes non-critical, and that the species which 
exist there are no longer recognized as species which are 
deserving of protecting, or the animals and birds which live in 
that are recognized as no longer need of protection. 
 
How is it, how is it that that was based? When you say you 
made a mistake, was the mistake that you didn’t consult with 
the Deputy Premier earlier on, or Mr. George Hill earlier on, 
that they were going to build a dam there and that maybe the 
animals and birds that live in that area were going to get in the 
way of their political project. Or is it true, as the deputy 
minister has said, that the decisions that are made on what’s 
critical and what’s not critical are arbitrary. I think that was . . . 
I’m not using another word, I’m using his word that those were 
made at least on arbitrary decisions. 
 

When you say that . . . It seems to me that you can’t have 
something that’s critical one day and not critical the next day, 
particularly on this kind of area. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member from Regina Centre on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I ask for leave of the Assembly to 
introduce a group of school students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I hate to give the minister an opportunity to 
concoct a reply while I’m doing this, but I guess such is the life 
in the Assembly. 
 
I want to introduce to the Assembly, a group of — I could only 
guess — about 15 or so students . . . 20, I’m told, who are 
accompanied by their teacher, Ingrid Alesich. These students, 
members will be interested in knowing, are English as a second 
language students. 
 
Very few of these students were in fact born in Canada — the 
odd student from Quebec, but they’re very few. Very few of 
these people were actually born in Canada. Most have come a 
very long distance to settle in this country. In some cases, there 
were functioning democracies in the countries they left, but in 
many cases, life being what it is, there wasn’t. 
 
So I know all members will want to join me in welcoming these 
students to our democratic institution here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend the Critical Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act 

 
Clause 1(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, as an 
immigrant to Canada — I’ve lived here for 22 years now — it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome you here today. 
This is the greatest country in the world, and it certainly has 
been wonderful for me and my family, and the best place 
possible to raise a family. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d like to deal specifically for the hon. 
member on the deletion of certain lands in this Act. And when I 
see a mistake, I’m going to finish with that one and show you 
how sometimes a mistake can be made. We’re proposing to 
add, as we know, several hundred thousand acres that we 
believe to be critical to the support of wildlife in this province 
to the Act. 
 
We are also proposing to withdraw 47,000 acres from this Act. 
And the major criteria are as follows: firstly, land directly 
involved in the proposed grasslands national   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2541 
 

park is 17,000 acres. So 17,000 acres has been drawn out so 
they can go in to the grasslands national park. 
 
Land identified — and this is of prime interest to the hon. 
member, and we’ve provided this information, I believe, 
through my office to him — land identified as part of the 
Rafferty reservoir proposal is 2,400 acres. 
 
Land no longer considered critical wildlife habitat — and this 
follows intensive review in this — is the forest fringe area of 
the province, amounts to 13,000 acres. 
 
That leaves another 15,000 acres. And most of this were errors 
in the original Act due to a time lag in our consultation with 
Agriculture, maintaining their files, and then us putting into 
legislation. 
 
I’ll give you an example of what I mean by that: finding out that 
there was land that had buildings on it or finding out there was 
land for which there were already sale agreements in place that 
we didn’t know about, and we included those in the Act. So 
we’d have to take those out. 
 
So that’s the 47,000 acres. And the ones that you’re particularly 
concerned with are the 2,400 for Rafferty reservoir. 
 
I’ve had lots of discussions with the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, the North Dakota Wildlife Federation, Canadian 
Wildlife Service, and others, and this is a business of trading 
off. It’s not my place to debate the Rafferty; there are others 
who are more capable than I am of doing this. 
 
But it becomes a trade-off. We are taking other land to put in 
here for habitat. There is certainly going to be some loss of 
habitat there, but we feel that the benefits of the project greatly 
outweigh that 2,400 acres. And we’ve agreed with the wildlife 
federation to take mitigating measures so that we will replace 
those acres elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well that would be news, Mr. Minister, and I 
can appreciate that it’s not your job to debate the 
Rafferty-Alameda. But, given the reasonable approach you’re 
taking to it and your seemingly openness to reason, I think you 
would do a better job debating it than the Deputy Premier, 
who’s just pushing it ahead as if nothing more than a political 
project. I think you would do a better job. 
 
Be that as it may, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 
North Dakota Wildlife Federation, and those other 
organizations mentioned, and those organizations you haven’t 
mentioned, like the National Wildlife Federation and the 
Canadian Wildlife Federation, the Canadian naturalist 
federation, have all taken exception, first of all, to the process 
by which this has occurred; that you in fact have designated 
land as critical one time, and then because of a 
politically-driven project you have de-designated it on another 
time; that they seem to be at a loss in terms of what real criteria 
your department uses for setting aside critical wildlife habitat. 
 
Secondly, those organizations dispute the area, the exact area, 
of whether it’s 2,400 acres or not. They say, in fact, that the 
area is much larger that needs to be protected, 
 

and that the fact that there were some buildings on some land 
did not disclude that land from critical wildlife. but that’s open 
to argumentation, and I think that everybody could be 
persuaded one way or the other on that particular instance. 
 
But I think the fundamental objection to this designation or 
re-designation of the lands under The Critical Wildlife Habitat 
(Protection) Act — and may I just say that in fact we support 
100,000 per cent the inclusion of those 17,000 acres for 
grassland. And we see it’s coming a little bit later than a lot of 
us would have desired, but we see it as a necessary step forward 
for the creation of the national park. 
 
But be that as it may, despite our support for that side, of setting 
aside those several hundred thousand of acres — it actually 
works out to be about 140,000 acres in total — despite our 
support for that, we think that it’s imperative that you develop 
and then make it clear to the people of this province what the 
process of designating critical wildlife habitat is, which you 
have not done. 
 
And when that designation is clear, that there is some legal 
protection for organizations like the wildlife federation or for an 
individual citizen of this province to be able to go to the courts 
for remedy in order to save them; that you in fact develop some 
kind of mechanism whereby people in this province can go 
directly to the courts as aggrieved parties, as citizens of this 
province; that they in fact can develop and initiate actions in the 
courts to save lands which have been set aside, which 
unfortunately the process is not now in place for them to do. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would comment on that fact, 
and we’ll allow the Bill to proceed. As I said earlier, we have a 
House amendment that will put the 47,000 acres back in there 
until, in fact, those criteria that I’ve outlined are met. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t comment on all 
the legal arguments that have been brought in. I can comment 
on The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, which was an 
initiative of this government in 1983, 1984, and then the 
following year when we actually put in one million acres and 
now we’re proposing to put in another 700,000 acres. 
 
I believe you’re asking what the process is for designating that 
land. That is assessed by the biologists. Am I answering your 
question? Is that what you’re asking me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — This is assessed by the biologists, 
according to the wildlife, water-fowl, and upland game bird 
population. And further north you look at other things: 
ungulates in the North and bear and fur as well. So we have to 
take a look at what the populations are and where they live and 
we protect their habitat. 
 
What has happened over a number of years is habitats have 
been disappearing, in some cases at the rate of 3 per cent per 
provincial constituency, largely due to programs directed by 
Agriculture whereby we paid people at one   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2542 
 

time to drain sloughs, and consequently, where we had four 
million pot-holes a few years ago, now we have one million 
pot-holes, and that’s why our duck population, the mallards, are 
under a million for the first time in the history of this province. 
We’ve gone from 14 million ducks to four million. This is the 
reason that we’re saying we have to protect the habitat and the 
upland nesting and the cover for the birds. 
 
We have to do the same thing with deer. We have had programs 
to clear bush off. Deer don’t necessarily run around in large 
forests, but they need little clumps of bush where they can 
move around. That’s their habitat. That’s where they live. 
 
So what we are trying to do is protect . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I have colleagues here, criticizing my accent 
here. I did remind them I wasn’t born in this country. My 
heart’s in this country. 
 
That’s how we decide. The biologists make that decision based 
on the habitat and based on the numbers of animals and upland 
game birds and water-fowl, then is brought in as a schedule to 
the Act and put through this process. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Just the one comment, Mr. Minister, in terms of 
the outline of the problem that is facing wildlife . . . and I may 
say it’s not just wildlife in the province. When you have 30 per 
cent of the surface water drained out of this province in 10 
years, you’re not only dealing with the wildlife population, 
you’re also dealing with the question of recharging of the 
aquifers and the whole question of water, which is why in 
places like Indian Head we’re seeing the water table been 
dropping 12 feet over the last 12 years — just as an example 
that we’re not just dealing with birds and animals; we’re 
dealing with our environment and the way that in fact we relate 
to the earth. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that because I 
think you understand that. And I think that what you said shows 
in fact your government’s — not yours, but your government’s 
— sorry record when it comes to dealing with some of those 
fundamental ecological environmental provinces. The fact that 
that kind of draining has gone on, mainly within the last six 
year since you took place, I think sends . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You and I will agree on that, right? The Deputy 
Premier won’t, but at least you and I will agree on that. 
 
The smartest thing you said, Mr. Minister, today however, 
relates to this critical wildlife habitat that is going to be lost. 
And you used the words “trade-off”, and that’s what the words 
we have been using, the opposition — and I’m not saying the 
opposition just in parliament — I’m talking about the 
extra-parliamentary opposition, the wildlife federation, 
nationally and provincially and internationally. 
 
(1330) 
 
All those groups that have been opposed to this because they 
are saying that trade-off is not needed, that trade-off is not 
necessary — and quite frankly, we can understand the position 
that the government has put you in, the 
 

cabinet has put you in, by going ahead with this 
Rafferty-Alameda project. I think, quite frankly, Mr. Minister, 
that if you had your druthers it wouldn’t go ahead; that quite 
frankly you’d protect that natural habitat. 
 
I certainly want to say that I sympathize with the position that 
the government has put you in on this. And having said that, I 
would hope, I would hope that you will develop under the 
auspices of your department some pretty strict guide-lines and 
some mechanisms whereby cabinet, because of the political 
majority of one group or another in cabinet, can’t dictate what 
the future of the ecology and what the future of wildlife in this 
province will be. 
 
I hope and I think that you’ve got the responsibility, Mr. 
Minister, to develop those kind of mechanisms whereby people 
can come to the defence of the wildlife habitat. those people 
who are interested have to, and need to have the mechanisms 
whereby they can march forward to the courts and say, we’re 
going to protect what is in law. Having said that, Mr. Minister, 
we’ll allow . . . I’ll agree to let it go. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 2, moved by 
the member for Regina Rosemont. Will the members take the 
amendment as read? 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to section 7, moved by 
the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture: 
 

Amend section 49.3 of the Act as being enacted by section 
7 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out “member of The Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police or other police” and substituting 
“wildlife”; and 

 
(b) by striking out “member or other” and substituting 

“wildlife”. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have now the amendment before me, 
Mr. Chairman. Can I ask the minister to explain what the 
purpose of this amendment is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, when this Bill was being 
considered in legislative review committee, there   



 
June 24, 1988 

 

2543 
 

was a change made to the original Act and I’m . . . let me say 
this again. There was a change made to what was in the original 
Act, and when we later looked at that change, it wasn’t one that 
had been requested. So we said, well we’d like to get the 
original text, it’s been there for a number of years, back in. We 
realized we’d made an error in the discussion, so we’re just 
putting back what had been in the original Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We will allow the minister to correct his 
error, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have . . . I’m not 
going to take a lot of time. I’m going to ask my question on 
both of these Bills. I have one question. We’re going to do 
another Bill afterwards. I believe, No. 76. And my question 
simply is: can the minister assure the House, so we have it on 
the record, that all of the amendments here are what I think they 
are, and that is to put into place those things that have been 
negotiated in a collective agreement between teachers, trustees 
and the government. If that’s the case, then it’s already in a 
collective agreement and this puts it into force and we’re quite 
prepared to support that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, that’s the case. Both of these are 
as a result of the last collectively bargained agreement — and I 
mean both Bills 76 and 78, and the contract requires the 
government to make the necessary legislative changes as soon 
as possible. And that’s what we’re doing here. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the amendments be now read a 
first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — With leave, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:43 p.m. 
 


