




















































March 25, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 25, 1988 
 

103 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Legislative Assembly, a 
group of 34 students from the town of Porcupine Plain and area 
who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re accompanied 
by their principal, Mr. McMillan; by Mr. Grant Ziola, teacher in 
charge; and by the bus driver, Al Dewan. 
 
I’d like to welcome the students from Porcupine Plain to our 
Legislative Assembly. I’m sure they’ll find it interesting, and I’m 
sure they’ll learn much about how the operation of this Assembly 
is. I also wish them a safe journey home. I’d like all the members 
of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming the students from 
Porcupine Plain to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed 
my pleasure this morning to welcome to the Assembly 17 grades 8 
and 9 students from Poplar Hill School, Red Lake, Ontario. These 
students and their chaperons and teachers are in the Speaker’s 
gallery. The teachers are James Byler, Ken Ranck; and chaperons 
Darla Byler, Kris Wengerd, Janice Hartman, Doris Schantz; and 
James Byler is the bus driver. 
 
We welcome you to Saskatchewan. We welcome you to the 
Assembly, and we hope you enjoy the question and answer period 
that will be following shortly. Have a good time on your visit here 
in Saskatchewan. I’ll be meeting with them, Mr. Speaker, at 11:05 
for drinks in room 218. I would ask all members to please 
welcome these students and guests from Ontario. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
introduce to all the members of this House some special guests 
and welcome them and ask the members to join me in that 
welcome. There are seven students here today in the Chamber 
from the life enrichment program of the Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council. 
 
The Saskatchewan Abilities Council, I believe, every year takes 
advantage of the opportunity when the House is sitting to bring 
some students here, and they are always welcome, and we hope 
that the experience here is worthwhile and that the visit is 
enjoyable. It is certainly very great to have them here on a part. 
They are accompanied by volunteers Lynn Demenle, Louise 
Billesberger, and Rita McGinn. I ask all members to join me in 
extending a hearty welcome to this group of people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

pleasure to introduce through you, and to members of the 
Assembly, my cousin, Michelle Hovdestad, who is seated in your 
gallery. Michelle is down visiting our grandfather who resides 
here in Regina, and Michelle and her husband, Wayne, reside in 
Calgary. Please join me in welcoming Michelle to our Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Possible Sale of Sask Minerals 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the minister of 
privatization, I’ll direct my question again to the Premier. 
Yesterday, Mr. Premier, your minister of privatization and I both 
attended a meeting in Chaplin, Saskatchewan where, rather than 
consulting with the people of Chaplin and Fox Valley, your 
minister simply announced your government’s intention to, in the 
very near future, to sell off the assets of Saskatchewan minerals. 
 
At that meeting your minister of privatization said that: no, he 
would not consider offering participation to the workers or the 
employees; no, he couldn’t guarantee their jobs; no, he couldn’t 
guarantee that the head office would remain in Chaplin; no, he had 
no indication of any expansion that would come with the new 
owner. All he could guarantee the people of Saskatchewan is that 
a Saskatchewan asset that has contributed well over $50 million to 
the province of the people of Saskatchewan is being sold to an 
out-of-province firm. Mr. Premier, I ask you, how can you 
describe that as building, diversifying; how do you describe it as 
public participation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe that the 
easiest way to describe it, Mr. Speaker, is the difference, clearly 
the difference in philosophy. The Leader of the Opposition said in 
his response to the Speech from the Throne on this issue, he said, 
we don’t need Weyerhaeuser in Saskatchewan. That’s what he 
said. We don’t need Weyerhaeuser. We don’t need other people 
investing in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say this: we do need Weyerhaeuser; we do 
need people to invest in Saskatchewan, and that’s precisely what 
you have here, is an opportunity for us to receive money by 
investors. The resource is here; we can manage it; we can tax it; 
we can take the benefits and create even more, Mr. Speaker, as 
we’ve seen with Weyerhaeuser. We know that we can expand in 
several areas, and the Minister of Public Participation is going to 
make the appropriate announcement. 
 
See the point is simply this: we welcome people from across 
Canada to come into Saskatchewan and invest in Saskatchewan. 
The Leader of the Opposition says we don’t need outsiders. We 
don’t need Weyerhaeuser; we don’t need other people to invest 
here. I say, Mr. Speaker, we enjoy inviting people to come into 
Saskatchewan and build this province. That’s why you’re over 
there and we’re here. 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

104 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 
last thing that the people of Saskatchewan want to hear is that 
you’ve signed another deal like the one you signed with 
Weyerhauser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — In that regard, Mr. Premier, will you confirm 
today in this House that any sale of Saskatchewan Minerals’ assets 
will not include any form of loan guarantee or grant from your 
government to the new purchaser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just classic that the 
socialists do not want other people to invest in Saskatchewan, and 
they are against Weyerhaeuser. We’ve got a brand-new paper mill; 
we got 160 new jobs. Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to listen to the 
truth. Would you just listen, please. Come on, co-operate. Mr. 
Leader of the Opposition get a hold of your people there so we can 
listen to the response. The response is: when you get $500 million 
of outside money coming into the Province of Saskatchewan, you 
create 160 new jobs and a new fine paper mill to take aspen and 
poplar, which we didn’t use before, design and put it into a paper 
mill and sell it all over North America, and the opposition and the 
NDP are against it because it happens to be outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s classic. We encourage people to invest here, the 
NDP — it’s the same old line we’ve heard for 40 years — they’re 
getting worse; they’re not getting better. Talk about being 
progressive, they’re going back and back and back and back. Mr. 
Speaker, I will announce we are encouraging investment in the 
province of Saskatchewan to create wealth and prosperity and jobs 
so the people of this province — and we will continue to do that 
— including Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary; this is classic. We 
ask a question; we don’t receive an answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Premier, once again, is your government 
providing loan guarantees or grants to the purchaser of Sask. 
Minerals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The minister will be making the appropriate 
announcement in response to your answer when he is ready to do 
that and not before. I will just simply make the point: if you want 
to stand there and say that we should not encourage investment in 
Saskatchewan, which is your point, I would say I fundamentally 
disagree with that. I believe we should encourage people to invest 
here, to create new jobs precisely like we did with Weyerhaeuser. 
So we take 

$91,000 a day debt and convert it to profit plus new jobs and new 
technology, and you’re against that. 
 
I will visit with people across the province and across the country 
on the concept of creating new technology and new jobs versus 
your philosophy of the government. They don’t like this, Mr. 
Speaker. Listen to them; listen to them. What about the concept of 
Weyerhaeuser; are you still against it? Mr. Speaker, put it on the 
record, they’re still against Weyerhaeuser, and as the Leader of the 
Opposition said, they don’t need Weyerhaeuser in Saskatchewan. 
I’m glad we’re on the side of Weyerhaeuser and he’s where he is 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Final supplementary. Mr. Premier, if you want to 
know the answers to some of your questions, call a by-election in 
Eastview, call a by-election in Elphinstone and you’ll find out 
soon enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my final supplementary is this. Mr. 
Premier, along with contributing well over $50 million to the 
province of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, Sask 
Minerals has contributed a great deal in grants in lieu of taxes to 
the communities of Chaplin and Fox Valley. Can you assure this 
House that the new company will be paying the same amount of 
taxes, both provincially and locally, as the publicly owned firm? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member mentions 
elections. I’d say the first real test of socialism in a big way is 
going to be in Manitoba, and the whole country will be able to 
watch their philosophy of nationalizing companies and watching it 
go deeper and deeper and deeper into the problems of debt. If he 
wants a test for a whole bunch of things, just look next door. 
 
Secondly, I will point out that anybody that invests here pays 
taxes. I wouldn’t have had to buy — and everybody knows this — 
all the potash mines that you people bought, we could have taxed 
them. But you borrowed money and bought them and put us all in 
debt and they’re not paying, Mr. Speaker. It’s a big debt. 
 
We wouldn’t have had to borrow money and buy PAPCO (Prince 
Albert Pulp Company), we could have let it run and taxed it. 
Money for the people. The whole philosophy of the government 
borrowing money to buy is gone. It’s dead. It’s over. It’s time you 
realized, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, that the philosophy of the 
government borrowing money to buy the resources is over. That 
was 40 years ago. It might have been good in 1930, 1940. It’s old. 
It’s passé. This is 1980. We’re going into the ’90s and the turn of 
the century. It’s time that you got on board with the rest of the 
country and the rest of the people in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dental Services for Gravelbourg 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

105 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Health, I direct this question to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, your Minister of Health said yesterday, in this 
House, during oral questions, and I quote: 
 

. . . if you were to take the interest in phoning the community 
or whatever, there is a dentist on his way into Gravelbourg. 
There will be a program in Gravelbourg. 

 
Yet today’s Regina Leader-Post says that the head of the dentist’s 
search committee in that town says that no dentist has been 
located. And CKRM radio quotes the mayor of Gravelbourg as 
saying he is unaware of such good news. Now, Mr. Premier, can 
you tell us today whether your minister simply didn’t know what 
was going on or whether he intentionally misled the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I want to first of all welcome the member 
from Rosemont back into the legislature. I thought I heard him 
whooping there. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, that I believe that the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Gravelbourg will have a new 
dentist. I hope that it is announced in the near future. I know that 
there are negotiations going on now in at least one, if not two, 
different . . in two different processes. And when the minister is 
prepared to, along with the community, to make the appropriate 
announcement, then it will be made. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Premier, that answer is totally inadequate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Not only is your government’s privatized rural 
dental plan totally inadequate, but your government doesn’t even 
seem to know what’s going on out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Your minister made statements in the House 
yesterday . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
please. The hon. member from Regina Lakeview didn’t indicate 
whether her question was a new question or a supplementary, and 
I’d ask her to do that. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, or a new question 
now. Your minister made statements in the House yesterday, Mr. 
Premier, that were in direct contradiction to the facts. Now I want 
to know whether you’re going to speak to him and ask him to start 
speaking truthfully in this House, or to get his facts straight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talked yesterday 
about the negotiations between the community and dentists. 

Now the negotiations were going on yesterday and they are still 
going on today. He thought they might have been announced 
yesterday. They may . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. I can’t hear the Premier answering the question. I request 
some co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I really do appreciate you 
having this calming influence on the members opposite because 
when we do try to respond to a question, they often . . . There they 
go again. See, they just keep wanting to talk. 
 
I would just say again that the minister said yesterday that there 
are negotiations going on between the community and dentists, 
and an announcement night be made yesterday, it might be made 
today, it might be, Mr. Speaker, it might be made tomorrow. All I 
can say is that I know negotiations are going on, and I suspect that 
the community will be successful in the near future in having a 
dentist there for the first time in a very, very long time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Premier, you’re just compounding what 
happened here yesterday. What we heard from the Minister of 
Health was that there was a dentist on his way to Gravelbourg, and 
that is not the case. He also referred to an 87 per cent registration 
rate, which was a misleading fact, because he knows that doesn’t 
amount to utilization. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, we’re asking you once again: what are you 
going to do about the fact the minister spoke in this House and 
either made a mistake or deliberately misled this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be careful about the 
allegations of deliberately misleading anybody. If there is a dentist 
in Assiniboia that will be sharing time in Gravelbourg, if there’s 
negotiations with a dentist that’s about to graduate, I mean it’s 
obviously providing dental services and negotiating dental 
services with the community of Gravelbourg. Now if there is one 
on his way and a dentist will be coming then, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
going to be extremely good news for the community. 
 
The members opposite, I would hope, will be very happy with a 
new dentist in Gravelbourg, and they’re going to applaud that and 
say, very nice, because they haven’t had one there for some time. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, because the hon. member raised it, the 
Minister of Health did not say that 87 per cent registration was 87 
per cent utilization. He didn’t say that; you did. You have it 
confused. Let me just point out what the minister said. He said 87 
per cent registration means over a course of a year you will have 
utilization. They don’t all go to the dentist in March or in April, 
and as far as we know, there are 12 months in the year and you 
want to look at all 12 when it comes to utilization. Rather than 
confusing the public like you normally do, and particularly the 
poor, when you go out and try to buy their 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

106 
 

votes . . . buy their votes . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Say it outside the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will say it outside the House and inside the 
House, Mr. Speaker. They get a little excited about buying the 
voters . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of dental 
services in Gravelbourg is a serious issue of great importance to 
the people in that community, and I would like to treat it seriously. 
 
I wonder if the Premier, given his comments today and given the 
comments of the Minister of Health yesterday, that the Premier 
would undertake to consult with the Minister of Health and to 
report to this House no later than Monday, a definite time frame 
when the dental service problem in Gravelbourg can expect a 
solution. It has been lagging on now for many, many months. The 
community is terribly concerned, and I would ask the Premier to 
provide a report on Monday about the details of these negotiations 
and when a solution can be expected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. 
member, it has been months. The whole point of this exercise is 
that it’s been years since they’ve had appropriate dental services in 
many communities across Saskatchewan. And it isn’t just the 
children. The entire community — and take Gravelbourg, the 
community, the seniors, the farmers, the parents — all want access 
to a dentist. That’s the first thing. And that’s why we are working 
so hard to provide dentists in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The second point is that the minister advised the House, and his 
staff has advised me, that there are negotiations on at least two 
fronts right now, and I will report as quickly as I can on any 
progress of a dentist providing service — a dentist now that’s in 
Assiniboia providing service in the short term, and maybe longer, 
for the people in Gravelbourg. 
 
And secondly, negotiations between students that are about to 
graduate and come to rural communities like Assiniboia and 
Gravelbourg. So those negotiations are going on. 
 
The minister was under the impression that the negotiations would 
be finished yesterday; if they’re not, they’re still going on today. 
then, I mean, we will announce it as soon as we can, and as soon 
as the community has negotiated with a dentist to come to the 
community of Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, before the dental program was 
changed last year, Gravelbourg in fact had two forms of dental 
coverage. They had the school-based plan and they had a 
downtown dental clinic. And the changes in the program meant 
that they lost both. As a result of government decisions made last 
year, they lost both. And the situations, Mr. Premier, is critical in 
that community because since the changes . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I believe the hon. 
member is making a very long preamble to a supplement. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to make the point 
that last year Gravelbourg had two forms of dental services; now 
they have none. The situation is urgent. Will the Premier give me 
the undertaking that he will report on Monday about the state of 
these negotiations and when Gravelbourg can expect a specific 
solution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what I can give the hon. 
member the assurance of is that we are working with the 
community and with the colleges of dental surgeons and graduates 
and everybody that’s involved to provide more and more dentists 
into rural communities and a dentist into the community of 
Gravelbourg. And that’s what the community wants, is a full-
fledged, real live dentist there. 
 
So we are prepared, we are prepared to continue to work, to co-
operate with the community to make that happen. And when it 
does, I’m sure the people of Gravelbourg and the people of that 
particular constituency that you’re somewhat familiar with will be 
very happy with that. 
 
And to say that both dental services have changed as a result of 
our program, I’m not sure that that’s accurate and that’s fair, but 
we will go back and I’ll review that so that I can respond, perhaps 
at another time. 
 

Application Fee for SIAST Students 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice on three 
questions yesterday relative to a $25 fee at the new Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology. I was asked by the 
Education critic to confirm the fee; is this over and above the 
normal tuition costs; and is this fee non-refundable, Mr. Speaker? 
 
First of all I would confirm that there is a $25 fee. Is this fee a tax 
or a deterrent fee, I think, as has been used and described by 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker? The answer there is no. It is a 
application fee or a processing fee if you like. It’s a one-time fee 
that covers all four campuses of the new institute. It’s not meant to 
create undue hardship or prevent accessibility to that new institute. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, and the question is raised relative to the 
hardship that it might cause to a student of there was a waiting list 
there, a long waiting list, or that program was full. The example I 
would give you there, Mr. Speaker, if, for example, a student 
applied to auto mechanics in Saskatoon and that course was full 
and then he applied to Kelsey, would he pay the fee twice? The 
answer is no, Mr. Speaker. It’s a one-time fee, and the application 
is transferred to another program area without cost, if in fact that 
program is full. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker this was meant to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order, please. I think 
that while ministers certainly have the right to take notice and 
bring the answer, I believe their answers 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

107 
 

should be brief as possible and not unduly take up the time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The second question was relative to the 
impact on the student, Mr. Speaker. What was happening, Mr. 
Speaker, and this was what was unfair to the students themselves 
with the old system, we had instances where students might put 
their names on the waiting list for five or six or eight courses, and 
in fact it was the same student, but he would show up on several 
waiting lists. With this one-time fee and the transferability of the 
application throughout the system, the lists now will more 
accurately reflect that indeed are the enrolment lists and/or the 
waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third and final point: is this somehow unique just to the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology? The 
answer there, Mr. Speaker, is no. The University of Regina has it, 
the University of Saskatchewan has it, the community college in 
Lethbridge has it. So it’s not unique to Saskatchewan, it’s not 
unique . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, I think you’ve made . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lease of Office Space in Regina 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the minister 
responsible for the property management corporation, I should like 
to direct a question to the Premier, although I might say it is a 
painful exercise getting answers to questions. It’s kind of like 
getting your teeth pulled. 
 
Mr. Premier, it has been revealed in the press that the corporation 
in question has been taking leases on a large amount of new office 
space in Regina, and I wonder, sir, if you can confirm that the 
property management corporation has taken out a 10-year lease 
for 60,000 square feet of office space in the Ramada Renaissance 
Hotel at a cost of $12 million, the highest rate for office space in 
Regina. And can you confirm that this is taking place at a time 
when your government has a surplus of office space in Regina for 
which the taxpayers are already being charged? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the same philosophy 
again. You’re against the new trade centre and the hotel in the city 
of Regina. And if you provide any incentives to have us build 
there, then it’s something that you wouldn’t do. I mean, we’re 
building paper mills, we’re building bacon plants; you’re against 
building water conservation projects, you’re against power 
projects, you’re against building. 
 
I believe that the people of Regina enjoy the new facility, and we 
can help over time till they fill up that facility — until we have 
space, accommodate the building of that kind of facility. And 
we’re happy to do that . . . the details of which the minister can 
respond to because I don’t have them with me, but the philosophy 
of us encouraging people to build, Mr. Speaker, is one that’s very 
clear on 

this side. They buy and borrow and buy. We help build, Mr. 
Speaker, a distinct difference in philosophies, and we’re proud of 
the difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
sure whether he took notice or tried to answer the question for a 
change. 
 
I just might ask: is adding to the supply of vacant office space in 
Regina your short-term or your long-term economic development 
program? Is this what you mean by open for business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I assume that the Premier took notice and 
is going to have someone answer the specific questions. And if he 
is, Mr. Speaker, can he confirm also that the leasing agent in this 
case who stands to make hundreds of thousands of dollars is one 
Gavin Koyl of Regina, the same Gavin Koyl who’s a close 
personal friend of the Minister of Finance; the same Gavin Koyl 
who acted as agent for those who purchased the Cornwall Centre 
from SaskTel of who the minister was the Minister of Finance; the 
same Gavin Koyl who leased space to SaskCOMP when he sat on 
their board of directors; the same Gavin Koyl who seems to pop 
up in just about every property transaction between your 
government and developers. Can you confirm those things, Mr. 
Speaker, or, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite and the 
member from Victoria, Regina Victoria, the Leader of the 
Opposition, they keep saying how they support small business in 
Regina and how they support small business all over the province. 
Mr. Speaker, every time they stand in the legislature, they pick on 
another business man. They will pick on Gavin Koyl. They will 
pick on Ron Barber. They will pick on George Hill. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — They don’t like to hear this, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t like to hear it at all. See, yes, well, just hang, okay. 
Here we go. Small business, free enterprise, small business in 
Saskatchewan — you can’t find free enterprisers in small 
businesses that are aligned with the socialist party, okay. They’re 
all Tories. They all support free enterprise, and therefore you name 
them after name. 
 
Go outside, like the member from Quills said, go outside and tell 
everybody how awful it is to be free enterprise and private 
enterprise. Pick on people who are doing business in Regina. Is 
that your claim to fame? You’re from downtown Regina. Don’t 
you have small businesses in Regina Victoria, or is it all poor 
people, that you can go out there and say, I can do this, I can do 
this, right? Is that what you do, or do you defend small business? I 
would say, Mr. Speaker, we are proud of small businesses in the 
city of Regina. We’re going to encourage small business in 
Regina. We’re going to encourage small business all across the 
piece in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

108 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 
wish to raise a point of order with you, sir. We have in this House 
a 25-minute question period, one of the shorter question periods in 
Canada. It is intended to provide an opportunity for the opposition 
to ask questions of importance and of interest to the public in this 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When members of the government, ministers, take up that period 
of time with filibusters and lengthy answers, it destroys the whole 
purpose and the concept of what the question period is all about. 
This is what we saw happening here today, I submit to you, sir, in 
my point of order. 
 
And therefore in light of the fact that, and given the lengthy 
answers that we have been hearing today and in previous times, I 
want to ask you to consider the process, to consider what is 
happening and the kind of answers that we’re getting; provide 
some direction to the House, particularly to the ministers of the 
Crown; make a ruling and then enforce it so that the purpose of the 
question and the integrity of the idea of the question period can be 
maintained. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: I have listened to your point of order, and as hon. 
members know, I have on different occasions asked all hon. 
members in the House to adhere to a self-disciplined rule where 
questions and answers will be a reasonable length, and I once 
more do that. And I am confident and hopeful that all hon. 
members will try to adhere by this rule without strict enforcement 
of rules that will say questions will be no longer than X number of 
seconds and answers no longer than X number of seconds. I 
simply ask for the co-operation of all hon. members. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on Legislative Committees 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have informed the Government House 
Leader about what I would request leave of the House to do here. 
Prior to the orders of the day I request leave of the Assembly to 
introduce several motions with regard to the membership of the 
legislative committees, and with the leave of the House I have 
several of them. 
 
I would so do and I would, Mr. Speaker, ask leave to move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Trew be submitted for that of Mr. 
Shillington on the Standing Committee on Agriculture. 

 
And this motion would be seconded by the member from 
Lakeview. 
 
Leave granted. 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for 
Quill Lakes, I would also move: 
 

That the names of Mr. Brockelbank, Mr. Tchorzewski, and 
Mr. Van Mulligen be submitted for those of Mr. Kowalsky, 
Mr. Romanow, and Mr. Shillington on the Standing 
Committee on Communications. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for 
Prince Albert: 
 

That the names of Ms. Atkinson, Mr. Calvert, Mr. Goulet, 
Mr. Lyons, and Mr. Tchorzewski be submitted for those of 
Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Brockelbank, Lautermilch, Simard, and 
Thompson on the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for 
Regina Northwest: 
 

That the names of Mr. Koenker and Ms. Smart be submitted 
for those of Mr. Calvert, Mr. Goulet, and Mr. Koskie on the 
Standing Committee of Education. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon South: 
 

That the names of Mr. Anguish, Mr. Rolfes, Mr. Van 
Mulligen and Ms. Simard be substituted for those of Mr. 
Calvert, Mr. Goulet, and Mr. Koskie and Mr. Lautermilch on 
the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Athabasca: 
 

That the names of Mr. Anguish, Mr. Tchorzewski and Ms. 
Simard be substituted for those of Ms. Atkinson, Mr. Hagel 
and Mr. Koenker on the Standing Committee on Municipal 
Law. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the names of Mr. Brockelbank and Mr. Prebble be 
substituted for those of Ms. Simard and Mr. Solomon on the 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

109 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the names of Ms. Smart, Mr. Kowalsky and Mr. Goulet 
be substituted for those of Mr. Anguish, Ms. Atkinson and 
Mr. Koenker on the Special Regulations Committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by the member from Regina Centre: 
 

That the names of Mr. Kowalsky and Mr. Trew be 
substituted for those of Mr. Koenker and Mr. Thompson on 
the standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Tchorzewski be substituted for that of 
Mr. Romanow on the Standing Committee on Privileges and 
Elections. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by the member from Regina Centre: 
 

That the names of Mr. Anguish and Mr. Prebble be 
substituted for those of Mr. Tchorzewski and Mr. Lyons on 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Tchorzewski be substituted for that of 
Mr. Shillington on the Special Nominating Committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Regina Rosemont: 
 

That the names of Ms. Simard and Mr. Tchorzewski be 
substituted for those of Ms. Smart and Mr. Romanow on the 
Continuing Select Committee. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good morning. I’m very 
pleased to be participating in this debate this morning, and I only 
hope that the members opposite will pay attention long enough to 
learn a thing or two about what it means, what it means to be 
committed to the province and to its people. And so to you and my 
colleagues across the floor, sharpen your pencils and take a few 
notes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in His Honour’s Speech from the Throne, we heard 
mention of a difficult economic time that is plaguing the larger 
portion of our world, and each of us in this province have faced 
hardships in one area or another because of that. 
 
But this PC government is not content to just sit in the background 
and wait for things to turn around. We are not content to reminisce 
about the days when grain prices were high and our resources 
brought in big money on the world markets. We are not content to 
do these things, Mr. Speaker, because we have a strong 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This government is committed to protecting and improving 
essential services to the people despite uncertainties and financial 
pressures on the provincial treasury. If we are successful in 
providing these services and more, Mr. Speaker, we are, because 
our Premier and our caucus is in touch with the people of the 
province. 
 
We listen to the people of Saskatchewan and believe in what the 
people have to say. You see, we have not lost touch with the 
people as the NDP have done in their own admission a number of 
times in the House. This government is a government that consults 
with the people. 
 
People will tell us how important things are, like trade, are to our 
survival. They tell us, Mr. Speaker, they want to compete in the 
United States market without being penalized through taxes and 
tariffs. And they tell us that their standard of living and their 
children’s future will be more secure as a result of free trade with 
the United States. Mr. Speaker, they tell us that this province 
needs free trade. 
 
But do you know what the NDP say, Mr. Speaker? Would you 
like to tell me what the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Nice Guy, 
Mr. I’m in touch with Saskatchewan; Mr. Everything that I’m 
going to do in the years ahead will be geared to the protection, 
preservation and the survival of the family farm. Would you like 
to know what he said about free trade, Mr. Speaker? Get your 
pencils ready, guys. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, said that it’s not even a provincial issue. No, he really 
did. I have a newspaper article right here. It’s February 1, ’88, 
page 5, and in it, I quote: 
 

I think this government has become so preoccupied with free 
trade, which is not even a provincial issue, that it’s not 
minding its business 

  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

110 
 

at home. 
 
Now I think this government has become so occupied with the 
free trade . . . and he said it’s not even a provincial issue. Well I 
can’t believe it. I would like to tell the NDP leader that free trade 
with the United States is a provincial issue, so the suggestion that 
we’re not minding business at home is not fair, and doesn’t hold 
water. In fact, the statement is so full of holes, Mr. Speaker, that I 
doubt that if it could even stand the weight of the paper on which 
the NDP agricultural policy is written. And we all know how 
heavy that is. 
 
Not a provincial issue. How out of touch can these people be! I 
wonder if the people in the communities who rely on mining and 
trading in Saskatchewan potash think it’s a provincial issue. I 
wonder if the Saskatchewan hog producers think free trade with 
the United States is a provincial issue. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Leader of the Opposition and . . . what the heck, take your 
agriculture critic along for the ride, too. I suggest that he go out to 
the farming communities of this province and ask the grain 
producers and the livestock producers what they think of free 
trade, and if it is a provincial issue. 
 
How about the consumers of Saskatchewan. they tell you what a 
provincial issue free trade is with the United States. They’ll tell 
you they’re saving the average of $300 per person in annual 
purchase. It is very much a provincial issue. 
 
I could go on and on about the positive effects free trade will 
produce for our province and our people. But it seems they’ve 
worn their pencils down, so we’ll leave the members opposite to 
study their notes until tomorrow, and then we’ll see if the NDP 
and their new leader have learned that free trade with the United 
States, indeed, is a provincial issue. 
 
I’d like to, at this time, Mr. Speaker, stress the government’s 
commitment to the building and diversifying of our province, and 
I’d like to cite some specific examples in my constituency, the 
constituency of Redberry, and what is happening. 
 
We’ll go to the northern part of my constituency to a village called 
Rabbit Lake. It’s in the northern centre. The government of 
Saskatchewan, through the Department of Health, has built a level 
3 and level 4 nursing home, and we didn’t have a moratorium; we 
built. This is a commitment to take care of the senior citizens in 
that district. 
 
Through the Department of Highways and the Minister of 
highways and my colleague from Melfort, we have built 20 miles 
on Highway 378 connecting Spiritwood and Rabbit Lake. It’s an 
excellent connecting link between two trading centres. 
 
We move down south towards the hamlet of Mayfair and their 
district. This is a hard-working, positive-thinking district. They 
have constructed a new arena, a hockey arena for their children 
and their hockey teams. It’s the centre of activity in the area. They 
have worked with Sask Housing in putting up a new four-unit 
enriched housing which was started in September of ’86 and 
completed in 

May of ’87 — just a real nice unit for the seniors in that area. 
 
Then we go over to Leask, to my home town, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP talk of the dismal situation that the province is in. Well they 
haven’t been to Leask. What’s happening in Leask? Well, Mr. 
Speaker the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, for instance, a high 
through-put elevator holding $140,000 is remodelling and 
updating, spending a million dollars to improve their service to the 
farmers in that area. 
 
This spring a new Pioneer elevator at the cost of a million and a 
half dollars is going to be built. This is a positive, forward-
thinking, future planning. The idea that the Pool and the Pioneer 
have — they have confidence in the economy of the province and 
that it’s going to improve, and confidence in the farmers of that 
area. 
 
Highway 40 that passes by Leask on the way to North Battleford 
from Prince Albert has been repaved with two lifts of pavement, 
an excellent job done, 15 miles of highway. It was done by Wilson 
Construction of Buchanan, a private enterprise company. 
 
We move on down to Blaine Lake where I live now in the town of 
600 or so people. In the past three years, because of 
Saskatchewan’s positive and aggressive attitudes and thinking that 
has resulted in this, there has been a new Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool elevator built at the cost of over a million dollars, and also a 
new Cargill elevator built at a cost of over a million dollars. 
 
During the summer, Highway 40 then, from Blaine Lake to 
Hatford, approximately 25 miles, was repaved by Botkin 
Construction — an excellent job, quality work, another private 
enterprise company working for the province and in co-operation 
with the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We go down to Borden district and Highway 16. During last 
month, tenders have been let out for the repaving of six kilometres 
on Highway 16 just east of Borden. The CNR is presently looking 
at building a new underpass to address the problem of the old 
narrow underpass which is unsafe at present, which will likely be 
rebuilt in the next two years or so. 
 
And we go down to Radisson. There’s a positive, hard-working 
town. Their motto is a town with a future . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . There’s a member opposite criticizing me for 
talking about my riding, and I take offence to that. I’m elected in 
this legislature to represent my riding, and I’m just passing on to 
the legislature and my colleagues some of their attitude and their 
positive-thinking attitude that maybe it would rub off on the 
opposition, and they should take note with their pencils in writing 
that down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Town council and the mayor are long-term 
planners and are worrying about the future development of their 
town. They have a number of innovative ideas, one being they 
received a huge sign donated from them from the city of 
Saskatoon to the town 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

111 
 

of Radisson. They’ve erected it on the north side of Highway 16 
just behind the Red Bull Cafe. They’re using this sign as in paid 
advertising putting into a fund. These people are innovative. 
They’re looking after themselves. They’re not looking to the 
government like a lot of these members opposite would like to see. 
The government purse has got to pay for everything. 
 
These people have taken these funds and have put it into a fund to 
pay for a new hockey arena, or help towards paying for it — the 
new sportsplex. This town — the people, the wives, the children, 
the business people — everyone there is involved in helping build 
this new complex. 
 
The town council worked with the Minister of Sask Housing just 
recently to have a 10-room enriched housing complex built. You 
started in November ’86 and it was finished in November ’87. We 
opened it here last fall, and we had 125 people out to it to celebrate 
in the festivities. Many of the senior citizens in that district are 
now making use of this facility and making it their new home. 
 
We go down to Maymont just down Highway 16. The mayor and 
that council, with the support of the district, are adopting new 
strategies for the future development of their town. They’re very 
positive and a forward-thinking lot. They’re looking at new 
alternatives to enhance their village, and they are at present 
canvassing their town and district for funds to build a new arena 
complex. 
 
Now we go to North Battleford. North Battleford is not in my 
riding; it’s the member opposite’s, but my riding surrounds the 
city of North Battleford. Now as much as the member opposite has 
his doubts about the city of North Battleford and the atmosphere 
there, the city is a bustling city with lots of activity. There’s 
manufacturing; there’s manufacturing of RV’s; there’s new 
housing going up; there’s metal fabric development going on; 
there’s a Gainer’s bacon plant that employees 500 people, most of 
them living in my riding. My riding of Redberry is benefiting 
greatly from the economic growth and employment of the city that 
is provided by the city and its jobs. I would like to thank Mayor 
Glenn Hornick and the past MLA, Myles Morin, for their work in 
bringing industry to North Battleford, that in turn brings support to 
my Redberry constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Just north of the city of North Battleford a new 
cleaning plant has been built. It services an area of 40 to 50 miles 
in radius. It cleans specialty crops such as rape, peas, and lentils, 
as well as the cereal grains. It’s a great help to the farmers in that 
area for marketing of their grains. 
 
I hear a few comments coming from the opposition, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I kind of take offence to that. In my speech here I’m 
talking about my constituency, the people in my constituency and 
their attitude, because of the attitude that they receive from the 
provincial government and the leadership in looking after 
themselves and not being dependent on the government as much 
as the opposition would like. We know how they 

operate. They’re even purchasing votes so that they get support, so 
that they can tell you what to do. 
 
We get into Meota and district, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve 
constructed a new hall and a gym — a sportsplex to service the 
needs of their children and the people in their community. It is a 
small community that pulls together to get results. 
 
(1100) 
 
We go into the town of Hafford which is the centre of my 
Redberry constituency. The pioneering attitude of these folks is 
still astounding; it’s positive. They’re planning for the future. They 
never say it can’t be done; they’re doers. They built a new arena 
and a hall complex. Everyone in the community is working to 
finish off the final touches to the Hafford complex so that the town 
and district of Hafford, on their 75th birthday this July, can have 
their birthday celebration. 
 
In 1987 and ’88 of this year, a remodelling to the Hafford Hospital 
was done. It was done to the heating system which had, over the 
years, become worn out. It was a cost of $99,989, with the 
government sharing. This is a real commitment to the health care 
of the district and the people in the area. 
 
Since January, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have travelled in various 
districts and towns in my constituency and have talked to many of 
my electorate. I’ve talked to the farmers. they don’t like the loss, 
the 60 per cent loss in income over the last two years, but they are 
adjusting. They’re adjusting by growing different cash crops. 
They’re diversifying by going into cattle and hogs. They’re 
changing their farming practices to better suit their income needs. 
 
Now in government, the government of today, it has to be 
changing and adapting to the needs of the electorate with plans to 
the future and long-term goals. We, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, under the leadership of the Premier, are doing just 
that. We’ve addressed these problems in health care, wage 
negotiations in the agricultural sector, and we look forward to 
doing so for the next four years. I therefore support the positive 
planning and statements of the throne speech and support the 
motion put forth by the member of Rosthern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I might have leave 
to introduce some students who have entered the Chamber. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I wish to introduce 20 
adults who are attending the Regina Open Door Society, 
accompanied by the program co-ordinator, Ali Abdu. They’ll be 
witnessing some of the proceedings here and then I’ll be joining 
them. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to the 
Chamber. 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

112 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, on March 21 as I listened to the 
throne speech, I listened for some indication that the government 
understood the problems and difficulties facing Saskatchewan 
people, but I received no such indication. I listened for some 
indication that the government wanted to deal with the problems 
of Saskatchewan people, but I received no such indication. 
 
The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, had no specific policies, no 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, and no recognition of 
the hard work and efforts of Saskatchewan people. It was lacking 
in content and commitment. It was devoid of vision, Mr. Speaker; 
meanwhile, the people of Saskatchewan labour under the financial 
burden imposed on them by this PC government. 
 
The people of Regina Lakeview and the people of Saskatchewan 
tell me they cannot afford this government’s unprecedented tax 
increases, and they need some relief from the PC government 
taxation policies. They tell me they don’t believe that the PC 
government should finance its massive $3.4 billion deficit on their 
backs. 
 
They believe there are other sources of income for their province, 
and these sources must be called upon. And let’s look at some of 
these sources: 1.7 billion on oil royalties; 1 billion on the Rafferty-
Alameda-Shand boondoggle; 20 million a year to self-serving 
advertising; 8.4 million a year renting empty office space; 75 
million to the PAPCO give-away; 23 million to the Saskoil sell-
off; 22 million in gifts to millionaire Peter Pocklington. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we should look at the truth about 
PC taxation of ordinary people. In Saskatchewan, we pay the 
highest income tax in the land, exceeded only by Quebec. And the 
PC flat tax costs the taxpayer with a net income of $25,000 a year 
an additional $375 per year. There’s no indication in the throne 
speech that there will be relief from that flat tax. There have been 
utility rate increases averaging 47 per cent from 1981 to 1987. But 
these, Mr. Speaker, are only the most obvious tax increases, 
because there are many, many hidden taxes. 
 
Governments, as you know, impose fees and charges for various 
public services, and a short review has found some 234 individual 
increases to provincial government fees and licences in the last 
year alone. These include everything form hunting licences to 
business name registrations to change of name notices, to technical 
institute fees, and so on and so on — hundreds and hundreds of 
hidden taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

And if one looks at increases only in utilities, retail sales tax, 
property tax, the loss of the property improvement grant, 
prescription drug costs and increases in drivers’ licences, vehicle 
registrations and hunting licences, one finds a total of $1,424 
annually for the average family of four with a $25,000 annual net 
income. And this increase has taken place from 1981 to ’87. 
 
And all this, Mr. Speaker, from a government which promised, 
promised the people of Saskatchewan it would cut provincial 
income tax by 10 per cent. And there’s not a word in the throne 
speech about giving some financial relief to families who are 
suffering from the burden of PC taxes. 
 
And not only are we shouldering ever-increasing financial burdens 
and taxation by this government but we are seeing also, a drastic 
cut in services — less for more, for more money. We see our 
health care services being slashed, and people are suffering as a 
result of this. We see changes to the prescription drug plan, where 
people are having to make a decision between drugs or groceries. 
We see long hospital waiting lists where people who need urgent 
surgery are unable to get into the hospital to have their surgery, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what do we see in the throne speech? We see the government 
lecturing us about the rising cost of health care. Not a word, Mr. 
Speaker, about the rising cost of PC political appointments, but 
many words, many words about the rising cost of health care. The 
PC government and the PC Party would like Saskatchewan — 
they would like Saskatchewan to think that quality accessible 
health care is not possible. They want to pave the way and set the 
groundwork for privatizing more health care services, as they’ve 
already started to do, and they’re attempting to exploit the myth of 
spiralling health care costs. But let’s look at the truth in this 
regard. 
 
Over several years the PC government has shifted many programs 
and expenditures out of other government departments to the 
Department of Health. examples include: continuing care 
expenditures, which used to be funded through Social Services; 
the minister’s salary., which used to be funded through executive 
Council; and routine support services, which used to be funded 
through supply and services. These transferred items now amount 
to more than 240 million per year. They have merely transferred 
such expenditure items to the Health department and therefore try 
to claim that health expenditures have increased rapidly. It’s 
another case of PC arithmetic, comparing apples to oranges, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But when we make a straightforward, fair, and accurate 
comparison, comparing apples to apples, Mr. Speaker, we see the 
PC assertion is simply not true. In the final three years of the New 
Democratic administration, health expenditures accounted for 26 
per cent of total government expenditures. And in these past three 
years of PC administration, Mr. Speaker, health expenditures have 
declined to 25 per cent of total government expenditures. On a 
straight and fair comparison basis, the PC government is devoting 
a smaller proportion of total expenditures on total health care, and 
with manipulation of its books it claimed that its health care 
budget 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

113 
 

introduced in 1987 contained increased spending for health care. 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the PC government actually reduced the 
total spending on health in its last budget, and the 1987-88 health 
budget shows a reduction of more than 18 million on a straight 
and fair comparison with the previous year. 
 
The PC government assertions, which we find once again in this 
throne speech, are not true; they are merely a desperate attempt to 
justify their betrayal of Saskatchewan health care services. The PC 
cut-backs in health care have imposed hardship on Saskatchewan 
families, particularly on those who need medical services and are 
least able to bear the added financial burden. The cuts to the 
prescription drug plan have caused severe financial stress to 
thousands of families and individuals and seniors, and have cause 
many to make a choice between necessary medication, or 
groceries. But that doesn’t matter to this government, Mr. Speaker. 
It makes parents dig even deeper to find the extra $144 per year 
the average family of four pays because of just this one harmful 
attack on health care. 
 
And what about people, young or old, who are fighting severe or 
chronic illness? What about people with rare conditions who need 
the newest, most expensive drug treatment? Without the drug 
plan, medication costs for the sick can be astronomical — 
hundreds and hundreds of dollars per month. But that doesn’t 
matter to this government either. It promised a special policy to 
assist people with the highest drug bills, but it double-crossed 
them, and no such policy is in place . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The PC privatization . . . And the member from Regina Wascana 
says they delivered. Well the facts show otherwise. The facts show 
otherwise, I say to the member from Regina Wascana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And let me tell you the people in your 
constituency don’t agree that you have delivered on your 
promises. The evidence is clearly against you. The PC 
privatization of the children’s dental plan resulted in the firing of 
more than 400 dental plan workers and the elimination of 578 
school clinics in 338 Saskatchewan communities. 
 
And these cut-backs have been particularly hard on rural families, 
on the people whom they claim to represent. And they’re proud of 
it, they’re proud of it. More than 300 small communities in rural 
Saskatchewan lost their dental clinics, and they’re proud of it, Mr. 
Speaker. And they lost the jobs connected with them, and they’re 
proud if it, Mr. Speaker. With private dentists concentrated in 
large centres, rural families have lost access to dental care. 
 
PC underfunding and understaffing have caused a crisis in 
Saskatchewan hospitals. In Saskatoon alone, waiting lists have 
climbed to more than 11,000, and even cancer patients have been 
made to wait five or six weeks for surgery, Mr. Speaker. The PC 
government made the situation worse by forcing the closure of 
more than 300 beds last summer at Saskatoon’s three major 
hospitals. PC underfunding has forced hospitals across 
Saskatchewan 

to solicit private donations to purchase necessary equipment. 
 
This PC government no longer helps hospitals with equipment and 
staffing costs when it contributes capital funds to new hospital 
construction. What good was the new wing to Pasqua Hospital 
while it sat empty for months as the hospital sweated to scrounge 
up enough money to furnish it and hire nurses? And at the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, Mr. Speaker, it’s charitable 
donations that are furnishing and equipping the children’s therapy 
area. Saskatchewan families know that disabled persons in our 
province deserve better than that, and Saskatchewan families are 
angry that the needs of our senior citizens are getting ignored by 
this PC government. 
 
Our elderly people deserve to be treated with respect and to live in 
dignity, but instead this government has cut back on special 
services helping them live in their own homes as long as possible. 
This PC government has failed to recognize the wisdom and social 
benefits in helping our seniors live independently, and that’s no 
way to treat the people who built our health care system, Mr. 
Speaker, no way to treat our seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — In tough economic times it’s especially 
important, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial government set the 
right priorities and make wise choices. The PC government in 
Regina has wrong priorities, and it’s making unfair choices. 
 
It’s chosen to spend more than $1 billion on the Rafferty dam 
project in the Premier’s constituency. It’s chosen to spend more 
than 20 million per year on advertising, including some special TV 
specials for political purposes. It’s chosen to spend more than 
$34,000 a day on empty government office space. And it’s 
provided royalty holidays for big oil companies and expensive 
sweetheart deals for out-of-province companies like Gainers, 
Weyerhaeuser, and Manalta coal. The PC government is betraying 
Saskatchewan health care with its wrong priorities and its wrong 
choices, and that’s a betrayal of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And now, Mr. Speaker, the PC government is 
scared for its political hide because they people of Saskatchewan 
are angry, and they have told them that their wrong priorities are 
simply not acceptable. 
 
And what is this government’s reaction? The government’s 
reaction is to set up a task force that has no power to bring its 
recommendations before the Legislative Assembly, and for all we 
know may be composed of PC patronage appointments, because 
they refuse to tell us who’s going to be on this task force — a task 
force, Mr. Speaker, that may have a very narrow mandate which 
directs the task force to consider a move towards privatization of 
health care and deterrent fees. 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

114 
 

And this government, Mr. Speaker, has betrayed Saskatchewan 
people because it has made it perfectly clear that they do not have 
confidence in the people. They do not have confidence in 
Saskatchewan people running their own affairs. They would rather 
bring in large corporations from outside the province to run the 
business of Saskatchewan rather than to encourage Saskatchewan 
small business and entrepreneurs to provide the service. It’s clear 
that the PC view of the world is that big business can do it better 
than the people. That’s clear. 
 
And that’s a view with which we disagree, Mr. Speaker. We 
believe in the people of Saskatchewan, and we believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan individually and co-operatively can build 
a better and more prosperous Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And for those who may have doubt about the PC 
intentions to move towards privatization of health care, let me 
refer you to the Premier’s free trade initiatives. The service portion 
of the free trade agreement which allows for free trade in the 
service sector specifically states that hospital management and 
nursing home management is up for free trade. Simply put, Mr. 
Speaker, that means that private corporations from the United 
States will be able to come into Saskatchewan and manage our 
hospitals and manage our nursing homes and demand equal 
treatments by our government. 
 
In other words, they can demand equal financial support form our 
government that we pay to our public institutions. And the Premier 
says, oh, medicare’s not in the free trade agreement. Well the word 
“medicare” may not be in the free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
but there’s no question, when you have private corporations 
coming into Saskatchewan to manage hospitals and nursing 
homes, and demanding equal treatment with respect to public 
funds from the government, that medicare is in the agreement, and 
to suggest otherwise, Mr. Speaker, is dishonest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And let’s look at the provisions of the free trade 
agreement that talks about disciplines on monopolies. That 
provision will require us to consult with Americans before we 
implement any public program that may interfere with American 
competing interests. 
 
In other words, if we decide to implement a new dental plan that 
covers seniors and students and adults other than young children, 
we will have to consult with the Americans, we will have to 
compensate any competing interests. American competing 
interests, that may be affected by Saskatchewan people deciding 
that they wish to develop a public program to help seniors, adults, 
and school age children. 
 
This paragraph alone in the free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
could have the effect of stifling initiative on the part of 
Saskatchewan people to better our lives and to improve the quality 
of our lives in Saskatchewan, because when we decide we want to 
do that, we will 

have to consult with the Americans. And that’s, Mr. Speaker, the 
PC vision of Saskatchewan, which is no vision at all, and which is 
a total lack of confidence in Saskatchewan people. 
 
And we see t his lack of vision in their attitude and in their actions 
in health care. New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, believe in 
Saskatchewan people. We believe in the ability, in the ingenuity of 
Saskatchewan people to do things for themselves by using the 
three engines of prosperity — the private sector, the co-operative 
movement, and public institutions. 
 
We believe we can build a better tomorrow in Saskatchewan and 
still be masters in our own land. 
 
Monsieur le Président, je trouve très étrange qu’il n’y a pas un mot 
dans le discoure du trône de la décision de la Cour suprêmes du 
Canada sur Mercure et l’intention de ce gouvernement de 
l’appliquer. La Saskatchewan se vantait d’être la première 
province anglophone d’avoir ratifier l’accord constitutionnel du 
Lac Meech. Il est donc inconcevable que la Saskatchewan 
n’applique pas l’article 110 pour respecter les droits des 
francophones. Je vous parle comme député d’origine francophone. 
L’article 110 est un point des droits humains fondamentales 
comme l’a si bien dit la Cour suprême. C’est donc un sujet qui 
dépassé la partisanerie de partis politiques. Je demande à tous les 
partis de supporter la mise en marche de l’article 110 
immédiatement. 
 
Monsieur le Président, je veux avancer un amendement à la 
motion avant nous, secondé par le député de Humboldt, 
l’amendement lit comme ci: 
 

That the following be added after the word “session” in the 
last line: 
 
But regrets that the provincial government has betrayed 
Saskatchewan families by its attacks on medicare, its failure 
to support Saskatchewan farmers in financial crisis, its unfair 
tax policies, and its failure to provide jobs and opportunities 
for Saskatchewan young people. 

 
Merci. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to enter the debate today. I first of all would 
like to complement my colleague from Rosthern on the fine 
remarks which he made in replying to the Speech from the 
Throne. I thought that he very succinctly covered the intent of the 
throne speech. 
 
As you and I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the particular 
profession which we belong to, that each year as we roll around to 
this time of year, we think about the future. We think about 
concepts, we think about the things that we’re going to do to 
achieve success in the following year. And the things that my 
colleague from Rosthern talked about in this throne speech, I 
think, summed up that attitude. 
 
Perhaps it’s too bad that those people in Saskatchewan who aren’t 
from the rural areas have lost a little bit of that 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

115 
 

hope and inspiration which the spring season brings upon us, 
because I know that if I didn’t approach my particular life-style 
and my profession in that regard, I would find it very difficult to 
face the rest of the year if I didn’t look with optimism and hope 
upon spring. What would be the point of me continuing all the 
endeavours which I do during the year? I mean, every time that I 
go out to the field, I don’t necessarily know that it’s going to be a 
successful year. I don’t know, until that crop is in the bin, that the 
things that I’d planned and dreamed about are going to come to 
fruition. 
 
And I think that all of us in here, as we make our remarks and talk 
about our partisan things, should keep that in mind, because what 
the Speech from the Throne is, is a concept that’s been developed 
over many centuries. It is hopes and dreams; it is ideas that are put 
forward in a general way — a plan, if you will — and you work 
on it. And I know it isn’t as definite, perhaps, as what I do in my 
farming operation, and it certainly isn’t as definite as some of the 
members of the opposition would like, but it is a plan. 
 
Prior to us coming back into this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I took the opportunity to go out around my riding of Thunder 
Creek and talk to people. I like to go out to the different towns and 
villages and rent the R.M. office and advertise it and just have 
folks come in and talk abut it. And I particularly like to do it in the 
spring because it is a rural riding, and people do come in and they 
talk about their hopes and dreams and aspirations for the coming 
year. And it doesn’t really matter whether they’re farmers or the 
people that live in those towns; they all have ideas and thoughts 
that they like to express, and I think they like to express them to 
their MLA. 
 
I was around to places like Chaplin and Central Butte, Pense and 
Rouleau and Bethune. And that’s exactly what we did. They’d 
bring their concerns in, but mostly we talked about 1988 and the 
things that they’d like to see and achieve in that particular year. 
And I think that the throne speech, which was delivered by His 
Honour last Monday, was a good example of this. He clearly said 
in there that it’s our annual spring awakening. It’s a time of 
commitment, a commitment to our land and to our people. It 
talked about some of the realities of the world today. It talked 
about economics. It talked about, I think, some realistic things that 
we as a people in the province of Saskatchewan can achieve and 
that we as a government can achieve. 
 
All too often in the past, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people have 
been led to believe, or people have come to believe themselves — 
and possibly through us as politicians, and certainly through the 
media — that maybe we’ve come to expect too much as a people 
all the time, and it puts a lot of pressure on us as individuals and 
also as a society to keep that up. And I think we have a 
responsibility as elected officials to bring those expectations into a 
proper perspective; to bring them into line with some of the 
realities of life. Because if we don’t, it’s truly a fool’s paradise 
which we would sink into. 
 
(1130) 
 
I want to touch on a number of issues this morning, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I won’t be getting so much into numbers and 
details. I think a number of my colleagues have done that more 
than adequately. They covered off the programs and the 
expenditures of our Progressive Conservative government, and 
certainly we’ve heard a tirade of numbers and facts and statistics 
from the opposition. And I heard one of the members from the 
opposition criticizing last night that we don’t talk enough about 
the throne speech and the concepts, so I’m going to try to do that. I 
don’t know if I’ll be entirely on the money, but I’m going to take 
an honest shot at it. 
 
First of all, I’d like to talk about trade. There was a statement 
made by His Honour that fair trade is essential to the economic 
well-being of our province, and I haven’t heard anybody argue 
abut that. Everyone seems to be unanimous that trade is good for 
the economic well-being of this province. It seems to be that when 
we get into method that we run into some problems. And as I’ve 
studied and listened to this particular issue over the last year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, one point becomes very clear to me — there are 
no economic reasons to have a trading arrangement with the 
United States of America. There are political reasons, purely 
political and philosophical reasons perhaps, to not do that, but 
straight economics, — none. And we, as we’ve gone through 
history of mankind, we’ve had trading relationships that have 
occurred over the years and, I mean, we have some examples that 
are very current, like the economic community, and we’ve had 
people joining that thing over a period of time. And definitely 
there haven’t been many economic reasons over there not to keep 
going ahead, or more people wouldn’t keep joining. 
 
And I mean, as far as the social fabric of the countries involved, 
Greece is one of the last countries that joined that particular 
association, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and all of us, whether we wanted 
to or not, have had to take out share of Greek history in school. 
Some of us found it interesting, others not so much. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Some of us taught it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And as my colleague says, some of us taught it. 
And I don’t think the social fabric of Greece has been breaking 
down particularly bad because they joined the economic 
community in Europe. And I believe that we as Canadians, in our 
social fabric, in our wants and needs as Canadians, have 
established that over the last hundred-and-some years. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what makes a Canadian is 
a collage of things. I mean, we know about the blood that was 
shed at Vimy Ridge, about the beaches of Dieppe and about the 
beaches of Normandy. I mean, Canadians proved that they were 
Canadians and that they believed in their system of governments 
in those places, so I don’t think there’s any doubt in anyone’s 
mind any more what a Canadian is or isn’t. So I don’t fear for my 
social fabric because my social fabric in this country will be 
exactly what I want to make it, what exactly I want to pay for to 
support it, and it will be as good as I am as a Canadian, as an 
individual. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

116 
 

Mr. Swenson: — So I want to say that I find it strange that so 
many people are trying to put fear into this equation about being 
un-Canadian. To say that a social fabric of a country that is 120-
some years old can be rent asunder by a trading arrangement — 
which simply talks about tariffs; which talks about the proper way 
to deal with disputes in the court — can be torn asunder; a social 
fabric can be torn asunder by something that simple. 
 
And I know, as an individual Canadian who is a farmer and a 
business man and who has personally done business in the United 
States of America over the last 15 years — I, matter of fact, this 
very spring, at the end of January, my little two-section farm, 
which isn’t large by standards today, did about $30,000 worth of 
business with Americans in Idaho, in Utah, and Nevada, and those 
are trading relationships and marketing relationships that I’ve built 
up over a number of years. 
 
And I can truthfully tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those 
people down there, they’re good people. They’re farmers or 
business men like me, but they aren’t particularly any smarter than 
I am. They get up in the morning, they put their pants on, they 
plan their day, and they try and make a living and educate their 
children and support their community. And the last thing that I 
would expect from any of those people is to come up here and tear 
my society asunder. They aren’t like that; it would make no sense 
to them to do that, as it would make no sense for me to go down 
and plunder the American society as a Canadian. I simply want to 
continue doing business with them because it is beneficial to both 
of us. 
 
I can honestly say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from being around 
my riding — and I admit I don’t have a large urban area; I’m in 
close proximity to one though — but once people understand what 
that particular document says and what the thrust of it is, there is 
no fear in the trade arrangement. 
 
Now other people wish to put politics and fear into it, and for that 
they don’t call it what it’s supposed to be — they call it the 
Mulroney-Reagan trade agreement because they want to make a 
political issue out of it. And that’s fair ball; we all do that. That’s 
what this place is about. 
 
But let’s not talk economics and economic sense in the social 
fabric of countries, because it’s untrue. Let’s talk politics and fair 
ball. I’ll lay my side out, they’ll lay their side out, and we’ll let the 
people decide. And I’m sure that the people in Manitoba are going 
to discuss this issue a lot in the next few days, and they will 
decide. 
 
And I guess that leads me into another area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because it is so near and dear to myself and to my constituents in 
Thunder Creek. Once again we go back to the speech delivered by 
His Honour the other day. It talked about agriculture and the prime 
importance of it in the economy of Saskatchewan. Certainly in my 
riding there is no other issue that is so important as agriculture. 
 
Others in my caucus have gone through the list of programs that 
this government has delivered over the years, and I’m sure that 
when you put that record up, the last six years against any other 
six years in this province as 

far as this particular department goes, program by program, dollar 
by dollar, it will stand the test of time. 
 
Even though the members of the opposition may talk about cuts in 
agriculture, I just ask them to run it through program by program, 
dollar for dollar, to anything in any previous administration, and if 
they then can come up with a straight face and say that they done 
better, I’d sure like to hear abut it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Agriculture is not something that you quick-fix, it’s not something 
that you stand up and make one speech about and everything 
comes right. And I think some of the nonsense that we’ve heard 
on the production loan program coming from the opposition 
benches really drives that thought home. Farmers all across this 
province, farm organizations consulted with this particular 
government on that issue. And I am just glad, and so are most of 
my constituents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the program as it was 
derived at by this government has stood, and I believe will stand 
the test of time because it’s fair, it’s reasonable, and it fits into the 
life-style of the people who are using it. And be it may that people 
from other areas like to criticize it, I suggest that they learn a little 
bit about agriculture. 
 
And that brings me to a little article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 
happened to twig upon a few months ago, and I think it kind of 
sums up the problem that exists in the benches across the way here 
about what they think about agriculture and trade and taking risks 
and a few things. And I’d like to read it into the record. And I must 
say that as part of my job, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I like to read 
everything that’s available. And whether it’s pro or contrary, I 
think it’s important in my job that I read both sides of most 
arguments. And I normally wouldn’t read this particular magazine 
because I don’t put a lot of faith in it, but I was looking at both 
sides of the trade argument and happened to twig upon this. 
 
And this, believe it or not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is from the 
Briarpatch magazine, and it’s the December-January issue of 
Briarpatch. It’s an article by one Fred Gudmundson, I believe the 
author’s name is, and I would like to read it into the record 
because I think it tells a lot about some of the things that I’ve been 
saying. And this is headlined “Carrot River, Saskatchewan,” and 
the article was written in the spring of 1969. And it follows as 
such, it says: 
 

The NDP Opposition (of the day had) decided that it was 
good politics to mingle with the great unwashed so they 
started holding caucus meetings all over the province. Today 
car after car is streaming toward Carrot River. Star-Phoenix 
reporter Jack Fraser . . . (is) in the back seat (of one of the 
cars). An executive member . . . (is) in the front . . . seat and 
rookie MLA, Roy Romanow (the present Leader of the 
Opposition) . . . 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the hon. 
member, I’m sure it’s a slip of memory, not to mention sitting 
members’ names either in debate or in quoting. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — My apologies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

117 
 

will refrain from that. 
 

Then it happens, a thump, and white feathers billowing all 
over the place. The car screeches to a halt on the dusty road, 
one set of farm buildings on either side. The hon. Leader, the 
now Opposition, leaps out in panic. I’ve killed a chicken! 
I’ve killed a chicken! What will they do to me? 
 
(The former Leader of the Opposition) Mr. Blakeney strolls 
up from the car behind. patting him on the shoulder, he 
consoles the then rookie MLA. Don’t worry (hon. member 
from Riversdale) it’s just a chicken. Farmers get used to 
people running over their chickens. They’ve got lots of them 
anyway, and if they really cared about chickens, they’d fence 
them in. 
 
(Mr. Blakeney), I’ve got to be sure. Shouldn’t I tell the 
farmers? Maybe I better take the chicken’s body to him. I can 
apologize or pay for it or something. Maybe I should dig a 
grave and bury it. 
 
(Mr. Member from Riversdale), get a hold of yourself, boy. 
Nothing’s going to happen to you. Let’s go. We’re late. 
Remember, it’s only a chicken. 

 
Mr. Fraser, the Star-Phoenix reporter slouched in the back seat 
muses, “Good boy, Al. Lost one, saved one.” 
 
Now some of the things and I . . . the reason this thing twigged 
me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was because I honestly get that feeling 
that that attitude is still prevalent from the Leader of the 
Opposition and some of the people in the benches over there when 
they talk about trade and when they talk about agriculture. And I 
mean, these was a grown individual back then and still a grown 
individual today, and yet I don’t see a heck of a lot more sense on 
these particular issues. 
 
And I would like, instead of a constant stream of criticism, that if 
they honestly believe in my industry and my constituents, then I 
would like some concrete proposals on the agricultural situation. 
And when we talk about trade and agriculture, let’s get the politics 
out of it, get back to the economics and talk about how we do this 
so we all make a living. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll 
believe that since this article was written, that some members in 
the opposition have actually learned about an area so important to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s one other issue that came up in my riding, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I want to talk about this morning — and I wasn’t 
going to until the member from Moose Jaw South brought it up — 
and that is about the salt plant at Chaplin. I was out to Chaplin on 
my office days this spring and was talking about that particular 
operation, and I think when we talk about public participation in 
the throne speech, we’re arguing and talking about a concept that 
it is good to have all manner of people coming into our province 
and investing and doing business, and it’s good for all manner of 
people within our province to participate In the industries and the 
businesses that are here. 

(1145) 
 
And I only mention this because I know full well that one morning 
the people in Chaplin woke up and they owned the salt plant, or 
they were told they did. One morning the Government of 
Saskatchewan told them that they now owned a salt plant. And I 
don’t suppose maybe that was any less surprise or as big a surprise 
than some of the reaction that the hon. member from Moose Jaw 
South was talking about yesterday. And I would hope that the 
employees in that particular enterprise do participate in it, because 
I think they can do very well, and the town of Chaplin can do very 
well by participating in that particular enterprise. 
 
But don’t let anyone lead you astray, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
perhaps because consultations weren’t totally where people would 
like it, that it is any different than the members opposite when they 
were in government. And many times as individuals in this 
province, we woke up one morning and we owned something. 
Now we didn’t have a whole lot of say in it, but we were told that 
we owned it. Somebody, either in the government benches of the 
day or in the bureaucracy did the deal on a piece of paper and now 
we owned it. And there wasn’t a lot of consultation anywhere in 
that particular piece. Now I’m hoping that Chaplin prospers 
because of this arrangement, whatever it may be, and I am going 
to work very hard as their MLA to try and see that it prospers. So 
don’t be misled when we talk about public participation and we 
hear a lot of rhetoric from the members opposite — and we’re 
talking in concepts here — that consultation with people cross this 
province was a high priority of past NDP governments. 
 
I’d like to talk for a second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
diversification, because I think His Honour clearly outlined in the 
Speech from the Throne that our province has been subject to 
boom and bust cycles ever since entering confederation. And we 
who are in agriculture only know too well how those cycles can 
affect the family farm. And when he talked about some of the 
initiatives that can help make the economy of this province strong 
enough that we don’t have to go through that again, I felt a great 
deal of pride. 
 
The other day when he talked about irrigation, when he talked 
about paper manufacturing, when he talked about heavy oil, when 
he talked about meat processing and production and when he 
talked about high-tech industry, what he did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was talk about strengths that are inherent to this province. What he 
did, he talked about strengths that we have in our educational 
system. We have the ability to teach our young people, to educate 
them so that as these things are done and achieved, that they will 
fit into the matrix of our society and they will be productive 
people in our society. And Saskatchewan, as a result, will be 
productive. 
 
And that is the things that we should be talking about in a throne 
speech, when we’re talking about economic diversification, 
because they are the strengths of our people. They are the things 
that we want out people to think about, to bring in concepts, to talk 
about with their MLAs and to have government move into those 
fields and act upon them. I very much look forward to working 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

118 
 

 with the member for Maple Creek over the next months in the 
new area of economic diversification. I think it’ll be very exciting 
for both of us, I know, and it will be, I think, down the road, 
something that — if nothing else that I do in my time here as an 
MLA — if I can do some small thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
help take the bumps and grinds out of Saskatchewan’s economy, 
to take the boom and the bust out, I think I will have done what 
my constituents sent me here to do. And I know not a whole lot 
about it yet, and I’m planning on learning a whole lot about it in 
the future, and I think that’s something that all the members of the 
government caucus have dreamed about and will be striving for in 
the next few months. 
 
I’d like to finish my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by talking 
about an area that is important to all of us, and I guess I didn’t 
really realize how important until last year — to me. It’s 
something that uses a full third of our budget here in the province, 
and that is the Department of Health. And I guess I, as an 
individual, have to say an extreme amount of thanks to the 
taxpayers and the people who deliver the health care in this 
province because, probably more than anyone else in this 
particular Chamber, I probably used more money than any of you 
here — perhaps all of you put together — in fighting a form of 
cancer last year. 
 
And I’ve got to say that, in the hundreds of hours and months that 
I spent at the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic at the Pasqua Hospital, 
that I met an awful lot of fine people. The people who delivered 
the health care to me, as a Saskatchewan citizen there, were top-
notch. And I know that because of the particular disease that I had, 
that I sooner than later may have needed that again. I hope not. 
And I will tell you as a taxpayer in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and as one who has used the benefits provided to me, that 
I will do everything in my power as an individual to make sure 
that that system is every bit as good for the next person that walks 
through the doors of Allan Blair as it was for me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And that brings me to a point that the 
Lieutenant Governor brought up in the throne speech and which 
seems to have drawn a fair amount of derision from members 
opposite, and that is that the Minister of Health will have a task 
force to look at medicare in its second 25 years in our province. 
 
And even though I met some of the finest people in the health care 
delivery system in this province at Allan Blair, and as I wandered 
around that hospital for all those hundreds of hours, no system is 
absolutely perfect, and many people in that institution and other 
institutions in this province will say it isn’t absolutely perfect. And 
they will also say it’s not necessarily simply adding more money 
to the system that will make it perfect. 
 
There are an awful lot of people who I talked to in the last year 
who said they would like the ability to put some input into the 
health care system. And I had an acquaintance of mine make a 
statement to me — and this is a person who lives 24 hours a day in 
the delivery of health care in this province — and we were talking 
about budgets and my own experiences and that type of thing, 

 and he said, honestly, I’ve got to tell you, I think a lot of people in 
the health care field might vote NDP next time. And I said, why is 
that? And he said, well, it’s this way. They are so scared of this 
particular issue that they will not attempt to take it on if they are in 
government. They will simply throw money at it to try and satisfy 
the wants of the various interest groups within the health care 
system, because this issue has become something which seems to 
strangle the NDP Party, and they cannot talk about some of the 
things that need to be talked about. 
 
And this is an individual who I can remember talking to when the 
member from Saskatoon South was the minister of Health and, 
believe me, their former minister of Health. And this individual 
did not have a high opinion of that particular member at that time. 
So I just wanted to pass those thoughts on because I believe . . . 
and I believe the Leader of the Opposition should know this, from 
sitting on a national task force on health, how beneficial it is for 
people in those particular areas under discussion to participate. 
 
I mean, for as much as people knock at the fact that five members 
of this government went around the province last year to 13 
meetings and talked to about 4,000 farmers about farm debt, 
maybe hasn’t solved the total problem. And you know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, from being on that particular committee that we 
didn’t solve all the problems, but people sure as heck enjoyed 
participating in something that dealt with their particular 
livelihood. And I think it is a tremendous show of courage, a 
tremendous show of responsibility for the Minister of Health to 
talk about a task force on medicine and health in our province. 
And I know I look forward to that task force, and I look forward to 
people in my community having the opportunity, however he 
decides, to put input into that task force. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to leave the 
members of the legislature with a few items here. I think that when 
we’re talking about a Speech from the Throne we’re talking about, 
as I said, it’s kind of like spring planting, it’s hope, it’s new ideas 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a general direction. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — . . . it’s a general direction. And as the 
Lieutenant Governor read through a list, there was five here that I 
felt had a lot of relevance to my particular constituency and a lot 
of people — and I know there was others — but I just want to 
leave us with five of these that we’re going to think about as we go 
into spring and summer and through the rest of the year. 
 
We talked about improving the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, a 
tremendously successful plan already, and one that we want to 
make better for the people of Saskatchewan; improving The 
Labour Standards Act, particularly as it relates to part-time 
workers. More and more people are joining the service sector, are 
in part-time work, and I like to think that it had to be a PC 
government that brought forward improvements in The Labour 
Standards Act. You know, traditionally the socialist parties claim 
these things, but I guess they just couldn’t handle it and it’s been 
left up to us. So I’m very proud that that is part of our long-term 
agenda. 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

119 
 

To amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act to provide 
information on toxic chemicals used in the work place. Once 
again, it’s been left up to a Progressive Conservative government 
to deal with issues of the work place, and I’m proud of that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
To replace The Family Services Act with legislation to improve 
the role of the family in foster parent situations and to improve the 
adoption procedure. That is also something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which we can be very proud of. 
 
And because it affects rural Saskatchewan so much, to provide a 
new Homesteads Act that recognizes modern day arrangements 
concerning ownership of marital property. 
 
All, I would say, social issues. All issues that have been derived 
and driven by this government. And I think that for us that it is 
something that we need to take to heart as we walk through this 
session and think about the future and the things that we’re going 
to achieve for our province. So let’s not be hidebound by our 
dogma. Let’s rethink what the meaning of spring is, perhaps. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to say 
that I am proud to support this document. I think it is the way that 
we in this province should go. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the PC government opposite is not known for telling the 
truth, but it did acknowledge in the throne speech that: 
 

There is no doubt that the past year has been a difficult one 
for the people of this province. 

 
I couldn’t agree with you more, only I would have put it a great 
deal more strongly. I would have said that this past year has been a 
devastating one for the people of this province. It’s been a really 
devastating one. 
 
(1200) 
 
I represent a constituency where over one-third of the people are 
over the age of 60, and for them this past year has been 
particularly hard. The PC government has increased utility rates, 
increased the sales tax, added a flat tax, driven up property taxes, 
cancelled the property improvement rebates, created increases in 
hundreds of service fees, and perhaps the worst of all — although 
on top of everything else sometimes those other things can be 
very, very difficult — you’ve increased the cost of prescription 
drugs for the sick and the elderly. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask the members in this Assembly 
opposite, how can people on fixed incomes cover all these 
increased expenses? The reality is that they can’t, and that they are 
slipping further and further into poverty. And that is very, very 
frightening, very frightening to a group of people who have 
always prided themselves on being able to manage their own 
affairs. And for them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those people I 
represent in Saskatoon Centre, and the seniors across this 
province, this past year has been horrible. The increase in 

financial burden is one reason why it’s been horrible. 
 
And then there’s been another reason why this has been a horrible 
and devastating year for Saskatchewan seniors. Not only have they 
faced a financial crisis, they have also had to watch the 
government hack and slash at the many valuable social and 
economic programs which they, the seniors of this province, have 
worked so hard and so long to establish. 
 
And to add insult to injury, the PC government has even 
eliminated the senior citizens’ own self-help programs, like the 
Evergreen Neighbourly Services in Saskatoon, which were based 
on the very values of volunteer service which the PC government 
says, so very self-righteously, that it supports. Some support, when 
you pull the funding out from under the senior citizens groups. 
 
The actions of the government opposite have been quite instance, 
and certainly they have been totally unacceptable and heart-
breaking. I say that the caucus opposite has a lot to answer for to 
the seniors in this province, and I certainly hope in this year ahead 
that they will be hearing loud and strong from these many deeply 
frustrated people. Mr. Speaker, I have spoken personally with 
many seniors about these concerns, and they have asked me to 
convey them to this Assembly. 
 
So this has been a very difficult past year; we all agree on that. But 
that’s about where it ends because, Mr. Speaker, over the past 18 
months that I’ve been a member of this legislature I have learned 
that one of the most striking characteristics of the PC government 
is its uncanny ability to wander away from both the truth and from 
reality. The government uses language which it hopes will fool 
people into believing that it is what it is not. It concocts phrases 
which are deliberately deceptive, and the throne speech is a good 
example of what I mean. 
 
Take, for instance, the proclamation in the throne speech that these 
difficult economic times “continue to harass us all.” How false, 
how pretentious that is. How incredible! Can we believe for one 
moment that George Hill, the former PC Party president, with his 
$150,000 salary plus benefits from SaskPower is harassed by 
economic difficulties? Or Paul Schoenhals, whom the taxpayers of 
Saskatoon Sutherland defeated and who now earns over $80,000 
at their expense. Or, for that matter, Jack Sandberg, whom I 
defeated and who is now managing customer relations at 
SaskPower for an undisclosed salary. You won’t say what his 
salary is, so I’m sure it’s quite high; he’s being paid by the people 
of this province to justify to them why their power bill should be 
increased. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And it’s going on and on. This is scandalous 
patronage in the past year — just cosy cushions of comfort for the 
PCs. And I say, shame on all of you opposite for supporting 
statements that declare that. 
 
And I’m going to quote again from the throne speech: “. . . the 
turmoil of transition has created hardship for each and every one 
of us.” And I say to you that you know nothing about hardship, 
nothing at all, and that you have no right 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

120 
 

to pretend that you are among those whom your policies have so 
grievously hurt. 
 
But it’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the PC government can’t face 
the truth of the effects of its policy. You can’t face the shame, you 
can’t face the guilt, you can’t face the people, so you’re blaming 
all our problems on the world economy. But I say, Mr. Speaker, 
that they can’t have it both ways. 
 
You, the PCs opposite, are the ones who love to rub people’s 
noses in the idea that you can’t have rights without 
responsibilities. So I say to you, be responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — You are the government. Have the guts to face the 
fact that you have the power to help people. You have the right to 
help people and you have the responsibility to help people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: All the people. So do it. Ah, but you say, we are doing 
it, we’re doing it through public participation. “My government,” 
you say in the throne speech, and I’m going to quote again: “. . . 
believes that all people in Saskatchewan have a right to the 
opportunity of participating in the province’s economic growth.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I almost choked when I heard that sentence, 
because it illustrates for me so perfectly one of the fundamental 
differences between the ideology of free enterprise Conservatives 
and democratic socialists. It illustrates so clearly just how little 
you value the people of this province, and I say it’s another 
example of PC deception. 
 
Now very simply put, Mr. Speaker, who do they, the PC 
government, think creates the province’s economic growth in the 
first place? It’s the people, that’s who. 
 
We already participate — and I want to underline that strongly. 
Without our work here in this province there wouldn’t be any 
economic growth. But the PC government whole-heartedly 
embraces a narrow, right-wing ideology which totally fails to 
value the contribution of every person in this province who 
participates in the economic growth, whether that person is a 
home-maker, a waitress working on minimum wage, a nurse, a 
miner, a farmer, and thousands and thousands more. That’s the 
public participation and the economic growth of this province, and 
that’s what we represent here on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to look at what’s 
happened with the Saskatchewan Minerals plant in Chaplin. And I 
ask you what kind of public participation is it when the minister of 
privatization only speaks to the employees to tell them that the 
plant has been sold to a Toronto owner. The minister believes in 
public participation so much he won’t even go on an open line 
show to speak with the people. 

Mr. Speaker, this PC government has demonstrated over and over 
again that it only listens to the owners of large corporations and 
their PC friends who dance to “Yankee Doodle Dandy,” and 
everyone else in the province is fair game for manipulation and 
deceit. 
 
And the PC government will sell or give away the very precious 
heritage of this fine province, a heritage which rightly belongs to 
us all, to all the generations of people, of the people who have put 
their energies and work into building up all the industries and 
services and farms of Saskatchewan — the ordinary people; the 
people who work for wages; the people who work on the small 
farms; the people who have owned the mom and pop small 
businesses here in Saskatchewan. But the PC’s want to siphon off 
all their wealth, all our wealth, siphon it off to put more money in 
the pockets of those who already have far too much financial 
control. 
 
And I ask why, Mr. Speaker, why can’t they value people’s 
labour? Why can’t they support Saskatchewan’s own ways of 
developing a vibrant community! And why can’t they treat 
ordinary people with the dignity and the respect that they deserve? 
They can’t do it, Mr. Speaker. They can’t do it. The corporations 
fund their political party, and we all know that he who pays the 
piper calls the tunes. They must all do as they are told, and to help 
them do this, Mr. Speaker, they’ve swallowed hook, line, and 
sinker a free-market, dog-eat-dog ideology to which they seem to 
be very slavishly attached. 
 
And others before me have spoken at length on this point, so I 
won’t. But their allegiance to the dog-eat-dog ideology explains 
why I laughed when I heard in the throne speech that they were 
going to deal with dangerous dogs. For one wonderful moment I 
fantasised that they might be going to control themselves. But 
there’s no such luck, which is too bad for the people of 
Saskatchewan, because their blind, unreasoned allegiance to one 
narrow ideology spells deep trouble. 
 
Now we see this already, Mr. Speaker, in their attempts to 
diversity the economy. In the throne speech they tell us that 
economic diversification will “combat the boom and bust cycle,” 
but they fail to acknowledge that an uncontrolled free market 
economic system creates these boom and bust cycles, and they 
will never be able to develop plans for combating this until them 
come to terms with the cause. 
 
That’s one reason why, even though we have economic 
diversification through our high-tech industry, we see SED 
Systems laying off people and we see Develcon faltering. Two of 
our major high-tech firms are in deep trouble, and I have little 
confidence that the PC government will rescue them over the long 
term, and especially with the former minister of Consumer Affairs 
now in charge of SEDCO. Since she failed to protect the 6,700 
depositors in First Investors and Associated Investors, I worry 
about the kinds of deals she may be considering in her new 
portfolio. 
 
(1215) 
 
And last but by no means least, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak about 
health care. The nature of the task force 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

121 
 

announced in the throne speech remains a matter of grave concern. 
My colleagues have already spoken about this in detail. I just want 
to record here my outrage when I heard that the PC government 
now wants to use the taxpayers’ money to study the future of 
medicare after spending all last year introducing changes which 
destroyed the concept. If you thought health care system needed 
changes, why didn’t you study it before you attacked it so 
viciously. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that nothing that the PC government does 
makes sense. They seem to believe in government by chaos. They 
seem to be lurching towards the dark ages making proclamations 
of no substance which you expect us to believe with blind faith. 
 
As I listened to the throne speech, I had a vivid sense of déjà vu 
when I heard that the government intends to draft a blueprint for 
health care into the year 2000. The words had such an awful 
familiar ring to them. We’ve heard that phrase over and over and 
over, ad nauseam, particularly in connection with education. Now 
we have it with health. 
 
So I looked up the report Preparing for the Year 2000: Adult 
Education in Saskatchewan, and I was glad that I did because I 
think it may shed some light on what we can expect in health care. 
As you know, we new Democrats are concerned that the task force 
may be used to move our health care system into medicare 
premiums, deterrent fees, and cuts in services, and to provide the 
environment where extra services for those who are wealthy may 
well be introduced. 
 
The PC government denies this, but look at what’s happened in 
adult education. In Saskatoon, for example, is now bursting with 
enterprises offering adult education to those who will pay. The 
fees are often high, the staff sometimes poorly paid, the standards 
questionable, and the end result sometimes deeply frustrating for 
those who spent their savings hoping to find employment or to get 
upgrading. And government loans and grants are often supporting 
these businesses, yet there’s no mention of them in the report, 
Preparing for the Year 2000. They are not even party of any PC 
blueprint. They are there because the government sees nothing 
wrong with the proliferation of such agencies any more than it 
sees anything wrong with encouraging a two-tier health care 
system. 
 
So we can be sure that the blueprint for health care will not 
probably openly announce the destruction of our public health care 
system any more than the education report announced the 
undermining of our publicly-funded adult education system. What 
will happen will be indirect and more insidious. 
 
So I say, beware of a government which tells us in the throne 
speech that its primary goal over the next decade will be to ensure 
effective and relevant delivery of health care. Remember that this 
is the same government which has already destroyed the popular 
school-based dental plan, dismantled the prescription drug plan, 
refused to fund senior citizen groups focusing on preventive care, 
created long hospital waiting lists, cut back home care, and the list 
goes on and on and on. 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a government which is not to 
be trusted, this is a government which is not to be believed, and 
this is a government which is not to be sanctioned. From the PCs 
we get the platitudes of the throne speech, and the realities of their 
actions. While they say that they remain committed and remain 
optimistic that farmers and common sense will see us through, 
they are practising the politics of greed, the politics of fear, and the 
politics of hatred. 
 
They have turned Saskatchewan into a “hustle heaven.” There’s a 
few winners and a great many losers. There are privileges for 
those who are already privileged, and there are penalties for the 
poor. The PC government has destroyed the programs designed to 
help people across this province and left them cowed. They’ve 
intimated working people, and they have failed dismally to 
support women and children. They have viciously maligned our 
aboriginal people and other minority groups, and they have pitted 
groups of ordinary people against each other in an ongoing 
campaign to make us hate each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has set our younger generation an awful 
example of leadership — incompetence, dishonesty, and totally 
lacking any sense of justice or compassion. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have truly fallen upon tragic times in this 
province. It will take the strength of all of us who are genuinely 
committed to fairness and common sense to see us through. 
 
We must together honour the work of our seniors who created our 
history and who truly built this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — They built this province. And we must together 
work for a future which is not based on the backward, narrow, 
right-wing ideology of this present government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I join my colleagues in saying that there is no 
way I can support this vacuous throne speech any more than I can 
ever support the actions of this present government. I vote against 
the throne speech, but I vote in favour of our amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In entering the debate 
on the throne speech, I’d first like to congratulate the mover of the 
throne speech and the seconder of the throne speech, the member 
from Rosthern and the member from Moosomin, on a job well 
done. 
 
I’m going to start off with . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I ask the hon. members to allow the 
member for Saltcoats to make his remarks to the Assembly. I’m 
sure we’re all having difficulty hearing him. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re elated over 
there for some reason, but I don’t know why. 
 
First of all, I think that Saskatchewan stands on the edge of a new 
frontier. We really do. The frontier of economic 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

122 
 

opportunities and strong and vibrant — that’s good for the 
province. The Saskatchewan of 1988 will be a celebration of 
progress and achievement. That’s what the Speech from the 
Throne represents, and that’s what the Progressive Conservative 
government is all about. 
 
I’m especially pleased to rise in the legislature today to speak in 
support of the Speech from the Throne, and obviously they’ll ask 
why. Because I have confidence in this government and its leader, 
that’s why. The Premier of our province — probably the best thing 
that’s happened to Saskatchewan in the last 20 or 30 or 40 years. 
 
I have confidence in the dynamic programs that the government 
have laid out for agriculture, education, and health care, and 
certainly economic affairs. The people of my constituency elected 
me to this legislature because they have confidence in what I stand 
for and what this government stands for. They also have 
confidence in the Saskatchewan future. Mr. Speaker, the Speech 
from the Throne spells out the future direction of the province. All 
the opposition has to do is just go over it point by point and they 
will understand what the direction is and what the agenda is. 
 
Of course health care got top billing in the throne speech, and 
rightfully so. I hear about underfunded health from the opposition 
benches and, as you remember, there’s 63 per cent more funding 
in the health care system today than there was a few years ago. 
 
The major task force on health care is going to supply a blueprint 
to us, an agenda to follow into the ’90s. And that announcement is 
very, very important. As you all know, Saskatchewan spends one-
third, and I won’t elaborate on that, but they do, one-third of the 
entire budget on health care, but it bears repeating in this 
Assembly. And all I’ve heard from the opposition is: you throw 
more money at the problem; that’s going to fix it. 
 
Well I think it’s near time that we took, and high time that we let 
the people out in rural Saskatchewan and throughout the province 
come before the task force and try and help us find out how we’re 
going to address the health care system in the next 10 or 20 years, 
because obviously the costs are rising every day and there’s new 
diseases that will come into health that will have to be addressed, 
and I think it’s only proper that we do have a blueprint that will 
tell us the direction of health care in this province. 
 
You know, there’s many things in there besides health. I want to 
touch on a few, such as agriculture. I would like to take some time 
to discuss agriculture and what it means to our province. The 
many programs that we’ve brought in since 1982 in agriculture — 
the PLP, which is production loan; counselling assistance for 
farmers; Farm Land Security Act; federal debt review board. I 
could go on at length because there’s many, many programs, but 
my colleagues have pretty well covered it in throne speech debate, 
and we will hear more of it in the days to come. 
 
One sentence in the throne speech says something that the 
government has recognized for very . . . I suppose ever since we 
got here in 1982 — agriculture is the backbone 

of Saskatchewan; there is no doubt about it. 
 
That’s why since 1982 this government has introduced many 
protections and protectionist programs for the farmers. I don’t 
believe in protectionism really, but under normal . . . and certainly 
not under normal conditions, but these aren’t normal conditions. In 
times of economic adversity for the farmers of the province, we’ve 
come to realize that government will always help the farm 
community, and we’ve demonstrated that year after year since I 
got here in 1982. We have helped and we will help, and they can 
say anything they want from the opposition side, that the farmers 
don’t agree or disagree with what we’re doing. It may no be 
everything they want, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a whole lot better than 
22 per cent interest. 
 
This session of the legislature will bring in a farm protection law 
and we will bring it in, in this session. Legislation to protect the 
rural family in tough times will be introduced. I guess, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition is haunted by the fact that in two 
provincial elections, 1982 and 1986, the farmers of the province 
— rural Saskatchewan — rejected them totally. Why? Simply 
because of a couple of things. State ownership, that’s all they can 
think of — state ownership. Land bank . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Control, control, control. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Control our lives. Land bank, and total disregard 
for farmers, total disregard for the rural way of life. 
 
The NDP has no respect. They have no regard for farming and the 
farmers out there know that. We’ve heard them complain and harp 
and bellyache and shout and scream about how tough it is out in 
agriculture and rural Saskatchewan. Well they’re right on that 
point. The trouble is they’re not listening to what the people are 
saying out there. I haven’t heard one solution since 1982 to 
anything that I have addressed up to now come from that side of 
the House. 
 
(1230) 
 
The debate on the Speech from the Throne gives the people of 
Saskatchewan an opportunity to see clearly the difference between 
that side of the government and our side of the government. 
There’s a reason why the opposition sits there. For 10 long years 
they promoted state ownership, state control — almighty 
socialism. 
 
The dignity of the individual was replaced by the power of big 
government. The man who sits here today as Leader of the 
Opposition is the key figure in that past 10 years of the family of 
Crown corporations and land bank and secular socialism. I believe 
the motto of socialism is: let me take you by the hand from the 
cradle to the grave. You’ll never want, but if you start off that way 
you’ll stay poor, and they’ll make sure you stay that way. They 
carry you on from, like I say, from the cradle to the grave — stay 
under the wing of socialism and they’ll look after you. You can go 
across the pond and find that they’ve lived with that thought for 
years and years and years and just see how depressed the people 
are there. And of course if you’re really poor, they’ll buy you a 
membership to let 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

123 
 

you know that they’ll look after you, and they will keep you — 
take you from the cradle to the grave. 
 
The member from Riversdale better know that it takes more than a 
cowboy hat and a pair of cowboy boots to represent the farmers of 
this province, and you can remember back into the . . . when he 
was running around the country doing that. 
 
They’ve got no new ideas at all. They cling to the old ideas. I hear 
them talking, way back in Anderson days and 30 years ago and 20 
years ago, and I don’t know when they’re going to get the 
visionary thought to look to the future and forget about the past. 
You can’t really do a whole lot about that now anyhow. 
 
Their response to the throne speech shows that they’re not in touch 
at all with rural Saskatchewan. Main Street, Saskatchewan, coffee 
row. No wonder the NDP candidate from Elphinstone has dropped 
out of the race. I take my hat off to those that done that. I think 
they’re withdrawing from that race on principles alone — 
certainly in buying memberships just to belong to a party. I mean, 
giving it to them for a present, buying votes — the party of Allan 
Blakeney obviously have taken the position that they’ll go to any 
length to seize power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, you have a Premier 
who has shown leadership that people in Saskatchewan can trust. 
He’s made it possible for us to stay in our province and keep them 
on the road to prosperity and economic achievement. Our Premier 
believes, as was stated in the Speech from the Throne, that we 
need the building blocks that are going to form the next 10, 20 
years in this province. 
 
The importance of the family was stated in the throne speech. As a 
government, we believe that there’s no institution out there that’s 
more important than the family. As a result of our commitment to 
the family, more Saskatchewan families are prospering today. 
Education, health care, agriculture — all the programs are geared 
up to help the family. We will uphold that solid family values in 
our policies. 
 
I want to make a point here, Mr. Speaker. The opposition don’t 
like to talk about traditional values and the family. It makes them 
uncomfortable, simply because it doesn’t fit their agenda. Mr. 
Speaker, the family of Crown corporations and the family of big 
government is the only family that they really feel comfortable 
with. We, on this side of the House, we just love to work with the 
families who work, and work hard, to build a better Saskatchewan. 
 
I not, with some interest in the debate that I’ve heard up to now in 
the last few days, their continual gloom and doom. Every one of 
the speeches that come from that side of the House — I haven’t 
seen one ray of light; it’s all doom and gloom, the underdog, the 
ordinary people. I’m really, you know, frankly sick and tired of the 
gloom and doom aspect. They’re scare tactics. I mean, they’re 
scare tactics even to the people of the mine of Chaplin that was 
took over yesterday. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No solutions, no options, no new 

ideas. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — No solutions, no new ideas. Negative, negative, 
negative. 
 
Let me take the time, Mr. Speaker, and talk about Canada-United 
States free trade. Saskatchewan is a trading province and we all 
know that. Our economy is dependent on trade, and we all know 
that too. And yet we have the Leader of the Opposition 
comfortably in bed with John Turner and Ed Broadbent in tearing 
up the agreement. I mean they’ve publicly stated that all over 
Canada: if we’re elected we will tear the thing up. Well that’s 
silly. I say shame on the leader. To him Oshawa and Bob White 
are more important than any jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I suppose they’re comfortable in bed with the NDP and the 
Liberals, they always have been. But I can’t understand why a 
leader of the province of Saskatchewan, or an opposition leader, 
that’s hoping some day that he might get in, will protect eastern 
Canada. Lord knows, we’ve protected them for a lot of years. 
 
The Premier of our province on this side of the House has 
certainly shown leadership in free trade. He knows that free trade 
presents a great opportunity to the people of Saskatchewan to 
prosper in the future and I proudly join him on supporting that free 
trade. 
 
Now, I just want to take a moment or two on talking about the 
family. The throne speech makes mention of the fact that The 
Family Services Act will be replaced by legislation to improve the 
role of the family in the foster parent situation, and to simplify the 
adoption procedures. I commend the government for encouraging 
the adoption of children. Children are precious and they must be 
helped to have homes in this province. The government has shown 
care and compassion in recognizing the special needs of children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role of education in this province also is 
recognized in the throne speech, education of our young people 
that will help build the future of this province. Good schools 
simply build a better society. Without a doubt the government will 
continue to build their education corner-stones in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On a note that happened in Saltcoats constituency, my 
constituency that I represent, the good news is that we have our 
shoemaking training school back, training the children, training 
the students — I shouldn’t say children — training the adults and 
we’re cranking out adults into the work-force that are going to go 
to work in the shoemaking training and trade of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wish to raise another matter, Mr. Speaker, the matter of vital 
importance not only to Saskatchewan but all of Canada, and I 
speak now of the protection of the unborn. The Premier of this 
province and the government caucus has shown a strong 
commitment to the sanctity of life. 
 
We have called for a national law to be passed in the Parliament of 
Canada to protect the unborn, and I’m 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

124 
 

proud of our commitment to the dignity of life. And at this time, I 
call on the members of the Opposition to state their support for the 
rights of the unborn. Stand up in this Assembly and tell the folks 
exactly where you stand. The Saskatchewan families and the 
people of Saskatchewan believe in values such as the protection of 
the unborn and so does the Progressive Conservative caucus and 
our Premier. 
 
This debate on the throne speech presents us with many 
opportunities to show the people of Saskatchewan where and what 
the government stands for. My question is again: what does the 
Opposition stand for? What do you really stand for? 
 
Before I get to the end of my time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to relate a 
few things out of my constituency, if I may. 
 
Going right back, related to health care, the constituency of 
Saltcoats finally got badly needed health care beds in the Saltcoats 
constituency after eleven years of the former government — badly 
needed home care beds. We finally got 30 brand-new beds in 
Saltcoats, proudly named Lakeside Manor because it’s right 
beside the lake on the Yellowhead Highway at Saltcoats; and 20 
new beds, ten in each care homes; additions to the Langenburg 
and Esterhazy care home structure — beds were badly needed . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the NDP had a moratorium 
certainly on that Saltcoats one because it was debated in this 
House when the member that’s trying to get into Elphinstone was 
the minister of Health, I believe, and it was turned down for some 
silly reason because they thought they should plunk all the care 
beds into the big centres. This government took the decentralizing 
concept and we are now building badly needed care home beds 
out in the country where they belong, where they’re close to their 
families and their grandchildren and that’s just the compassion of 
this government. 
 
Of course we got new highways built in my constituency that were 
very badly needed, and I’d like to quote from the little paper, The 
Four-Town Journal, that’s out in Langenburg. The local paper 
said, and while I have just wrote it down here, I can get the quote. 
The editor says that: 
 

Walter Johnson, MLA, since he has got the post as the 
Saltcoat’s representative has accomplished more in the past few 
years as the former member had in the 11 or 12 years 
(whenever) he was here. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Our Progressive Conservative government, Mr. 
Speaker, believes in free trade, a strong economy, good education, 
a real good education system, a first-class health care system, and 
the family. And that pretty well sums up this side of the House. 
Those are Saskatchewan values. Those are values that brought me 
to this legislature, because people in my constituency voted for 
those kind of values. 
 
The throne speech shows that we are on the right 

direction and on the right course, and we’ll stay on that course. 
Common sense will prevail. We have chosen to build an economy 
to support farmers and strengthen our education and health 
system, and I really believe that’s what Saskatchewan people 
want. That’s what the Speech from the Throne presents to this 
legislator — positive programs for the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during this session of the legislature, it’ll become 
more obvious that the Progressive Conservative government are in 
tune with the people of Saskatchewan. We listen to people, their 
hopes and their goals, and that’s stated in the throne speech. 
 
On behalf the constituency . . . my people in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker I am absolutely very, very pleased to support the throne 
speech. And again I congratulate the Premier for his strong 
leadership, and I wish to go on record supporting the throne 
speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to open my 
remarks in this throne speech debate this afternoon by repeating 
something that you said earlier this week, and that is to extend 
thanks to the CFB (Canadian Forces Base) band from Moose Jaw, 
the band from Canadian Forces Base, Moose Jaw that 
accompanied the opening of this session. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re all my friends. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The Deputy Premier just indicated that they’re all 
his friends. Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the Deputy Premier 
that as I greeted some of the members of the band, it was 
suggested to me, by members of the band, that when the 
government members opposite were filing into this Chamber, they 
were going to play, “Send in the Clowns.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — They want to know where you stand on the 
casino. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well now the Minister of Finance is speaking from his seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also had it observed — while we’re discussing the 
CFB band and other Moose Jaw issues here — I also had it 
observed by a number of those who were here as guests that the 
best thing they heard last Monday, in the afternoon, was the music 
of that band, and they didn’t hear much from this government that 
they liked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: Mr. Speaker, the time in this debate is precious and I 
do not intend to waste time, nor do I intend to participate in the 
kind of debate that we’ve heard so much from members opposite. 
I do not intend to use this precious time in personal attack on 
others members. I mean, this place is too important for that, indeed 
life is too 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

125 
 

important for that, and I’ll have no part of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given that the time is limited, I want to restrict my 
remarks, not to the whole waterfront of issues that arise out of this 
throne speech, but to some specifics. 
 
One, Mr. Speaker, a very specific lacking in this throne speech. 
And then I, too, wish to address some issues in regard to the 
Saskatchewan family. And then if I have time, I’d like to make 
just a general comment about the state of our province as I see it 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the environment, in terms of this 
favoured land which is ours to inhabit and to be stewards of, in 
terms of the nature that surrounds us and sustains us, I frankly was 
shocked, Mr. Speaker, when I heard the throne speech and found 
not one, not one substantial reference to the environment — not 
one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very significant environmental issues are facing this 
province today, and will face this province into the future, and that 
this government should totally ignore them is unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker — it’s unacceptable. 
 
This very week, Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan 
announced, had a forum in Saskatoon with the people of 
Saskatoon to discuss their plans for a hazardous waste disposal 
facility, an incinerator as I understand it. The University of 
Saskatchewan is forced into doing this because there does not 
exist in this province a facility to deal with hazardous wastes. And 
that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that I expected to see 
addressed in this throne speech. It wasn’t there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recently heard reports of dioxin contaminations 
in the North Saskatchewan River. This government says it’s going 
to monitor the situation. They’re going to monitor the situation, 
but we’ve got no commitment from this government that they’re 
out to discover the source, no commitment that they wish to 
prevent further poisoning of the North Saskatchewan. It’s just so 
typical, Mr. Speaker. They monitor, they watch, they task force 
until the problem is a crisis, and then they fumble around trying to 
find a solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech provided a golden opportunity to 
deal with some of these issues. And this week, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister of privatization who sometimes doubles as the Minister of 
the Liquor Board, the minister who doesn’t want to go on open 
line talk shows in the morning — this week the minister was 
announcing around the province that soon we’re to have sales of 
canned beer in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, to be fair, a great 
many Saskatchewan people are in support of that proposal. They 
might have sooner had a tax cut, but they’ve got canned beer. But, 
Mr. Speaker, what no one in Saskatchewan is in favour of is 
finding beer cans on our beaches, beer cans in our back alleys, 
beer cans in our ditches. 
 
This government has announced perhaps as early as May we’re 
going to be able to buy beer in cans, but no plan is in place, no 
plan is in place for the deposit or the return or the recycling of 
these cans. Mr. Speaker, a golden opportunity existed in this 
throne speech. I expected it to be there. Not a word, not a word 
about recycling, not a 

word about these aluminium cans. 
 
There’s just a litany of environmental concerns that I feel should 
have been in this throne speech. Let me just identify one more 
which I feel is perhaps the most significant environmental concern 
facing our province this year, this spring and summer, and perhaps 
well into this year, this spring and summer, and perhaps well into 
the future. And, Mr. Speaker, I saw evidence of that concern just 
yesterday as I drove west of the city of Moose Jaw along the No. 1 
Highway and saw clouds of blowing dust, Mr. Speaker, clouds of 
blowing dust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a problem out there. The land is dry. The 
largest body of water in southern Saskatchewan is gone — Old 
Wives Lake is gone. It’s a salt flat. The people in Limerick are 
telling us that already they’re concerned about their supply of 
drinking, the supply of the water they use for drinking. I talked to 
two farmers from the Carievale district. They were at the banquet 
following the opening. And they tell me, Mr. Speaker, that if they 
don’t get moisture very soon, there just won’t be a crop around 
Carievale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a problem out there. It’s not even 
mentioned in the throne speech — no plan, no contingency, 
nothing about what may well be the most serious environmental 
problem facing us this year, and perhaps well into the future — a 
throne speech with nothing. Now I’m not about to accuse the 
Premier, the Minister of agriculture, of not being aware of this 
problem. Just yesterday he spoke to a group in Moose Jaw at the 
Moose Jaw spring farm show and he concluded his remarks with 
these words. He said to the folks there: 
 

I wish you the best for ’88-89, and between you, me and the 
good Lord, I hope it rains this spring. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as much as I believe in the power of prayer, I 
think we need something else from our Premier than hopes and 
prayers that we can get through this spring and summer — 
concrete action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to turn, for a few moments, to an area of 
provincial life that does receive attention in this throne speech, that 
being the area of family life. And I’m personally glad this 
government did see fit to include family life within its throne 
speech, and no one will disagree — no one in this House is going 
to disagree with the fundamental assertion that appears in the 
throne speech, that the family is the fundamental unit of our 
society; no one is going to disagree with that. 
 
In recent days, and we heard it again today, this government has 
taken upon itself the mantle of the protector of Saskatchewan 
families. Mr. Speaker, in my mind that is a noble aspiration — 
noble aspiration. In the Speech from the Throne we heard the 
phrase that government programs will be modified to meet the 
changing needs of the Saskatchewan family. And, Mr. Speaker, 
again I respect that commitment, and I sincerely hope that some of 
their policies will be modified to meet the needs of Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
But I guess where we disagree, Mr. Speaker, is in terms of those 
needs. What are the real needs of Saskatchewan families today? 
You see, Mr. Speaker, for instance, I 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

126 
 

happen to believe that family life is enhanced when families can 
be, and spend time, together. I believe that’s good for family life. I 
believe that when kids are out of school there ought to be an 
opportunity for their parents to be with them. What that means, 
Mr. Speaker, what that means is that we need in this province a 
common day of rest. 
 
Now in this very same throne speech, in the very same section 
under “The Family,” this government announces its intentions not 
to deal with the store hours question, not to seek a common day of 
rest in Saskatchewan, not to provide time for families to be 
together. They’ve just washed their hands of it. They said, we’ve 
got neither the backbone nor the ability to deal with that question. 
Mr. Speaker, I do not find in that a commitment to Saskatchewan 
families nor to family life. Families need time together. 
 
In my experience, Mr. Speaker, in working with families in crisis, 
that experience has shown me that very often the family crisis, 
where families are breaking apart, where alcohol is involved, 
where gambling is involved — very often, Mr. Speaker, that crisis 
arises out of a financial concern and out of concern for financial 
security. 
 
It’s just understandable, Mr. Speaker. You would recognize the 
strain that’s on a family on the farm with a heavy, heavy debt load. 
You know what kind of stress that must bring. I know from my 
own family experience what it’s like for a family farm, for the two 
parents to have to work off-farm, two other jobs to support that 
farm. You know what kind of stress that’s going to put on a 
family. You know what kind of stress that’s . . . You know what 
kind of time that’s going to limit for the family to be together. 
 
Across this province, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency and across 
this province, working families are seeing their hours cut back. 
Everybody’s becoming a part-time employee. I mean, you can’t 
pay a mortgage, you can’t raise a family on part-time wages. This 
government itself has frozen the wages of working families and, in 
some cases, the wages have been rolled back, and Canada Packers 
in Moose Jaw is a good example of that. 
 
These families have kids who need clothes. They have mortgages. 
They have car payments. And the financial question becomes 
stress on the family. And in that kind of situation, what is this 
government doing? What is this government doing? 
 
Well it’s reaching deeper and deeper and deeper into the 
pocketbooks, the purses, the wallets and the bank accounts of 
Saskatchewan families. Reaching deeper and deeper. Higher and 
higher taxes. Higher and higher licence fees. Higher and higher 
utilities, leaving less and less and less for Saskatchewan families. 
 
And when they’re cutting things, when they’re cutting their own 
expenditures, where do they cut? They cut family services. They 
cut grants to groups, non-governmental agencies out there really 
trying to work and help families. They cut things like the dental 
plan. They cut the prescription drug plan. 

Mr. Speaker, just this week at my office arrived two boxfuls of 
this document, two boxfuls. It’s a glossy, 50-page booklet printed 
and paid for by this government extolling the virtues of free trade. 
I didn’t ask for them. Two boxfuls just arrived . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — By the taxpayers, paid for by the taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Paid for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this money could have been used, this expenditure could 
have been used, to help Saskatchewan families. If they would have 
just forgotten the idea, they could have cut the taxes on 
Saskatchewan families. No, they cut programs, but they won’t cut 
their self-serving propaganda and advertising, and that’s a shame, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: Mr. Speaker, let me move along, given the time, to 
make just a couple of remarks about the situation as I see it in 
Saskatchewan today. Mr. Speaker, when I look at Saskatchewan 
today and the situation that exists and is growing, a situation that is 
due to both the neglect and the intention of this government, I’m 
reminded of some very old words, and you might remember these 
from your days in school. Let me quote: 
 

It was the best of times; it was the worst of times. It was the 
age of wisdom; it was the age of foolishness. It was the 
spring of hope; it was the winter of despair. We had 
everything before us; we had nothing before us. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities — and when 
those words were penned a century ago or more, Charles Dickens 
couldn’t have known how appropriate they would be to 
Saskatchewan in 1988. Mr. Speaker, I am afraid that that is 
becoming more and more the reality in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are becoming more and more a tale of two cities, one city 
reserved for the few, the privileged, another city which is reserved 
for the many who daily are finding life more difficult. We do have 
everything before us. We have a land of wealth, we have a land 
that should offer opportunity for every Saskatchewan person, for 
every Saskatchewan young person. We have a land of great 
wealth. We have everything before us. But what do we have? 
 
In government, a group of men and women who are bent and 
determined to sell off, to sell out, to give away this great land. And 
soon we will have nothing before us, Mr. Speaker, soon we will 
have nothing before us. People are saying to me all the time, 
what’s going to be left when this government’s gone? 
 
(1300) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it takes years to build. It takes years to create. It takes 
generations to widen the gap between the rich and the poor. It 
takes years of labour to build even a modicum of social justice. 
Mr. Speaker, it only takes but moments, it only takes but the 
stroke of a pen to destroy and to tear 
  



 
March 25, 1988 

 

127 
 

down. And that’s what this government is bent on doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that agenda is foreign to the people 
of Saskatchewan. We built this province by working together, by 
sharing in good times and in bad times. We built this province, 
and now it’s all being torn apart by this government. 
 
We are becoming a province divided, a province of two cities, and 
it’s happening both by the design and the neglect of this group of 
men and women. 
 
Mr. Chairman: Order, please. It being 1 o’clock, this House now 
stands adjourned until Monday at 2 o’clock p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 


