


















































June 27, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 27, 1988 
 

2571 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d like 
to direct your attention to the area of mental health, and I have a 
few comments that I want to make in this regard, things that have 
been expressed to me over the last few months. 
 
We notice that this year’s figures, that the allotment for mental 
health represents a decrease of 6 per cent over the actual 
expenditure for 1985-86. Although it may show a 2 per cent 
increase over ’87-88, it is actually still 6 per cent less than what 
was allotted in ’85-86. And in terms of staffing, we also notice that 
708.1 person-years represents an increase of 24.5 person-years 
over last year but still a decrease of some 75.9 person-years over 
the two-year period, Mr. Minister. 
 
We have been advised that there has been a substantial increase in 
the demands on the system resulting from the continued emphasis 
of de-institutionalization. Now we are not suggesting that 
de-institutionalization is not an appropriate policy. We basically 
agree with this policy; however, funding must be provided by the 
government to the non-governmental agencies to continue to 
provide services outside the institutions. Otherwise we end up in a 
situation where people will be looking for services in the private 
sector, and then only those who can afford them will be able to 
obtain them. 
 
We understand that there are fewer professionals in the system and 
greater demands being placed on their services, Mr. Minister. in 
the Saskatoon Mental Health Clinic alone, there was a 25 per cent 
increase in clients last year. We were told that there are waiting 
lists of up to three months for psychiatric services, and that’s 
simply not good enough — a three-month wait for psychiatric 
services is totally intolerable, Mr. Minister. 
 
When people require these services, they require help 
immediately. We have been advised that there has been a 
noticeable change in the state of clients. Their situation is such that 
they are generally much closer to a crisis before they can get help. 
And I am told that the crisis intervention service had an increase of 
— which is in Saskatoon — had an increase of one-third in clients 
last year, and apparently there is a much greater reliance on these 
emergency service throughout the province than what there has 
been in the past. The costs for these very necessary services are 
but a drop in the bucket, Mr. Minister, compared to the cost of 
institutional care. But if these services are not available, than the 
dislocation in costs, both financially and personally — especially 
for people in rural Saskatchewan — are going to increase and 
increase dramatically, Mr. Minister. 
 
There is a second problem with the funding and that is the 

uncertainty of annual grants and department allocations, Mr. 
Minister. It is virtually impossible to do any long-term planning 
within this area. This results in a lack of co-ordination between the 
organizations involved and an inadequate, ad hoc, patchwork 
system. 
 
There are other problems, as well, concerning rehabilitation 
programs for those affected by mental illness. These clients 
require assistance to help them get a foothold in the vocational job 
market. But the response to this by the government has been the 
traditional question of jurisdiction, Mr. Minister. The province 
claims that the job creation is a federal responsibility, I understand, 
while sheltered workshops are an inappropriate vehicle of this 
group. Their needs are not being met by this program, Mr. 
Minister; their needs are not being met. 
 
I am advised that some 58 per cent of community mental health 
nursing positions were affected by last year’s budget, and I believe 
that comes from the health care associations’ brief to the minister 
on page 13. And several rural mental health clinics have been 
discontinued. I have been advised of that, Mr. Minister. Some 
areas have been left without any mental health expertise — a 
situation which is forcing individuals into utilizing more costly 
in-patient services or going without such services altogether. The 
out-patient/in-patient ratio, I’m told, is something like 4:1, with the 
obvious indication of continuous demand and increasing demand 
but, roughly, the allocation of current funding is 50-50. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what we have been advised — and much of my 
information comes from the conversations with people in the area 
and also from the Crocus Co-op brief, of which I’m sure you’ve 
received a copy — is that the whole sheltered workshop concept is 
not working for mentally ill patients. They need special kinds of 
jobs. You can’t just put them into the ordinary job market. It’s 
absolutely crucial that they have meaningful employment. They 
may not be able to work from 9 to 5. They may only be able to 
work two or three hours a day when they’re starting out, and these 
jobs are essential and crucial to them getting back on their feet and 
back into the regular work-force and into the regular world. 
 
They require training on the job and this sort of transitional 
employment, as I mentioned, and I believe there’s a reference to 
that on page 22 of the Crocus Co-op brief, Mr. Minister. And I 
want the Minister of Health to recognize the need for the special 
employment programs for people suffering from mental illness. 
 
I think it’s also important for the minister to recognize that people 
suffering from mental illness need food and they need a balanced 
diet. And the Minister of Social Services recognizes that people 
suffering from diabetes need a balanced diet and there’s special 
allowances made, Mr. Minister — special allowances for people 
suffering from certain kinds of illnesses having a balanced diet. 
But the allowance, as I understand, Mr. Minister, is not there for 
people suffering from mental illness, and people suffering from 
mental illness have a crucial and immediate need for a balanced 
diet. I therefore ask the minister to pressure 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2572 
 

his colleague, the Minister of Social Services, to include that as a 
heading under which people can get special assistance for a 
completely balanced diet. 
 
We need a network of front line staff with a high degree, I am told, 
of multi- or trans-disciplinary skills to deal with these people on an 
out-patient basis, Mr. Minister. And I understand that the support 
is not there from the government in terms of funding. 
 
Now the costs, for example, if one compares the cost between 
what it would cost to institutionalize someone and what it would 
cost to have them in a group home on an out-patient basis, it 
becomes readily apparent that the saving is overwhelmingly great 
and that it is important to have people out on an out-patient basis 
not only because of the saving, but because it puts them closer to 
the community and aids in the curing of their illness. And I believe 
the minister will recognize that that saving’s there. And because 
that saving is there, we have to start funding these group homes 
and we have to put the funding in the out-patient services at a 
higher degree than what has happened in the past. Now I want to 
know, in general terms: is the minister aware of the Crocus Co-op 
brief? Is he aware of the comments made by the Saskatchewan 
Health-Care Association? Will he insist that the Minister of Social 
Services will ensure that people suffering from mental illnesses 
will be able to get a balanced diet; will he recognize and promote 
the fact that meaningful, flexible employment programs are 
necessary for people suffering from mental illness; and will his 
government give this area a higher priority in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If I could just give some general 
comments that relate to this first and then make a more specific 
referral to the brief from Crocus Co-op that the member was 
referring to. 
 
First of all, as it relates the budget — and I know that you’ve said 
it this way, that there’s a 2.2 per cent increase over last year but 
that doesn’t tie in in terms of going back two years. I want you to 
know — and I think you do know — but when the early 
retirement program came into being last year, one of the areas 
most affected across all of government in the most global sense 
was the mental health services area of the Department of Health. 
And that’s because there was a very stable group there that had 
worked in that area for a good, long time and came up through the 
system for a long time together. And when the early retirement 
program came about, there were a whole series of these people 
that were eligible at the same time. And they chose, a good 
number of them chose to take advantage of it, and so this area was 
hit, you know, harder than most areas across the government; 
there’s no question that that’s true. 
 
Since then, you know, you made a couple of statements here that I 
just want to correct a little bit. You say that there are decreases in 
the in-patient volumes in the hospitals through the 
de-institutionalization and the movement toward that, and that’s 
not the case. I mean, we don’t see any volume decrease there. But 
we do believe, as you have stated you do as well, in terms of 
moving people from the institutions and into the community to the 
extent that that’s possible, while recognizing all along that it’s . . . 
And there’s no question 

that anyone would argue that you don’t need the support services 
in the community in order for these people to be able to cope 
outside of an institutional setting. 
 
You talked a little bit about rural health clinics. And I would say, 
last year, based on that circumstance that I just outlined, in terms 
of some of the people that took early retirement and so on, and just 
being able to cover the province in a not altogether ideal sense 
because we were short of people . . . And we’ve been recruiting 
since then and have had some successes, but maybe not to the 
extent that we would like to. 
 
In terms of dropping rural locations, that’s not the case. I believe 
there were one or two where we had people going no more often 
then once a month, where the demand itself didn’t suggest that 
that should carry on. But other than that, the rural settings in the 
rural communities still have those rural mental health clinics. 
 
You made some comments regarding . . . I believe you said, 
sheltered workshops, and I just want to make the distinction here. 
The sheltered workshop system is very much tied to people that 
are mentally handicapped or involved with the . . . with being 
mentally retarded and so on. What we try to do in the mental 
health area is to deal with some sheltered employment 
circumstances where we can bring people in this transitional time, 
when they’re in the circumstance of having some difficulty with 
mental illness, into sheltered employment rather than this very 
structured workshop environment. And we’ve had some, I’m told, 
good success with that across the province, but certainly in some 
of our larger centres. So it’s not all gloom and doom. Certainly we 
have more recruiting that must . . . that is going on, and we need to 
have some more success in recruiting some of these professionals. 
 
(1915) 
 
And now to turn to the recommendations that came out of the 
study that was done by Crocus Co-op of Saskatoon, basically two 
broad recommendations, which are on page 2 of the study. We 
received this study in about, I believe, February or March. I’m just 
going on a bit by recall here now, but two broad recommendations 
that: 
 

1. Government should examine the need for more affordable 
and supportive housing, food, medication . . . (and they go 
through a series of things) . . . educational, social and 
vocational opportunities, individual support, professional 
services, public education, and advocacy. 

 
I mean, everything that’s ever been stated, almost, about mental 
health services is covered in that very broad recommendation and 
that we should be aware of those things. I would say to you that 
we are aware of the need for those things. To a large degree, there 
is significant work going on in terms of trying to ensure that more 
and more of those various categories are there for a growing 
number of people who need this service. 
 
And the second broad recommendation, which I certainly don’t 
disagree with either: 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2573 
 

Research priorities should be assigned to: 
 
(a) strategies for optimum patient care facilitating the 
transition from hospital care to community settings; 

 
And that goes hand in glove with the concept that has been 
developed over a number of years of moving from institutional 
care out to more of a community setting and more of a realistic 
way of life for these people. And I think that we don’t disagree 
with that — and there probably does need to be more research, 
and there can be. 
 
And the (b) part of that second recommendation was: 
 
(b) investigating the very high . . . rate of involvement with the 
courts by persons with a history of mental illness. 
 
And there’s truth in that as well, just on an historical basis and a 
statistical basis, that’s the case. So we’re very aware of those. We 
appreciate the work that’s been done by Crocus Co-op, and 
frankly by other groups in terms of identifying some of this, and 
it’s the same identification that’s done by our people within the 
mental health branch — I might add that under the difficult 
circumstances I’ve outlined, has worked very well and has some 
excellent people in it. And the other thing that I wanted to . . . Well 
I had another point that I wanted to make, but I’ll get back to it in 
a moment if you have other questions. 
 
As it relates to the relationship between Social Services and the 
Department of Health and the recognition by my colleague, the 
Minister of Social Services, and others about, you know, the need 
for a particular diet and so on, I mean, I think that’s true and our 
people work on that all the time, back and forth, and there is, 
despite some of the conversations we might have, back and forth 
here, and so on, there is good co-operation that goes on — not to 
say that there can’t be better co-operation or better structures for 
that co-operation to take place in between the Social Services 
department and specific social service workers, and the people in 
the mental health branch. 
 
So there can be more done in terms of that co-ordination, but 
Social Services, I believe, are very aware of the need here for 
these people that are sometimes different needs than what are 
required just in the mainstream of society. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the balanced diet, 
it’s not a question of whether or not your department co-operates 
with that department. I want you to urge the Minister of Social 
Services to allow, to provide financial assistance for people 
suffering from mental illness to receive a balanced diet in the same 
way that people suffering from other illnesses receive balanced 
diets where that need is identified. And that need is clearly 
apparent for people suffering from mental illness. That’s what I’m 
asking you to do, Mr. Minister. 
 
With respect to the fact that early retirement has caused a lot of 
these employees to no longer be employed by the government, 
with respect to that allegation, then I suggest, Mr. Minister, that 
that’s very bad planning on the part of your government, where we 
have such a 

substantial drop in the number of employees in an area, so 
substantial that I am being told by people working in the mental 
health care system that patients are suffering as a result of that. I 
think that’s bad planning on the part of your government, and I’m 
glad to hear that the government is looking at ways of recruiting 
people. But obviously it’s not doing enough because we’re still 
75.9 person-years down from two years ago, Mr. Minister, and 
that’s not acceptable; we need more recruitment. 
 
But I wish to make once more the point that the people . . . people 
suffering from mental illness have advised Crocus Co-op, in the 
form of a questionnaire, that the thing that they require the most is 
more and better employment programs, Mr. Minister. And that’s 
on page 22 of the Crocus Co-op report. I direct your attention to it, 
and I’m urging your government to put more emphasis on 
employment programs for people suffering from mental 
disabilities. 
 
Now because we are running short of time and for the sake of 
winding up the estimates, I want to move to the question of AIDS 
(acquired immune deficiency syndrome) in the province of 
Saskatchewan and just ask the minister a few questions about that. 
 
I understand that there’s been a sum of money allotted for the 
control of AIDS . . . or the treatment of AIDS patients in the 
province of Saskatchewan. My statistics — and I just want to 
outline what my statistics are, Mr. Minister, to see whether or not 
you are in agreement with it and to put some perspective on how 
serious the problem is in Saskatchewan. 
 
I have been advised there’s 22 actual cases of AIDS in 
Saskatchewan, and that for every case, there’s probably 30 
carriers, and that would be a conservative estimate. I think 
nationally or in some areas it’s considered 100 carriers, but in 
Saskatchewan we feel 30 would be an appropriate estimate. That 
means there would be approximately 660 cases in Saskatchewan, 
since the evidence seems to be clear that every person who is 
carrier eventually ends up with the illness. By 1991 we are then 
talking about figures somewhere between 51 to 91 — I’ve been 
told the minimum would be 51 actual cases and maximum would 
be 91 — meaning we would have, if there’s 30 carriers per each 
case, 1,530 minimum to 2,730 either actual cases and/or carriers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m also told that it costs approximately $80,000 for the 
government with respect to the treatment of every person who 
suffers from the disease of AIDS — $80,000 per case, Mr. 
Minister. You can see that that would be a substantial amount of 
money by the year 1991. 
 
Now I know the government has put aside some funding with 
respect to AIDS. I’d like to have a breakdown from the minister as 
to how that money is going to be spent, and I would also like to 
know what his long-term strategy is with respect to the AIDS 
problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just say to the member that I share the 
concern that you’ve expressed as it relates to this disease and what 
its ramifications may well be for . . . well not only for the health 
care system but for this society as a 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2574 
 

whole. 
 
We have 23 cases — just an update now that there’s another — 23 
cases in this province. Just to put that into a little bit of 
perspective, I will recall just that a relatively short time ago when I 
became Minister of Health, I remember that the number was nine. 
And that’s — what is that? — about a year and a half ago, or 
whatever it is. So certainly there . . . and these are clinical cases 
I’m speaking of now. 
 
You ask, what are we doing, and . . . well first of all, let me, before 
I get into some of these specifics, let me just say that some of the 
stats that you raised are statistics that I have seen, that our people 
have seen as well, in terms of the number of potential carriers that 
there are out there as a relationship or a ratio of the number of 
clinical cases in a given population. There’s no real definite . . . 
There’s nothing really definitive on that. So I would not want to 
say that that’s what the best research says because there are some 
varying points of view on this. 
 
There’s no question that all of us who are in positions of 
responsibility as it relates to . . . well, to the care of the health care 
system, the care of the public at large and the health and 
well-being of our society, all of us have to be taking this pretty 
seriously because as you know, the most important statistics and 
the most important fact about this is that there is no cure. And 
there’s no known cure, and all of the best information that we have 
is that there isn’t likely to be a cure in the very near future, not one 
on the horizon that anyone has been able to define. So that’s the 
dangerous part of it and that’s what makes it all that much more 
frightening, I guess you could say, for the society. 
 
What we have believed for some time, and what we have done 
here in this province of a million people . . . I know there is at 
large out there a bit of a view that says we are a population here in 
the middle of the continent of a million people and this disease is 
one that we see from the large centres of the continent and other 
places in the world, and it’s something that’s in San Francisco and 
in Vancouver and in Detroit and in other places. I think it’s clearly 
the case in this very mobile society that we live in that it’s part of 
us and it’s here with us in our society as well. 
 
What we have decided to do is to say, we’ll take it extremely 
seriously. The drug which is administered to clinical cases, AZT, 
is provided for in the drug plan of Saskatchewan. You know, and 
I’m just getting into some more specifics in terms of where you 
say the money is being spent specifically for this disease. There 
are significant costs in our laboratory, obviously, as the number of 
tests, laboratory tests and so on are conducted here in the province. 
They are a significant cost there. 
 
We have costs to the department as it relates to — and I would be 
willing to send over . . . I want to go through this a little bit, but I 
could send over a breakdown in terms of how much is on the 
various literature and curricula for schools and all those kinds of 
things, which is important information for you to have as well. But 
we have media campaigns, or we’ve carried on some of that in 
terms of educational campaigns to talk about prevention and the 
kinds . . . some measures that can be taken to try to 

prevent this disease. 
 
We have, as you know, a committee. We’re the first province in 
the country to set up a committee of professionals to deal with 
what our response should be and what’s the most appropriate 
response for this province. So we’ve done that a number of . . . 
well months ago now. What else could I . . . 
 
We have a speaker’s bureau in the province where we have more 
than 100 people around the province and spread throughout the 
province who are available to speak to any group that’s interested, 
or whatever. So that’s been co-ordinated. It has not been easy to 
do, and they have over 100 people now. 
 
We have an individual who’s an AIDS co-ordinator in the 
province, you know, just to co-ordinate this effort. We have, as I 
say, pamphlets and videos and films, and our library in that area is 
trying to keep up to date with the most up-to-date information 
available across the world, and as quickly as possible. And as you 
know, the information changes from . . . you know, almost on a 
weekly basis there’s some new and more definitive kind of 
information — seems to be anyway. 
 
I should say that our curriculum in division 3, our grade 7 to 9 
health curriculum in Saskatchewan has been recognized across the 
country as the best curriculum in terms of dealing with this in the 
most balanced sense. And we have requests from across the 
country and various departments of education for that curriculum 
because it is a curriculum that’s based on various modules, and a 
module cane be inserted into that curriculum dealing with this 
specific disease. And I would just want to say that for the 
information of all the members of the House, Mr. Chairman, that 
that program has been regarded very highly by the federal 
government and all of the provinces, frankly, and it will be copied 
by most in the country. So that’s something that’s been developed 
in the last while. 
 
(1930) 
 
We also have new public education. I’m just looking at a note 
here, we have a newer public education program which is being 
developed now and it will be used in the fall. 
 
We also, as well, have a — and I’ll send this in the breakdown — 
we have had individual grants to two groups in the two largest 
centres: AIDS Saskatoon and AIDS Regina who have individual 
grants of money for them to deal with. I believe it’s $7,000 in each 
case, if my memory serves me right, that’s what it was in the . . . 
and for them to carry on their public educational programs, most 
specifically, to within the at-risk community and within their own 
area. 
 
So we’ve done a very, I guess, what I would call a strategy which 
covers all segments of the society and to the extent that our 
committee felt was appropriate, and I don’t know what else could 
have been done. The long-term strategy is to continue with 
education to the extent that we can and make sure that we 
maintain that in front of the people in terms of the scourge that this 
disease is and be sure that prevention measures are taken by the 
sexually active 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2575 
 

citizens. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, with 
respect to the funding to AIDS Regina and AIDS Saskatoon, I’m 
going to suggest, I believe they would like to see funding more in 
the vicinity of $25,000 a year, and I’m going to suggest to the 
Minister of Health that he consider that. And the reason why I’m 
going to suggest that is that I believe that these non-governmental 
agencies that are at arm’s length from government are better able 
to promote proper practices, for example, with respect to people 
who are sexually active than the government is. 
 
In media campaigns, for example, governments tend to want to 
dwell solely on advertising campaigns that deal with loyal 
relationships and the family, and that’s good; I believe in that as 
well. But I think the advertising campaigns that are out there also 
have to be talking, Mr. Minister, about safer sex and individual 
responsibility for protection during sex. And what we tend to find 
is that governments don’t want to identify themselves with that 
form of advertising in public education, and therefore I’m going to 
suggest to the Minister of Health that he reconsider the $7,000 that 
he has referred to as being the funding for AIDS Regina and AIDS 
Saskatoon and consider a larger portion of that $400,000 going to 
these non-governmental agencies. 
 
I had said it costs some $80,000 to treat a person who actually has 
AIDS until that person dies, but I don’t believe that figure includes 
the home care, long-term care beds costs necessarily, or what it 
will require the government to build extra facilities, extra 
long-term care facilities. I’m not sure that it includes dental care, 
and I’m wondering if the minister has looked at dental care for 
people suffering from AIDS. The mental health costs that will be 
there. We note a substantial drop in the mental health budget from 
two years ago, and this obviously is an area where there will have 
to be some consideration given with respect to treating AIDS 
patients and their families, Mr. Minister, because there’s a 
considerable amount of emotional stress associated with this, I’m 
sure. 
 
I’m wondering if the minister has considered the costs with 
respect to social assistance that will be engendered by the province 
and the people of Saskatchewan in helping people who have the 
AIDS illness and are unable to work and also the cost of 
alternative housing and palliative care for them, Mr. Minister. 
There are numerous costs, and I don’t believe that they have all 
been calculated into that $80,000 figure. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think that $400,000 is probably not enough. I 
can’t give you a figure; I can’t tell you how much you should be 
spending, but my instinctive reaction to this is that $400,000 is not 
enough because the long-term costs it’s going to cost us with 
respect to looking after AIDS patients is going to be substantially 
more than that. And if we prevent one AIDS case today, we save 
ourselves $80,000 down the line. 
 
Now I’m not simply talking in dollars and cents, Mr. Minister, 
because it’s not just a dollars-and-cents issue; it’s also a question 
of human costs and human tragedy, as you mentioned yourself, 
Mr. Minister. And therefore I 

urge you to take a closer look at the problem and to consider 
providing further funding to AIDS Regina and AIDS Saskatoon 
and to determine whether indeed you are spending adequate 
moneys to prevent these cases that probably will occur if the 
statistics bear out. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well you mentioned a whole series of 
areas where there can be implications on into the future as it 
relates to the, you know, this disease and what it can mean to the 
society and certainly, in a more specific sense, to the health care 
system. I don’t disagree with any of the suggestions that you’ve 
made except to say that we are addressing those, and recognize 
that they’re there. 
 
You say, and I just wanted to be clear on this . . . The two groups, 
AIDS Regina, AIDS Saskatoon have got some money both from 
us and from the federal government to carry on their programming 
in terms of their education. The committee that we have is a very 
excellent one and goes across the professions in terms of people 
involved in this from the . . . It’s their view, and a view that I 
concur with, is that the public education, in the widest sense in 
terms of getting information to the widest possible public, is more 
appropriately given from a variety of sources than it is necessarily 
to be given, because I know that the two groups that you refer to 
believe — and I think believe quite strongly — that they could be, 
and maybe perhaps even think that they should be, the lead 
agencies in terms of the dissemination of broad public 
information. And I’m not sure that I agree that that’s correct. 
 
I believe they have a role, and I believe that that role is recognized 
in the grants that we’ve provided. Although, you know, the level 
of those grants will be subject to some debate and obviously 
subject to some review by us in terms of saying that, I say it’s now 
7,000 and as time goes on, and as there’s a greater demand . . . 
That’s not to say that those can’t go up. I don’t want to say that at 
all. 
 
I know it’s difficult for you, and I understand why it would be. It’s 
difficult for any of us to know what is an appropriate number in 
terms of the total dollars to spend in this area. I believe there are 
people that are monitoring it as well as is being done in this 
country. I know that when I meet with my colleagues, the other 
ministers of health of Canada, that it is an issue that has all of us 
and our officials in our departments very concerned. And I think 
that the work that’s being done in terms of, well in terms of 
research, in terms of public education, in terms of some of those 
things across the country, reflects that concern. 
 
As it relates to the kinds of ads that we’ve had, for example, the 
public education programs that we’ve had here, you will know 
there was a little controversy at the time when CBC, for example, 
wouldn’t play out ads because they didn’t believe they were 
appropriate. We did that because we believed that they were . . . It 
was the kind of information that the public needed to have even 
though it may have offended some sensibilities. It shows how 
seriously we’re taking this in this Department of Health and in this 
government. And we will be developing more ads for the future to 
be able to deal with this issue as . . . Because it’s, as you have said 
and as I agree with you, it’s serious for our society. 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2576 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the question of 
midwifery — now I’d like to move on to that and ask you one 
brief question — is the Department of Health seriously looking at 
the possibility of developing a midwives program in 
Saskatchewan in order to introduce midwifery legally in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Let me just say that I’ve met with a group 
in the province who has some interest in advancing the midwifery 
across the province. I suggested to them --- and I believe it’s the 
appropriate place — that they make a substantive recommendation 
to the commission and I believe they are going to do that. In fact 
they’ve been working on that for some time prior to the 
commission even being announced. I know, and I know you’re 
aware of, some of the problems that arise in terms of what the 
medical profession will say as it relates to the advances of 
midwifery or whether midwifery be recognized. I’m also aware of 
a very large-scale study that was done in the province of Ontario 
as it relates to midwifery. 
 
And I guess that’s really all I can say now, except to say that we 
believe that it’s important that they make their case very well and 
that the commission perhaps could — now I’m not sure if they 
will or won’t — but if the commission sees fit to come forward 
with some recommendation as it relates to the potential for 
midwives or the practice of midwifery to be involved in the health 
care system into the future. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I want to refer now to 
the children’s school-based dental plan and ask you some 
questions that we had discussed earlier about the possibility of you 
sending some of these answers over to me in correspondence, and 
I think this is a case where it may be appropriate. 
 
The questions I would like answered are: in detail, how many 
children are eligible under this particular plan? My evidence says 
approximately . . . or the information I have says 140,641 under 
this new plan, which apparently is a 25 per cent decrease from the 
old plan. I would like to know, with respect to the enrolment, how 
many have enrolled. I understand, under the new plan, it’s been 
105,482 as of March 1, 1988, which is 14 per cent decrease of 
those who are eligible, and a 37 per cent decrease of the 
Saskatchewan dental plan enrolment. In other words, it’s 37 per 
cent down on what the old plan was in terms of actual enrolment, 
but 89 per cent . . . or 75 per cent as of March 1, 1988 as of the 
new plan. 
 
The utilization, I understand, is at 73,837, and I assume those 
statistics are as of March 1, 1988, as well, which is 23 per cent of 
those enrolled, Mr. Minister, with an overall decrease of 53 per 
cent of the old plan in terms of utilization Mr. Minister. In other 
words, the new dental plan is being utilized at approximately 53 
per cent of the old plan. And I would like those . . . And I’m 
talking in terms of not just comparing those who are eligible, but 
comparing the ones who are eligible now against the ones who 
were eligible before, and we’re looking at something like 53 per 
cent utilization. 
 
The other information I have is that there are some rural 
practitioners who have dropped out of their practices in the 
satellite clinics. I would like the minister to, in 

correspondence, to advise me whether that is correct, and just who 
they and how many there are. I’ve been advised there are some. I 
don’t have the specifics on it, but I’m sure the minister will be 
aware of the situation. 
 
I also want the minister, when he talks about utilization, and now 
I’m talking utilization as opposed to enrolment — there’s 
enrolment, utilization and completion, Mr. Minister — I would 
like to know the rate of completion under this new dental plan, 
because I understand that there has been a drop in the rate of 
completion as well because people don’t go back for the second 
visit, for example. 
 
I would also like the minister to outline for me the services that are 
not covered with respect to the new plan. I understand there are a 
number of services that are not covered, like the six-month recall 
exams for high-risk cases and some preventative services, some 
limited scaling and fissure seals. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I also want to know from your department the 
cost of the storage of the dental equipment, the cost of retraining 
these dental therapists, the unemployment costs with respect to 
these dental therapists, and an estimation on how much the extra 
costs are to patients who have to travel to see a dentist and take a 
half day off work and a lunch. And if the minister can send me 
that information in correspondence, I would be very appreciative 
of that because we have debated this at some length in this 
legislature and I would like to see what the minister’s facts are on 
this matter. I’m sure his department has now had an opportunity to 
take a very close look at it and would have the information for us. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You know, I was making notes to the 
extent that we can. A couple of us were here . . . But I will 
undertake to provide the information that you’ve asked in a 
definitive way, and I’ll send it to you so that you can have . . . And 
what we will do is go through Hansard to the exact questions and 
then give you the answers to the extent that we can on all of those 
things. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to take some time now to question you about both 
nursing homes and home care, the continuing care division of the 
Department of Health. 
 
Regarding the special care homes first, you’ve built many homes 
across the province in the last few years, and the comments that 
I’ve been getting from people both in the rural areas and in the 
urban areas are that that’s fine, having all this fancy construction 
— and some of it is quite fancy and has upset some of the seniors 
in the terms of the amount of money that’s spent on it. There’s 
nursing home construction, but they’re not adequately staffed, not 
by any means, especially since more and more people that are in 
the nursing homes are requiring heavier care. And I think that 
you’ll agree with me that in 1975, the average age of people in 
nursing homes was 68, and that now the average age is over 80; 
and that in 1981, about 50 per cent of those in nursing homes were 
in level 1 and 2 care, and that in 1987, levels 1 and 2 was only 20 
per cent of the people in nursing homes, and level 3 and 4 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2577 
 

is 80 per cent of the people. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like particularly to focus on some 
specific questions. One regards the Salvation Army Eventide 
Home in Saskatoon, which is an example of an institution that’s 
been level 1 and 2 from the time it was built. And they made a 
presentation to you last year pointing out the fact that many of the 
patients in that home and in many other homes — Pioneer Lodge 
in Moose Jaw is another one — where people have aged and now 
require level 3 and 4 care. 
 
And they did not get a satisfactory response from you last year as 
to how much support you were prepared to give them to care for 
level 3 and 4. And they have made the same presentation to you 
this year, Mr. Minister, and they still haven’t heard what your 
plans are. So my question to you is: what are your plans for all the 
nursing homes that have level 1 and 2 care, that are certified for 1 
and 2 care and now are dealing with 3 and 4? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the statistics as it relates to the ratio 
of the people in level 3 and 4 as now being 80 per cent versus 1 
and 2 are correct, and that’s as it should be in terms of the heavier 
care people having the access to the facilities that are there. 
 
I hear what you’re saying in terms of . . . And I appreciate the 
acknowledgement of the hon. member that we have been building 
nursing homes even in some difficult times and building a good 
number of nursing homes beds across the province, and that’s fair. 
That’s fair that you should acknowledge that even though I . . . 
And there are times when I may tend to agree with you in terms of 
the nature of some of the buildings, and that’s a thing that we’ve 
been trying to deal through SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), with the architects of this province in 
terms of some of the things that go into them, but that’s another 
issue. 
 
Let me just, for the specific questions that you ask: the Salvation 
Army Eventide Home, as you say, is a lighter care facility, and 
I’m informed that it does not have the kind of plant that’s required 
to be able to upgrade it to heavier care. And we would be willing 
. . . Because we recognize very much the kind of work that goes 
on within the Salvation Army, and not only this denomination but 
many others, in terms of these denominational homes that provide 
a lot more than just for the physical needs of the seniors that are 
placed in their care, but provide a very . . . care in terms of the 
physical needs and the spiritual needs and so on, and they do an 
excellent job of that. 
 
But the particular physical plant of the Eventide home in 
Saskatoon, there is some significant difficulty, or would be 
significant difficulty with upgrading that particular place, and we 
would be willing — and in fact I think they know this — but we 
would certainly be willing to speak to them or to talk to them and 
get into negotiations for a replace of heavier care kind of a place. 
That’s number one. 
 
As it relates to Pioneer Lodge in Moose Jaw, their plant, I’m told, 
would be not only eligible, but would lend itself to upgrading to a 
level 3 and 4 type of home. And in fact, even in last year’s 
estimates, I remember saying that here 

and at that time, they’ve been offered the possibility of having that 
done. And the funding was offered even before I was the minister. 
Under my predecessor, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, 
they were offered that and did not choose to do so. But we 
continue to encourage the Pioneer Lodge in Moose Jaw, and 
others that are level 1 and 2 places, to upgrade to be able to handle 
a heavier level of care because that’s obviously where the 
emphasis must be. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well the nursing homes, Mr. Minister, are caught 
because they have the patients there already who need the more 
intensive care, and yet the kind of funding formula that you offer 
them for replacing their nursing homes requires them to come 
forward with quite a bit of cash as well as the Department of 
Health putting forward the money. So what you’re doing is, you’re 
saying, we’ll help you build the nursing homes, but you’ve got to 
come up with a lot of the money yourselves, or else we’re not 
going to do anything. 
 
And meanwhile they’ve got patients in there that require a lot 
more care than you’re prepared to fund at this point in time. And 
so they’re caught, and they’re very badly caught, and the people in 
the nursing homes are caught. It’s a very serious problem which I 
think is not answered by the requirement that they upgrade those 
facilities in the way that you’ve said because they’re going to have 
to have the funding support to do that, and the way you’re funding 
the nursing homes means they have to get a lot of money from the 
local communities. 
 
And my worry is that they can’t do that or they’re not able to for 
whatever reasons and that the people aren’t going to get the care. 
And the nursing home, the Salvation Army nursing home has said 
that there’s a long time between the people being defined as 
needing more than level 2 care — there’s a long time between the 
time that they’re defined as needing more than level 2 care and the 
time they can get it. So a lot of people are getting caught in that 
situation. And I put it to you that I don’t think the funding formula 
is good enough for the provision of level 3 and 4 care if these 
particular nursing homes, which are run by churches or by other 
community groups, have a problem with getting the money 
together themselves. There’s a certain percentage that you require 
and a certain percentage that they have to come up with. 
 
But I’m not here to talk to you specifically about the facilities. I 
want to talk to you more about the staffing, Mr. Minister. And I 
want to know . . . You said your annual report in 1986 to ’87 that 
the department was funding 148 new positions for existing special 
care homes. And I want to know how many new positions were 
there in 1987-88 and how many are estimated for 1988-89. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just while the people in the continuing 
care branch are putting those numbers together, let me just say that 
I understand what you’re saying as it relates to the need to upgrade 
these homes and that there are particular residents that are in the 
homes now, but that does not diminish the need for these homes to 
be upgraded to the extent that it’s possible. And obviously it takes 
a period of time for that to take place. But there has to be the will, 
and in most places, there is. 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2578 
 

Moose Jaw is the one that you mention, and Moose Jaw Pioneer 
Lodge is one that we have been discussing with for some time, 
and it’s not for the lack of the funds, I’m told, even by some of the 
civic leaders of Moose Jaw, from the mayor on down. It’s just sort 
of an unwillingness to change the character of the home in terms 
of a level 1 and 2 place. So I just say that in terms of . . . that there 
is a need to change that. 
 
In terms of our funding of new projects, it’s 15 per cent is the local 
cost and 85 per cent is the cost to the provincial government in all 
of those cases. And as you said before, we’re doing many of them 
across the province, and that also includes the operating cost, 
which the provincial government bears the brunt of . . . or bears 
that operating cost. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, you can give me the answers to the 
question about the staffing in writing, if you will, because I would 
like you to break it down into full-time registered nurses, certified 
nursing assistants, and attendants, and also how many of those 
positions that you create are part-time positions. And if you could 
give me those answers in writing, I could go onto the next 
question because I want to ask you specifically about your 
government’s plans for staffing the new integrated facilities. I 
understand there’s a problem there because of the integrated 
facilities are nursing homes and part are hospitals. And I want to 
know how you are working it out with the administration of those 
integrated facilities as to how many qualified staff, how many staff 
are in the nursing home facility and how many are in the hospital 
facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will undertake to provide in writing to 
the member the nursing positions and so on. What I have, just so 
you know this year is an estimate, and what will I provide you is 
an estimate because we don’t have all the mix out there from all of 
the nursing homes yet, but we’re estimating an increase of 70 
full-time positions, full-time equivalents. So an increase of 70 this 
year over last year. 
 
And all I’m saying is that . . . but I will characterize that in the 
letter that I send to you. I will put the asterisk there with that 
explanation of what . . . that this last number will be an estimate 
and the others . . . and I’ll give you some background on that as 
well. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I’m interested in the qualifications of those 
positions and when you say full-time equivalent position, does that 
mean two part-time jobs that are counted as a full-time job, but I 
want . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s what that means. 
 
Ms. Smart: — That’s what? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Full-time equivalents, as I understand 
them, are, yes, positions . . . if there are two half time, that means 
. . . that makes up one position. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I asked the continuing care to tell me 
how the operating budgets for the nursing homes were set, and I 
understand that there’s not a formula funding arrangement 
between the Department of Health 

and the nursing homes as to how they establish their budget; that 
the nursing homes just come forward with a budget to the 
Department of Health and then they are either approved or 
rejected. Now it seems to me . . . and also if their budget is 
approved, that they’re meant to stay within that budget. So I would 
like to know what the criteria for approval of a budget for a 
nursing home is? If you’re not operating on a formula funding, 
how are you working out the operating grants for the nursing 
homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I think what the member’s referring to is 
we have homes which have come on stream after 1981. You 
know, there’s certain staffing standards set and so on, and that’s 
how the budgets are determined. 
 
We have other homes which were in existence prior to, and we’ve 
been trying to add . . . on an annual basis we’ve been trying to add 
enrichments to those homes, those previous to that, at the level of 
. . . well since ’83-84, up to and including this year, an addition of 
$11.4 million as an enrichment, bringing those on. 
 
So while we are not at the stage yet where we can say that those 
standards are up to where the others are, but the gap is . . . we’re 
making attempts on an annual basis to continue to close that gap 
and hoping at some point into the future to be able to have that gap 
completely closed. 
 
I know it’s not a totally acceptable situation for some who are 
either administering or working in some of those other homes, but 
I must say that it’s a major stride forward from what was in 
existence prior to 1981. 
 
And so, I mean, it’s not something that was . . . I’m not saying this 
because it was something that was done by us or anything. It was 
something that came into being in 1981 at the same time that 
continuing care set the standard resident rate, and there was a 
whole series of things done. It was really by your government, and 
we’ve continued that practice and continued to try to close that 
gap that was begun in 1981, and we continue that now and are 
having some success, but maybe not to the extent or as quickly as 
some would like us to do. 
 
(2000) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well I appreciate what you’re saying, but I don’t 
get a sense of how you judge a budget, how you approve a budget 
for a particular nursing home. And you don’t have any 
requirements on the nursing home that they only have a 2 per cent 
increase from last year. 
 
Or how do you work it out that you say, this budget is working 
and it’s an operating budget that you’ll approve of and one that 
you won’t approve of? And are you making a judgement on each 
individual nursing home? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well just let me just run through it very 
quickly. We have these kinds of staffing standards, the kind of 
bench-mark, I guess you could say, that are used. And let me . . . 
I’ll just read this to you. 
 
For purposes of comparing staffing needs among special care 
homes, requirements are calculated as follows: for level 2 — and 
it’s a certain amount of time required per day sort of thing, and it’s 
care time required per day is 45 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2579 
 

minutes; level 3, it’s two hours; level 4, three hours. Those are 
kind of the bench-marks that are used. 
 
I want to make a couple of other points here. It’s important to note 
that a mathematical calculation showing a staffing shortfall does 
not indicate an inadequate level of care provided, any more than a 
calculation showing a staffing surplus would indicate a superior 
level of care. I think that there’s not a direct correlation and that’s 
why it’s very difficult to get into these staffing standards in terms 
of, you know, exactly how much time is spent and so on. But you 
need to have some bench-marks and that’s what this is an attempt 
to do. In continuing care they’ve been attempting to do this as 
they, over the period of years now, that they’ve been trying to 
bring this shortfall up in the 81 homes. 
 
The key point is whether the home is providing adequate care to 
its residents. And that’s maybe an obvious statement, but I think 
that is still the key point. Our consultants monitor the care in 
special care home facilities, in the individual facilities, and it’s our 
view that homes are making excellent use of existing resources 
and they are meeting the needs of their residents. And I think what 
we have to do is put this into perspective. Not to say that there 
can’t be, you know, more care or more staff and so on, and I hear 
this concern being raised. But as I see the statistics from every 
other province in this country, I believe that our folks are cared 
for, in terms of having the staff available to them and so on, better 
than any other place in the country. But that’s not to say that it’s 
the best that it could be and it may well be better as time goes on. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, there certainly is a correlation 
between the number of staff that are available and the quality of 
the staff and the kind of care that the patients get. I mean there 
really is a direct correlation in spite of you saying that you don’t 
see that there might be. There is, and when you have a nursing 
home that’s defined as a level 2 actually trying to take care of level 
3 and 4, and getting funded at a level 2 — 45 minutes or whatever 
formula — you’ve got a nursing home in stress and you’ve got 
staff in stress and you’ve got patients in stress and you’ve got a 
bad situation that you need to do something about. 
 
And the operating funds are the main concern, now that you’re 
building all these nursing homes. Because people are saying to me 
over and over again, it’s not enough to have the homes 
themselves, we have to have the staff; we have to have the care. 
And people are having to go in and care for their families in the 
nursing homes because they aren’t getting the proper care from the 
paid staff that are there. 
 
And there’s also lots of situations, as I discovered going around 
the province and door to door in Eastview, both in the rural areas 
and in the urban area. I met women who work in the nursing 
homes who are registered nurses, who are saying that they have to 
get called out in the middle of the night, that they’re on call 24 
hours a day. Sometimes they have to come in, if they live outside 
the community, they have to travel in the cold in the middle of 
winter to go into the nursing home to deal with an emergency 
situation because in the nursing home, particularly at night, there 
are only attendants on duty. 

And there are people at level 4 care with Alzheimer’s disease who 
really need help 24 hours a day, and the staff is not adequate — 
it’s not adequate at all. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to question you a bit more about the 
operating budget. The operating budget for each nursing home 
that’s submitted to you, does that include the interest that they 
have to pay on the capital that they’ve been given to build the 
nursing home or to replace and renovate the nursing homes? Is 
that included in their operating budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The money that’s advanced through . . . I 
just want to get this clear now. You’re asking the question that the 
money that’s advanced through the Department of Health to pay 
the SPMC, the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
payment schedule? I went through that with the Health critic a 
while ago, as it relates to hospitals. Is that the same question? 
 
Ms. Smart: — My question regards the operating budgets for 
each nursing home. And I want to know, when the nursing home 
submits their operating budget to you, does that operating budget 
include the money that they have to pay on the interest on the 
capital expansion if they’ve had a replacement or a new facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — For the homes which were built under the 
arrangement between, you know, a number of years ago between 
CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) and SHC 
(Saskatchewan Housing Corporation) and there’s interest on those 
mortgages provided by CMHC and so on — yes, their budget 
provides for that and their payment from us provides for that 
interest. 
 
Ms. Smart: — And what happens to the ones that are built now 
under your new arrangement? Where’s the interest rate paid? Is 
that paid out of the operating budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s paid out of . . . if you look to the blue 
book on page 48, subvote 61, where grants to special care facilities 
repayment of principal and interest on capital loans in the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, yes, interest is 
paid from the Department of Health for both principal and interest 
on that repayment schedule that’s set up. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well the reason I’m questioning you about this is 
because I would like to sense of what’s involved in the operating 
budget that the nursing homes have to submit to you. Because one 
of the things that’s happening is that, as I understand it, when the 
resident fees go up, every three months, so much money is taken 
off the old age pension, that the amount of operating money that 
goes to the nursing home from the government is decreased equal 
to the amount that they are increased from their residence fees. 
And I’m trying to find out how much is paid out of that operating 
budget. What particular costs are involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the budgets that are approved on an 
annual basis . . . There’s an annual budget approved for a 
particular nursing home and there are two sources of revenue, 
basically, for that nursing home: one, the major 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2580 
 

source, from the government; and, two, resident fees. And as those 
resident fees go up as they do on the formula that’s set there, based 
on the pension and so on, then that revenue is treated by the 
department as offset revenue and in order to meet the approved 
budget, the department’s grant to them would be decreased in the 
similar amount, depending on the number of residents. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, that seems to be a very 
unrealistic way to fund the nursing homes when their costs are 
going up and they’re getting more and more patients at level 3 and 
4. You’re actually reducing the operating grants that the 
government is giving the nursing homes and making them pick up 
more and more of their costs based on that increase of residents’ 
fees. 
 
Now this has got the seniors very upset, the ones that are in the 
nursing homes, because more and more money is being taken 
away from them each three months, the money that is increased to 
them from the federal pension — and we’ve gone through this 
issue in the House before — that money is taken away to pay for 
their fees in the nursing homes. But they are not seeing any 
improvement in service, and one of the improvements in service 
that they particularly want to see is more adequate staffing. But if 
you are reducing the operating grants at the same time as their 
costs are going up in the residents’ fees, you are basically making 
the residents pay for more and more of the operation of those 
nursing homes. And that, Mr. Minister, is another move towards 
the privatization of the nursing home and the lack of government 
support to the people. 
 
And these are seniors who have paid taxes all their lives and who 
are entitled to see some basic income come back to them and to 
see some increases in services when they are charged for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well first of all let’s be clear here. What 
we’re doing and what the nursing home does and what we’re 
trying to do even in these estimates is to set a budget for an annual 
budget, whether it’s for the government, the Department of 
Health, or whether it’s for nursing home ABC — whatever it is. 
So that budget is set out for the year according to the need that’s 
there and whatever, and there will always be a debate in terms of 
is the budget adequate and so on. But I submit to you that the 
budgets are adequate, although I know that there’s some strain 
there, based on some of the points that you raised earlier. And I 
recognize them, those points being that the demands for heavier 
and heavier levels of care are coming on to us faster than we can 
respond, even though we have responded in a major way, coming 
into a circumstance where nobody was responding for a long time. 
And that’s something that’s, you know, that’s always an issue 
around the province is that there was so long when none were 
being built. But that’s . . . Leave that aside for now. 
 
In terms of the revenues which come from the residents, it still 
remains that that revenue is about 30 per cent of the cost of the 
operation of the nursing home. The residents pay about 30 per 
cent, the government . . . the taxpayers through the government 
pay 70 per cent. And that ratio is a very legitimate one, I would 
submit, especially given that the standard resident charge is set 
based on what’s 

available to the poorest of our elderly through the various pension 
schemes that are available to them. So that formula’s set on that 
basis, and they are required to pay 30 per cent. And I understand, I 
mean, I understand that individuals living in there when there’s an 
increase in their standard resident cost will say, well my services 
aren’t going up and whatever. I submit to you that the services are 
continuing at a very high standard across this province, and that 
the government still continues to pay 70 per cent, as we’ve done 
for some time now. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, the people in the nursing 
homes are having to pick up a lot of costs that are not included in 
the resident fees, and they’re only left with $100 to pay for those 
costs. 
 
One of those items that is causing a lot of stress for people are 
things called incontinency pads, which can cost as much as $300 a 
month. And people have to pay that out of their own money 
because the nursing homes seem to have not had a proper supply 
budget to be able to provide those resources to the patients in the 
nursing homes. And again, I remind you, if more and more of the 
people are at level 3 and 4, they’re going to need more and more 
services. And if you’re reducing the operating budget and trying to 
pay for these increased services out of the increase that’s given to 
them in their old age pension, you haven’t got enough money to 
provide them with the intensive care that they need at level 3 and 
4. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, one of my questions — and I’m trying to rush 
through this because I know the time has come up, but I have a lot 
of questions about home care and nursing care. One of the more 
important questions regards the budget for supplies for the nursing 
homes. Now it was at zero per cent last year. And the question is: 
is it going up to 5 per cent this year? Are they getting a 5 per cent 
increase? Apparently the nursing homes have not heard what the 
increase in their budget is for supplies. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Could I ask the member if . . . I’ll provide 
that information to you. And if you have several questions, do you 
want to just ask them and I’ll undertake that I will, in each case . . . 
If I can provide it, I’ll undertake to provide them. This one I will 
undertake to provide to the member in writing. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well when can I get that answer because it’s fairly 
serious for the nursing homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Within the next day or two. 
 
Ms. Smart: — All right, Mr. Minister, that’s fine. I do have a 
question. We just had a report come out, the two-year study 
released on the unmet needs of the off-reserve Indian and Metis 
elderly in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. It’s a very important 
report, and one of the things it deals with is the need for assistance 
and care. And it says that the continuing sensitization of the 
provincial system of long-term care to include the special concerns 
of the native elderly is also a need which is very much in evidence. 
 
It’s a very important report, Mr. Minister, and I would like 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2581 
 

to just question you particularly about the very great need in La 
Ronge for a nursing home. This need in La Ronge has been 
expressed to you for some years, and since 1986 I understand 
there’s been a promise of the nursing home. There’s still no sign 
of a nursing home on the horizon, Mr. Minister. What are your 
plans for a nursing home in La Ronge? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I can provide the other answer that I said I 
would undertake . . . The medical supply budget is an increase of 4 
to 5 per cent this year, so that’s that answer. 
 
And the second one as it relates to . . . And I saw the report that 
you referred to in terms of the elderly among our Indian and Metis 
populations, and you will know that I represent an area of the 
province with a large percentage of people of Indian and Metis 
ancestry. I know exactly what the report is saying, and I agree with 
some of the cultural things and some of the expectations and some 
of the way that those . . . some of those folks have been thinking 
about being in institutions and so on prior to this date in our 
history. But I think there is also a need, that it’s coming at us just 
as the need of a more elderly population across the widest sense of 
our society is there. 
 
And we get to the specifics of La Ronge. I hear what you’re 
saying. We’ve heard of this request, along with the request for the 
hospital in La Ronge, and both them are being looked at together, 
to be very frank with you, the hospital and the need for nursing 
home, and I just . . . The next question as it relates to the North is 
on the west side, what we call the west side in the North — 
Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval, La Loche area. There 
is an increasing need for nursing home capacity, heavier care for 
seniors, in that area as well, and I’m aware of it. 
 
Ms. Smart: — So there’s no particular plans for a nursing home 
in La Ronge in the next year or so? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s not on the list for this year or next 
year, but as you will know we have the five-year program that’s 
been there, that’s on now. Two or three years of it have gone by. It 
is our intention to add new projects to that list so that we can 
maintain a longer planning horizon because it’s well accepted that 
we have that longer planning horizon out there across the 
province, and we’ll maintain that. And we will be adding other 
projects with agreements in principle with some of these regions 
and areas . . . well, in the fairly near future. Let me just put it that 
way. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, turning to home care, I would just 
like to clarify the setting of the fees for home care. I have in front 
of me a press release from the Saskatchewan Home Care 
Association reporting the following changes. This was passed out 
last year: 
 

. . . reporting the following changes in the home care client 
fee system which have been imposed by the provincial 
government on home care districts to become effective May 
1, 1987. 

 
And a brochure that your department puts out, Mr. 

Minister, on a client guide for home care programs, which says 
your district boards set the fees for home-making, home 
maintenance, and meal services. Now is it the government or is the 
district boards which set the fee systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the government sets . . . And what 
we have said to the home care board, that we set the charge for 
each unit of service, you know, whether that’s a meal or whatever 
it is, there’s a certain charge for each unit of service. And then 
what the board sets is the board takes the applications from clients 
based on . . . which is an income-tested thing in terms of how 
much of a subsidy is the individual client eligible for if in fact 
they’re eligible for any subsidy of some of the service that’s 
provided, and depending on the number of units of service per 
month. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well I think the brochure is misleading, Mr. 
Minister, because it says that the district board sets the fees. And 
in one sense you can put it at arm’s length from your department, 
but the service fees for home care going up such a lot have meant 
that many people haven’t been able to afford it any longer, and it’s 
definitely the responsibility of your government, not the district 
boards, as to how much money is available for those fees. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to question you about the target funding, 
target grants for home care which have decreased in the last 
couple of years. Target funding is necessary for . . . is provided to 
home care districts for high-need care, respite care, palliative care, 
and/or other means of supporting individuals at high risk of 
requiring institutionalization. Now you, yourself, in the continuing 
care Exchange magazine said that, “Let there be no mistake; 
institutionalized care must be the last option.” 
 
But in reducing the target grants for this particular kind of care — 
reducing it by 5.7 per cent from 1986 to 1989 — you are reducing 
fees for home care services which could prevent the need for more 
people going into nursing homes. And I want to express my 
disagreement with you in reducing those fees. I don’t think I 
particularly need to hear your justification for it. It’s just a sign 
that the home care is not valued as it should be by your 
government as a way of keeping people in their homes and 
perhaps not needing the kind of institutional care which is a lot 
more expensive. 
 
Mr. Minister, I also just want to point out to you that in July of 
1987, a letter went out to the community clinic from Phil Gaudet, 
the executive director of the Saskatoon home care district, saying 
that your department had discontinued the funding for the Fish 
transportation program. Now that was a program using volunteers 
to provide transportation to people in the community, and they had 
supplementary funding from the Department of Health, and you 
discontinued that funding. 
 
As I look at the home care, I see a lack of support for volunteers 
doing work in the home care program, and that when you require 
volunteers altogether to fund things like transportation, instead of 
giving a grant to a program that was providing that, what you’re 
actually doing is requiring healthy seniors — because they’re the 
ones that are around to provide things like transportation — you’re 
requiring healthy seniors to finance frail seniors 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2582 
 

out of their own pockets, Mr. Minister. That’s the kind of home 
care that you seem to be supporting. 
 
You’re saying there’s no money for these supplementary 
programs. You cut the funding from Evergreen Neighbourly 
Services last year, and I’ve already expressed my concern about 
that kind of program. And yet you’re turning around and requiring 
volunteer work within the home care boards by healthy seniors 
who have to use their own money to support frail seniors. And I 
think that’s hard on them. 
 
Every one of the seniors is living mainly on a fixed income, and 
for you to require that kind of support from healthy seniors for 
frail seniors in an ongoing way, is, I don’t think, a strong enough 
support for that very important need of transportation and the other 
services that seniors provide for each other, and I think that their 
organizations should get the kind of support from you and through 
home care that they deserve, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple things, quickly. The targeted 
funds that you refer to is gone up by half a million dollars this 
year, a $500,000 increase. Most of that, frankly, is for the two 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
You make reference to transportation, some of the small grant 
organizations that were there, last . . . that was done in last year’s 
budget. And frankly, while you say that some seniors are being 
asked to do this on a volunteer basis, I have talked to a number of 
them who believe that it’s . . . that they feel good and they feel 
fulfilled by being able to do some of this in a community on a 
volunteer basis. And it’s not, you know, it is not done in any kind 
of an onerous sort of thing for any of them. 
 
You know, I just . . . if we took your logic to its logical conclusion, 
I would suggest to you that we’d end up where the model for some 
of these things — the nation of Sweden — which I know was, for 
some period of time, was raised by members opposite as the 
model for some of the care areas. 
 
At the present time in the nation of Sweden, they are trying to 
work out a way across that country to reintroduce the concept of 
volunteerism — a sad testimony on that whole process. And the 
way in which they are attempting to do it is through conscription, 
because it’s something their citizens understand through the 
military. 
 
Now that’s some kind of a system if we have to . . . And it 
certainly does not fit the spirit and the whole essence of 
Saskatchewan that we would ever get to the stage where we have 
to try to reintroduce, through some government program, the 
concept of volunteerism. 
 
The concept of volunteerism is, to a large extent, very alive and 
well in this province and I don’t want to be part of, nor do I think 
should you try to be part of, breaking that down in any way. 
 
And I just say that the programs that you were referring to a large 
extent were duplicated by home care. Home care is the umbrella 
under which they should and they do operate, and it’s working 
rather well. I know that there’s 

some debate as to, with the large bubble coming through the 
system here in terms of our ageing population and in much more 
need of heavier care, there always will be a debate for a number of 
years in terms of the level of funding. And I’m cognizant of that 
and attempt to increase that as the need continues, and I know it 
will increase inevitably. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, just a final comment. I don’t want 
you in any way to insinuate that I’m not supportive of the 
volunteer groups. I was very supportive of Evergreen Neighbourly 
Services. They needed some funding from the government to give 
them a base, to give them a paid co-ordinator to do the kind of 
work that they were doing, which was very much seniors helping 
seniors, working directly in the community. There’s another 
example in Regina, with the Senior Citizen’s Services. 
 
And what you have done by taking the funding away from the 
volunteer groups — the support funding — is that you have made 
volunteer work a lot harder on people than it was before. And 
there was a lot more support for it in the past, Mr. Minister, so 
don’t give me this business about Sweden and the military. I’m 
talking about Saskatchewan; I’m talking about the seniors that 
were organized here to provide volunteer services; and I’m talking 
about a decrease in the funding for home care that would have 
provided more support for those kinds of volunteer efforts. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m also talking about the decrease in the target 
grants to cover palliative care and respite care — two things which 
have been articulated as a very great need in this province. You 
have reduced the money; you’ve increased it a bit this year but it 
was down a lot last year from the year before, Mr. Minister, and 
the total is a decrease of 5.7 per cent. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Goodale: — I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have a 
few matters that I would want to pursue with the minister this 
evening, and first of all, Mr. Minister, I’d like to discuss with you 
an issue that you and I have discussed in the House before — 
we’ve exchanged correspondence on it — and it has to do with the 
ambulance service at Assiniboia, the Wald Ambulance service. 
 
And the precise issue that I wish to raise with you tonight, Mr. 
Minister, has to do with the method by which or the circumstances 
by which officials in your department became concerned about 
certain practices and procedures being followed by Wald 
Ambulance, which, of course, led to some rather controversial 
changes in the rules affecting that particular ambulance service. 
And tonight I don’t want very much to debate with you the 
controversy; I’m interested in pursuing the procedure by which the 
issue arose. 
 
And I gather from what I’ve learned from you and from the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons that there is within your 
department an auditing procedure which is undertaken to monitor 
what ambulance services are doing in the province, and that the 
practices being conducted by Wald Ambulance, which your 
department 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2583 
 

found to be questionable, were discovered, as I take it, during this 
auditing process conducted by officials in your department. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could simply confirm for me that that 
is the procedure by which this complaint came to light. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll just go through the process as I 
understand it here. Each ambulance service in the province is 
visited twice a year, one on annual inspection and one on annual 
visitation, I guess. And during the course of one of these visits, the 
inspection folks found . . . There were some drugs found in the kit, 
there were some drugs found there that were questionable, 
certainly, in terms of what they find in a normal process around 
the province. So it was brought back to the attention of the 
ambulance unit on the advice of the medical director, who’s the 
medical director to the department under contract. It was then 
raised with the College of Physician and Surgeons with whom 
these protocols, you know, are signed between the ambulance 
services and the College of Physicians and Surgeons in terms of 
what are appropriate drugs to be administered by the folks running 
the ambulance service with the people at whatever level of training 
that they have. So that’s basically the process through which this 
came to light as it relates to the department. 
 
As it relates to my own, I knew there was something happening, 
and the hon. member will recall that he and I had a discussion 
about it and so on. He brought it, as is legitimate, from concerns 
raised in his constituency by, I guess, both patients and, I believe, 
the ambulance service operator. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, what I’m curious about is the 
time-lag involved here, because as I understand it, the procedures 
and practices and the carrying of the drugs that you referred to and 
so forth, has gone on, or had gone on, prior to this controversy for 
a matter of two or three or four years perhaps. And it was only 
very recently that your department discovered there was a problem 
or a perceived problem. 
 
I’m just wondering how this ambulance service could have been 
going about the normal, legitimate conducting of its business, 
thinking that it was perfectly within the rules and everybody 
seeming to be totally satisfied and happy with the situation — 
indeed, letters of commendation being written to the ambulance 
service — everything seemed to be just fine over a period of two 
or three or four years, and then all of a sudden on some kind of a 
visitation or audit being done, a problem is discovered. I just 
wonder how this situation could persist for so long without your 
department seeming to regard it to be a problem until just the last 
two or three months. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It was not two to three to four years. It was 
about a year and a half ago that there were some protocols signed 
or some protocols entered into, let’s say, between the college and 
the ambulance services unit, and then for the various ambulances 
around the province. 
 
Prior to this visit, our people were out to visit the Wald service at 
Assiniboia. The protocols had been reaffirmed in terms of exactly 
what would be allowed when the . . . I 

think the circumstance, really, in Assiniboia was that the local 
physician, or one of the local physicians there, had taken it upon 
himself in arrangement with the ambulance operator to allow 
certain drugs to be dispensed by the ambulance operator and that 
was beyond what the College of Physicians and Surgeons were 
allowing. And that’s where some of the controversy . . . Well it’s 
pretty well the basis for what the controversy was following that. 
Since that time I think it’s been . . . whether it’s been cleared up in 
everyone’s mind or not, but I think it’s been very clear in terms of 
what is allowed on into the future. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, just before I leave this subject, I’d 
simply want to confirm with you and seek your response to the 
point that from every report that I have heard, and I suspect every 
report that you and your officials have heard, this particular 
ambulance service that we are discussing this evening, Wald 
Ambulance at Assiniboia, is a very excellent service. 
 
The controversy that has developed in the course of the last 
several weeks, as difficult a situation as that has been, I think the 
record should show in fairness to this particular ambulance and 
ambulance operator, that despite the controversy it is very clear in 
everyone’s mind that this is a very excellent service, one of which 
the Assiniboia district can be very proud and of which the 
province of Saskatchewan is very proud. And I think it would be 
helpful in terms of reassurance on the point, Mr. Minister, if you 
would be in a position to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I was just in consultation with my officials 
involved in this more directly, but I confirm everything that 
you’ve said about that service. Just here on the record tonight, I’d 
confirm that. There’s no question about that. They are a very 
excellent service who have tried to upgrade the level of standards 
of their employees and so on, and do provide good service and 
continue to provide good service for that area. 
 
So there is no question and nor has there been throughout this 
controversy ever any suggestion or any contemplation within the 
department or anywhere else that they don’t provide a good 
service. It was just a matter of this misunderstanding with one 
physician and the ambulance operator going beyond the protocol 
that had been set out. And I know that the hon. member knows the 
need for those kinds of protocols to be in place and that they are 
now, and everybody understands it. But I’m very readily 
confirmed what you have said about Wald Ambulance service of 
Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, could I ask if there are plans 
within your department to provide legislation which would, in 
future, authorize ambulance services, like Wald Ambulance, in a 
large rural area a long way from base hospitals, to provide the kind 
of service and the administration of procedures and so forth that 
Wald was previously providing, where the equipment and the 
properly trained personnel are available. 
 
As you will know, in other jurisdictions there is legislation 
providing not just for ambulance services, not just for advanced 
medical or advanced emergency technicians and attendants, but 
actually providing for a full-fledged paramedic system. I wonder if 
anything like that is in the 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2584 
 

plans of the department for the future, where you’re dealing: 
number one, with a very large rural territory, where that territory is 
a long way from a base hospital; and where, as is fortunately the 
case with Wald Ambulance, you have particularly well-trained 
people and good equipment to work with. I wonder if that’s in the 
department’s plans some time in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The system under the newly clarified 
protocols of the college and ourselves and the ambulance 
operators provides for that now. But in each case, the ambulance 
service will need to apply in a very specific sense for what it is that 
they . . . You know, for every transfer function, what I call a 
transfer, from a physician to someone who is not a physician, to be 
able to administer these drugs. There would have to be some very 
specific sort of guide-lines set out. But the flexibility is there in the 
protocols that we’ve been discussing now, and, you know, they 
would be . . . And I’m sure that if they haven’t already, I’m sure 
that Wald Ambulance is going through this process because they 
are one of those services which does have, as you say, a wide area 
with some long distances involved in terms of their catchment area 
and the Assiniboia Hospital, etc. So I’m sure if they haven’t 
applied now, they will have for, you know, the more specific 
process that they need to go through; so then I’m sure that’s under 
way. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I will want to review our 
exchange tonight very carefully when we get the written record of 
it, and there may be some specifics of that that I would like to 
pursue with you on another occasion in writing because this is a 
vital service in a rural community, and we’re all anxious to see it 
preserved and enhanced. 
 
Mr. Minister, just one another ambulance-related question, and 
that has to do with air ambulance services in the province of 
Saskatchewan. As we know, sadly, from time to time, even the 
best road ambulance with the very best of equipment and the very 
best of trained personnel is not able to cope with some of the most 
serious of circumstances, and I am wondering what plans your 
department would have in the foreseeable future to enhance the air 
ambulance capacity in the province of Saskatchewan, and most 
particularly enhance it with the addition of the new and fastest 
technologies like jet helicopters and so forth. Are those things at 
all within the planning horizon of the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — In the air ambulance area we have a 
medical director who’s about to make some recommendations to 
us in terms of that system, because as it relates to . . . well just the 
fact that we are the far-flung province that we are, with the more 
intensive services in the two larger centres, there may be a need 
for some of this. And as the member has said, there’s a whole 
range of potentials here in terms of what can be done. What we 
have to do is come to an agreement on what’s most appropriate 
and cost effective and so on. 
 
So I don’t rule out a move to some of those higher 
technology-type of ambulance services, but they’re not on the 
planning horizon for the very immediate future, but I can tell you 
that we will continue to look at those kinds of things. 

(2045) 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well I appreciate the minister’s encouraging 
answer to that question. I’d just urge him to accelerate the time 
frame because those things I think in a province like 
Saskatchewan are critically important. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s a long list of other issues I would like to raise 
with you. In the interest of time this evening, I will just go to one 
other subject area and that has to do with the construction plans of 
your department for hospitals and nursing homes and the 
integrated facilities that combine some aspects of both hospitals 
and nursing homes in one new building. I know you’ve answered 
some questions on that already this evening, so I think I can be 
brief on this subject. 
 
The last five-year plan for this construction schedule that you 
talked about earlier this evening, could you confirm for me when 
that plan began. My records seem to indicate it was about 1983. I 
just wonder if you could tell me in this five-year plan, when was 
the first of the five years, and when was that five-year period 
expected to conclude. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. The last year of that five-year plan 
where approvals in principle were given was for the year ’89-90, 
so — what would it be? — the ’84-85 would have been the first 
year of that. And there was one year last year — when was last 
year, ’86-87 . . . oh, ’87-88 — ’87-88 where we had deferrals of 
the projects. And I sent it out to all those that were due in ’87-88, 
plus the projects which had received approval in principle for this 
current year and for next year, a deferral there as well, but with the 
assurance — and this is key — with the assurance that they would 
not lose their place on the priority list, so to speak, that there 
would be no new projects coming in ahead of them. And that is 
still the case and they have that commitment from the government. 
 
And this year, the projects and the integrated facilities that are 
going ahead this year are those projects which were scheduled to 
go ahead last year. Now I haven’t been able to and will not be able 
to now, at this stage, to give an absolute assurance that we’re right 
back on track but with a one year delay, but it is our intention to 
carry on and to do these projects as quickly as we can. And as I 
said to one of the members earlier, it is our intention to add to that 
list so that we maintain a longer planning horizon both from the 
point of view of good government planning, but also from the 
point of view of good planning and legitimate kind of planning by 
the local organizations out there who are raising the local money 
and dealing with the local R.M.s and so on. And I know the 
member has a couple in his riding that he’s about to ask me about, 
and I’m sure that that answer, as I’ve given to them, you can 
reiterate to them as well. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well I appreciate the minister’s reassurance. 
Could I, Mr. Minister, have from you in writing within the next 
few days just some detail about the five-year plan in terms of 
actually when it began, what projects have been constructed so far 
under that plan, where are they, and how much they have cost. 
And with respect to the ones that have been deferred, could you 
indicate to me which ones have been deferred and where 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2585 
 

they were on the original schedule, the reasons for the deferral, 
and where are they now, just so we could see the whole pattern of 
what’s happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll undertake to answer the question just 
as you put it. We’ll take it from Hansard and we’ll answer the 
question in writing just as you put it here. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — I appreciate that very much, Mr. Minister. Could 
you then just clarify for me the assurance that you referred to in 
your earlier answer. I believe you said to me that any of the 
projects that were included in the five-year schedule, that for one 
reason or another in the government’s judgement had to be 
deferred, would not lose their priority. They would not be replaced 
by other projects coming in ahead of them, and in all likelihood, 
although this wasn’t a guarantee, the deferral would just be of one 
year’s duration. Those that were ready to go in ’88 would likely be 
’89, those that were ’89 would be ’90. 
 
I wonder if the minister could simply clarify that because as he 
anticipated in his previous answer, I have a couple of those that are 
important, two, specifically, that I can refer to, of course, 
Gravelbourg and Lafleche. They had been, as I understand it, 
approved in principle for 1989, I believe was the original 
commitment, and I wonder if the minister could give me some 
specifics as to where those now appear in the government’s game 
plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Both of the ones that the member refers to 
were approved in principle for ’89-90, okay? They were ’89-90 
projects. You have my assurance that they will not . . . but the 
projects which were approved for ’88-89, for example, will be in 
front of those. I’m not in a position now to say that it will be 
definitively those in a particular year and that there will only be a 
one-year delay. But I’m hoping that there will be that and in some 
cases perhaps we can even do a catch up on it. It’s not our 
intention to delay them any longer than we have to, secondly. 
 
So I can’t put a definitive date on when but I . . . and as I have said 
to those communities as well, and I’ll reiterate to the member just 
as you’ve outlined it, just as I outlined it earlier. And when you do, 
as you said before, when you go through the written record of our 
exchange here, you will see that the assurance is there, and if we 
need to write back and forth, we can do that as time goes on. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Just one final question then, Mr. Minister. I 
wonder if you can tell me if you have formal applications for 
hospital improvements and/or the construction of integrated 
facilities in the communities of Rockglen and Coronach. I wonder 
if there is anything presently before your department in terms of 
an active file on those two communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — They’re just trying to recall the particulars 
of . . . There has been a meeting or there’s one scheduled for 
Rockglen. Let me just reply to the member in a more definitive 
sense once I, you know, once I determine where there’s, you 
know, what stage any meetings, or what proposals they will have 
had before us. 
 
But certainly, in the case of Rockglen, they can recall that 

and I think . . . Well I don’t want to risk getting into this with 
Coronach because I’m not sure about the meeting, but I’ll provide 
in writing the status of any meetings or any sort of file that we 
have on either of those locations. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will look forward to 
having that information. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I just 
wish to point out that at the beginning of these estimates, we had 
talked about the fact that this government was attacking the 
principles of medicare, being universality, comprehensiveness, 
public administration, and accessibility. And we illustrated that 
through this government’s policies in the prescription drug plan 
whereby people are having difficulty getting access to prescription 
drugs and needed medication. We illustrated that by talking about 
the destruction of the school-based children’s dental program 
which has made it very difficult for young children to get access to 
dental services, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, and which, in 
effect, has reduced the number of people who are eligible under 
that plan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We talked about the long hospital waiting lists and we talked 
about that today in this House with respect to the fact that back in, 
I think it was March — my figures are February or March, the 
most recent figures I had — which indicated the hospital waiting 
lists were at approximately 12,000 to 13,000 people, Mr. 
Chairman, long hospital waiting lists for people to get needed 
services. 
 
At the beginning of the estimates, we showed, on a case by case 
basis, circumstances where people were being denied access to 
medicare. They were being denied access to comprehensive 
services. They were being . . . and the fact that government was 
moving away from publicly funding services such as the 
school-based children’s dental plan. And on a point by point basis, 
we were illustrating that this government is attacking the 
corner-stones of medicare, Mr. Chairman. It’s attacking the 
corner-stones of medicare, and it’s doing it under the false 
assumption that costs are escalating under control because that’s 
the PC rhetoric, Mr. Chairman, that costs are escalating out of 
control. 
 
And yet we were able to illustrate today in the estimates that this 
government has taken no serious measures with respect to 
controlling costs, for example, on the prescription drug plan other 
than, Mr. Chairman, to make people pay 100 per cent up-front 
drug costs, and in that way they’re attempting to control costs. By 
denying people the service, by denying people access to services 
because their pocket-book can’t afford it, they are attempting to 
control costs. 
 
But otherwise they haven’t provided doctors with a comparative 
formulary to compare prices of various drugs when they are 
prescribing, Mr. Chairman. They haven’t done that, Mr. 
Chairman, but the minister let slip the fact that the market would 
solve these things — a phrase to that effect — with respect to 
prescription drugs, Mr. Chairman. And that’s where that 
government is coming from, Mr. Chairman. They’re moving 
towards the privatization of medical services and attempting to do 
that on the false assumption and the false argument that 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2586 
 

costs are escalating out of control. 
 
But when we take a close look at the budget, we see that some 
$260 million of this year’s budget are reallocated expenditures 
from former years, Mr. Chairman — 260 million reallocated in 
this year’s budget. We take a look at these interest payments that 
are being made to the property management corporation, another 
government Crown corporation taking interest payments from 
hospitals and nursing homes, Mr. Chairman. And, of course, this 
adds to the health care budget, and it gives them a little more 
padding so that they can say that they’re spending this enormous 
amount of money on health care. But when you compare apples to 
apples and not apples to oranges, Mr. Chairman, it becomes 
readily apparent that costs have not escalated in the manner that 
they’ve indicated. 
 
We’ve also talked about specialists leaving the province, Mr. 
Chairman, at unprecedented rates, specialists leaving the province, 
Mr. Chairperson, and it’s largely due to this government’s 
policies; it’s largely due to the policies of this government 
inasmuch as they are underfunding hospital care and they’re 
underfunding many programs we see — the lack of equipment, for 
example, in the cardiac unit in the University Hospital in 
Saskatoon. There is equipment there that is old and out of date; 
and there is equipment there that other cardiac units across 
Saskatchewan have that this cardiac unit does not have, Mr. 
Minister . . .(inaudible interjection). . . And you can shout from 
your seat at me if you wish, but that’s the true facts of the matter, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And so we see an underfunding by this government and a lack of 
commitment to the health care policy, that has created a health 
care crisis in Saskatchewan, and has created an environment 
whereby health care specialists find it very difficult to practise 
their profession, Mr. Minister; and as a result of that, we see 
specialists leaving the province. And the minister was unable to 
come forward with any real plan to maintain and retain the 
specialists we have and to attract further specialists to this 
province. 
 
(2100) 
 
As I indicated earlier, there were a number of individual cases 
brought up in this legislature with respect to hardships being 
suffered as a result of PC cut-backs in health care and the lack of 
PC commitment with respect to health care, Mr. Chairman. We 
talked about these individual cases because these people had asked 
us to bring them forward, and they were hoping that by bringing to 
the floor of the legislature, it would make the public aware of 
some of the hardships they are suffering and would also bring the 
matter more closely to the government’s attention so that perhaps 
they would give their case further consideration. But we see 
virtually a very uncaring government, a very uncaring 
government, and it’s extremely difficult to get any real measures 
out of this government and any real help from this government. 
Mr. Chairman, because they don’t care. These people are only 
statistics to them and they’re not real individuals. 
 
And let’s just take something that we didn’t go into in detail with 
these estimates, but the CNAs (certified 

nursing assistants) of the Cut Knife hospital who were all fired 
because there is lack of funding to the Cut Knife hospital, and who 
are now taking jobs as aides . . . I am advised by these CNAs, they 
are being encouraged to take jobs as aides rather than certified 
nursing assistants, Mr. Chairman, because there is lack of funding 
and the hospital board is being encouraged to hire aides instead of 
nursing CNAs, Mr. Chairman — a very unhealthy situation. And 
that’s a stark example of how hospital funding and the lack of it in 
this province has created problems for people. 
 
I also want to comment on the fact that when questions were asked 
in this House, it took such an inordinate length of time to get some 
of the answers from the minister, and it makes me wonder just 
how he is on his department, Mr. Chairman. But I can . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I beg your pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s more interested in privatization. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, my colleague from P.A. says he’s more 
interested in the privatization of health care as opposed to solving 
many of the problems that we’ve brought to his attention and that 
the people of this province have brought to his attention, Mr. 
Chairman. And that’s a sad state, I tell you, for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I’ve been travelling across rural Saskatchewan over the 
weeks, and I know, Mr. Chairman, that the men and women and 
the children in this province want quality health care. They want 
universal, accessible, comprehensive, publicly funded health care, 
and they aren’t going to stand for the closure of rural hospitals. 
They’re not going to stand for the privatization of health care. 
They want their prescription drug plan reinstated. They want their 
school-based children’s plan reinstated. They want a commitment 
by their government with respect to providing quality, accessible 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And I tell you what, Mr. Chairman, they’re going 
to get it in 1990 or 1991 after the election is called. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, just prior to going on the 
estimates, I’m not . . . Just for anyone who’s worried about it, I’m 
not planning to give a long response to what the hon. member has 
said except to say that . . . except to say that what she has said, has 
once again . . . The way she has portrayed the health care system is 
not the way the health care system is out there across the province. 
 
And the other thing I wanted to say is, and I have given the 
undertaking to the member from Saskatoon South, a former 
minister of Health, who last year I remember that the estimates . . . 
And it’s, I think, to the credit of the critic here this year . . . The 
estimates last year, as I recall, about the month of October last 
year deteriorated one day during the debate between myself and 
the former minister of Health and now a member from Saskatoon 
South, to a 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2587 
 

point where I think in looking back on that after some sober 
second thought, I will withdraw some comments that I made n that 
occasion. And I made some comments as it relates to the 
relationship between that member, as minister, and the former 
deputy minister of Health who now resides in Victoria, Mr. Ken 
Fyke. 
 
So I will withdraw those comments that I attributed at that time to, 
I believe it was to the . . . Well I’ll just withdraw what was said in 
the Hansard of October last year related to the relationship 
between the member and Mr. Fyke. And I gave that undertaking to 
the member from Saskatoon South and it’s so done. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 34 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 35 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank the 
officials for having assisted in these estimates. We appreciate the 
help that they’ve given us. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I just — very quickly — 
but I want to thank these people, not only for the period of time we 
spent here in the House with estimates, but certainly these people, 
plus all of the people out across the province, who work in the 
Department of Health. They give excellent service to the public of 
this province and they should be thanked by all members in this 
House for the work they’ve done throughout the last year. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 53 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like the minister, please, to identify his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It gives me 
pleasure to introduce some of the officials that will be assisting me 
tonight. Seated to my left is the president of the property 
management corporation, Otto Cutts; directly behind me is Shirley 
Raab, vice-president, finance; and over across the aisle from Otto 
here is Les Handford, director of financial planning. There’ll be 
other officials that will move in from the back as we proceed 
through the estimates. 
 
Item 1 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when you 
boil down the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
from the blue book, you find there are really only essentially two 
lines dealing with the property management corporation which 
total up to 140, just over $148.4 million. 
 
And really, what’s important, Mr. Chairman, is what’s not in the 
blue book, what’s not in the blue book about the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation; that in itself, Mr. Chairman, 
speak volumes about practices of this Crown corporation to which 
we are now asked to provide even more taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The old and honoured parliamentary practice of grievance before 
supply is represented by the estimates and the examination thereof 
that we have before the House at this time. Put briefly, we, as the 
people’s representatives, have the right and indeed a responsibility 
to hold this government accountable for its expenditure of 
taxpayers’ dollars from the preceding supply of funds made 
available last year. 
 
Very few of us, and I include myself, Mr. Chairman, have the time 
or the sophisticated ability to examine the previous year’s 
operation to determine whether more funds should be supplied. In 
large part, we depend on the timely presentation of annual reports; 
we also depend on an analysis by others well qualified to do that 
job. We, as the people’s representatives, proceed through the 
estimates based on the foregoing. 
 
And I want at the beginning, Mr. Chairman, to deal about the 
timely production of reports by this department and now a Crown 
corporation. And the first report I want to refer to is 1985-86 
annual report of the department of supply and services, which this 
minister was in fact in charge of because his picture is in it, and I 
assume he was in charge. The letter of transmittal on this report, 
coming out of the report, is November 1, 1986, Mr. Chairman. It 
was finally tabled in this Assembly on July 9, 1987, or seven 
months later from the letter of transmittal which was in the report. 
 
The annual report of the department of supply and services, 
1986-87 — more than one year after the close of the year, this 
report was tabled in the House on April 6, 1988. The first report of 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation was tabled 
more than one year after the close of the year. So this information 
is brought forward more than one year after the close of the year. 
 
I think by relating these facts to the Assembly, Mr. Chairman, it’s 
quite clear that the timely presentation of reports and information 
is something that has not been followed by this minister in charge 
of this department and this Crown corporation to which we are 
referring to this evening. 
 
(2115) 
 
I want to leave that aside, Mr. Minister, and go to the last auditor’s 
report for the year ending March 31, 1987. In going to that report, 
it’s quite clear upon examination that there are only two other 
sections of government that took more space in the auditor’s 
report than the department of 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2588 
 

supply and services and the property management corporation 
which evolved from it. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Chairman, that the auditor comments 
in the auditor’s report dated the year ending March 31, 1987: 
 

All employees of the Department of Supply and Services 
resigned on February 28, 1987 (that was the end of February, 
1987) and accepted employment with the . . . property 
management corporation. 

 
And the auditor goes on to state: 
 

My representatives made the following observations 
regarding changes to departmental appropriations that did 
not appear to have appropriate authority. 

 
Dealing with Parks and Renewable Resources, the auditor had this 
to say: 
 

“. . . Rent of ground, buildings and other space.” Prior to 
August 31, 1987, my representatives enquired whether there 
was a written agreement supporting the payment . . . 
Subsequent to August, 1987, my representatives attempted to 
follow up (on) this matter numerous times and each time 
they were informed that the matter was being investigated. 
On February 17, 1988, (a considerable time later, Mr. 
Chairman, the auditor’s) . . . representatives were able to 
meet with management, at which time they were informed 
that no written agreement existed and that the rent was 
calculated in accordance with the SPMC’s (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation’s) accommodation 
manual. 

 
And the accommodation manual will be mentioned later in the 
auditor’s report, Mr. Chairman. It’s well to make note of that at 
this time. 
 

Upon further investigation of this payment, Departmental 
officials informed my representatives that the payment was 
not for rent, but was a grant payment to SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
respecting the Department of Parks and Renewable 
Resources for 1986/87 . . . 

 
It goes on to state: 
 

However, the voucher was incorrectly coded and no 
approval was obtained from the Lieutenant Governor . . . 

 
And the auditor goes on to state: 
 

In my opinion, the Department had neither support nor 
authority to make such a payment and accordingly, this 
payment was not properly vouchered or certified. 

 
The amount of money we’re talking about here is not small 
change, Mr. Chairman; it’s $2,414,000, in excess of 

that figure. And I want to find out from the minister what his 
response is to the auditor’s observations with regard to the 
payment to Parks and Renewable Resources for $2,414,660. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My officials indicate to me that in the initial 
stage that all the capital moneys from Parks was put into the 
property management budget, and then the property management 
corporation paid that back to Parks in their budget. And this is 
what the auditor was somewhat concerned about. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you suggest that the auditor 
was somewhat concerned about . . . You haven’t really given any 
answer, any response to it as far as I’m concerned. We’re talking 
about over $2.4 million which the auditor has drawn attention to, 
and there’s a number of other examples here. I don’t understand 
your answer. It doesn’t seem to wish away the auditor’s 
comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As a corporation develops and grows, I 
think one would realize that there are certainly . . . Sometimes 
there can be things that can be attributed as errors. What my 
department are telling me is that actually it was capital money that 
was, as I say, taken into property management corporation and 
paid back to the Parks department, but in the coding was indicated 
as rent. And that seems to be the bone of contention that the 
auditor is concerned about, that it was shown as rent when actually 
it was a capital transaction. I hope that adds further enlightenment 
to you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I want to bring another case 
to your attention, which was mentioned by the auditor. It is related 
to repayment of loans by certain hospitals and universities. 
 

Effective March 31, 1986, SPMC (the property management 
corporation), the Department of Health, (and) Department of 
Advanced Education and Manpower . . . entered into 
agreements to convert grants made by the two Departments 
in the 1985/86 fiscal year to these institutions into loans 
owing to the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) by the institutions. One condition of the loan 
agreement was that the obligation of the institution was 
limited to an amount equal to the funds received . . . and also 
provided for the repayment of these funds directly from these 
Departments to SPMC (the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation). 
 
In March, 1987, the Department of Supply and Services 
repaid $2,511,210 in respect of these loans agreements 
owing to SPMC (the property management corporation) by 
making a grant payment to SPMC (property management 
corporation) under authority of Section 4 of The Public 
Works Act. The payment was classified (coded) as a grant 
payment. 
 
Based on the terms of the loan agreement, such funds should 
have been provided in the Department of Health and the 
Department of . . . Education and Manpower appropriations 
. . . 

  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2589 
 

identified in estimates of these Departments rather than the 
Department of Supply and Services because the Minister of 
Supply and Services was not a party to the agreements. 

 
And I want to know, Mr. Minister, do you have a response to that 
condition raised by the auditor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think what the auditor is concerned about, 
there maybe was a little break with tradition. But actually I think 
the member would agree that the government could put the money 
in whatever department they wished. It would not necessarily have 
to be within, say, health or with Education, it would be within 
supply and services. But I think what he was indicating that 
perhaps that was somewhat different than what tradition had been. 
 
But I want to reinforce to the member that we were going through 
a very transitional phase there moving from a department of 
supply and service to a property management Crown. And also 
where the funding, the funding to third parties was being 
conducted in a manner different than it had been done previously 
when it came out of the line departments. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I would have to agree with you, Mr. 
Minister, that the auditor doesn’t agree with you and your 
department, and also that we’re not talking about small sums of 
money here. We’re talking about $2,511,210 that the auditor is 
alluding to in this particular instance. Agreed, you went around the 
procedures that normally would have been applied, and the auditor 
was not satisfied. 
 
I want to go on to another one, Mr. Chairman, grants made to 
property management corporation re capital projects of various 
school boards. And in March ’87: 
 

. . . under the authority of Section 4 of The Public Works 
Act, in order that SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) could make grant payments to 
various school boards in Saskatchewan with respect to 
capital projects. 

 
There was an authorizing: 
 

. . . Order-in-Council (which) did not specify the school 
boards to whom SPMC (the property management 
corporation) in turn was supposed to make grants. 

 
The responsibility for all matters, the auditor goes on: 
 

Responsibility for all matters relating to elementary and 
secondary education in the Province are assigned to the 
Minister of Education . . . Accordingly, capital grants to 
school boards have traditionally paid under the authority of 
The Education Act . . . Supply and Services made the grant 
payment to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) without an agreement with the Minister of 
Education relative to carrying out duties imposed on him 
and, accordingly, without knowing how the grants would be 
calculated for each school board . . . 

 
In addition, by utilizing authority under The Public Works 
Act to pay SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) and having regard to the broad scope of grant 
making powers which SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) was accorded under the 
authorizing Order-in-Council, it is not clear whether any 
criteria were effectively in force to govern the payments to 
be made by SPMC (the property management corporation), 
but in any case, no evidence was available to indicate that the 
criteria under The Election Act would be applied by SPMC 
(the property management corporation) . . . 

 
The auditor concludes: 
 

In summary, I am concerned that these actions have reduced 
the information available to the Members of the Legislative 
Assembly and thereby reduced the ability of the Members of 
the Legislative Assembly to exact a comparable degree of 
accountability on an ongoing basis. 
 
The following information is no longer disclosed. 

 
The auditor states: 
 

The Public Accounts no longer disclose the School Divisions 
who received capital grants during the fiscal year and the 
amounts each Board received. 
 
The Estimates no longer disclose the capital grants for 
School Divisions and accordingly the Members do not have 
the opportunity to specifically appropriate the sum necessary 
for new capital grants. 

 
And I might add parenthetically because they are now done by a 
Crown corporation. 
 
I want to know if the minister has any response to this observation 
by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think one has to realize that there 
was a transition phase there, and I make no denial that there is a 
change from what traditionally had taken place, and I think that’s 
what the Provincial Auditor is indicating. He’s not saying there 
was anything inappropriately done. He’s just saying that there was 
a change in the way it had taken place. And, as the member will 
realize from our discussions in Crown corporation under the 
property management corporation, that there was transition year 
from when it went from supply and services to the property 
management corporation. A lot of things changed in that period of 
time, but certainly new well-established ways in which the 
financing to third parties takes place. And in the case of Education, 
as I believe the members knows, there was a period where it was 
done by property management corporation, but in actual fact, now 
it is back to the way it was done formerly in the case of Education. 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2590 
 

(2130) 
 
So there should be no reason why anyone would have any 
difficulty in ascertaining what grants were given to what school 
boards across the province. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — What the Provincial Auditor is saying, Mr. 
Minister, here is that $20,950,000 — this is even in a larger sum 
than before: 
 

. . . is no longer disclosed: 
 
The Public Accounts no longer disclose the School Divisions 
who received capital grants and the amount each Board 
received, and 
 
The Estimates no longer disclose the capital grants for 
School Divisions and accordingly the Members do not have 
the opportunity to specifically appropriate the sums 
necessary for new capital grants. 

 
What the minister is saying is he’s saying that this is being 
corrected, and in the future, all the things that the auditor says that 
we shall not see, we will be able to see, and if so, why did it take 
the auditor to have to tell you that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think one has to realize that the property 
management Crown is a treasury board Crown and therefore under 
the direction of treasury board. And as I said previously, treasury 
board can allocate the moneys in whatever department they would 
wish for whatever type of purpose. 
 
However, I think you should realize, and I stated that before, that 
there was a transition phase, but in the case of Education, as it is 
today, it’s back to the similar way that it was previously. For one 
year there was a look at working it through the property 
management Crown. It has gone back under the Minister of 
Education. 
 
So there should be no reason why anyone couldn’t trace what 
moneys goes to whatever school board for whatever capital 
projects through the Department of Education capital 
expenditures. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, we will be watching this with 
interest to see if you have in fact complied with the auditor’s 
observations in the auditor’s report. 
 
I want to go on to another section. It has to do with rental 
payments, and it goes on to state: “. . . The Public Works Act reads 
as follows . . .” 
 
Essentially I’ll boil it down. It says the minister may enter into 
contracts or agreements. It goes on and says: 
 

Pursuant to Section 27, the Minister of Supply and Services 
authorized a delegation of authority on July 29, 1985, 
according to which any lease or lease/purchase of building 
space or property (including agreements for amortization of 
leasehold improvements costs and furniture leases related to 
building space or property) must be in writing and approved 
by officials authorized by the Minister. (Since he’s given a 
delegation of 

authority.) 
 
The auditor goes on to state: 
 

In March, 1987, the Department of Supply and Services paid 
a total of $7,638,403 to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) for “rental charges resulting from 
construction work in progress financed from 1985-1987”. 
Prior to August 12, 1987, my representatives asked to 
examine a copy of the contract between the Department . . . 
and SPMC to ensure that it was approved in accordance with 
the Minister’s authorization or delegated authority. At that 
time my representatives were not provided with copies of 
such contracts and management would not confirm whether 
a written contract existed for this payment. After several 
attempts to obtain a copy of the contract, at a meeting on 
February 17, 1988, my representatives were informed that no 
such contract existed. They were also informed that these 
payments were made in accordance with the 
accommodations manual issued by SPMC (the property 
management corporation) . . . 

 
There you have the mention of the accommodation manual, and I 
want you to make note of that again, Mr. Minister. 
 

. . . representatives were further informed that the rental 
charges were in respect of construction and renovation 
projects in progress at March 31, 1986, which were 
transferred over to SPMC (property management 
corporation) . . . 
 
Subsequent to the meeting of February 17, 1988, my 
representatives reviewed the documents and information 
provided by management . . . 

 
And the auditor’s representative reported as follows: 
 

a) The accommodation manual which the Department relied 
on as support for payments was not in effect at that time 
when the rental payments were made. 

 
So the accommodation manual, which was cited by me in example 
number one and again in this example number three, was not even 
in effect, and the department was citing that accommodation 
manual as the authority for making the payments. 
 
This goes on further: 
 

The agreements for sale did not make provision for any 
rental payments in the period prior to the accommodation 
manual taking effect on March 31, 1987. 

 
So the agreements made no provision for the period not covered 
by the accommodation manual. 
 
How are they made? 
 

SPMC’s request for one particular payment 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2591 
 

included in a payment voucher stating rental charges 
resulting from (get this, Mr. Chairman) construction work in 
progress Prince Albert $2,079,430. 

 
That was the voucher. 
 

Another request for rental charges resulted from construction 
work in progress stated 2340-50 Albert Street $2,082,802. 
My representatives requested a further explanation of these 
payments but were unable to obtain such information. 
Management indicated that they had other priorities to deal 
with and that the requested information would be made 
available as soon as possible. At April 30, 1988 (April 30, 
1988), this information has not yet been provided. 
Accordingly, I am unable to complete my examination and 
thus am unable to completely fulfil my reporting 
responsibilities pursuant to The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 
Do you have a response to that, Mr. Minister — a rather serious 
charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think, again, if the Provincial Auditor 
realizes now that the accommodation and account manual is in 
place and that that is the guide-line upon which our agreements for 
third parties are made . . . And certainly there is no attempt to not 
disclose those things. We were in a transition phase, building a 
new corporation, a new way of doing business, and I think anyone 
would realize that during that period of time that it takes some 
time to get things up and running. But I can say at this point in 
time, they certainly are and any transactions would be conducted 
in view of the accommodation manual. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well what we have here, Mr. Chairman, is 
the same minister, basically the same officials, and the minister 
says we’re in transition. Well that may be the portent of the times. 
This government may be in transition with this kind of 
bookkeeping, one of the most observed conditions, contrary to the 
auditor’s rules and practices, by this department and this Crown 
corporation. And I go on, Mr. Chairman. This is the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts, second report, filed May 10, 1988 
in this Assembly, and it says about the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, on page 10: 
 

The Provincial Auditor raised the issue of how the formation 
of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation may 
reduce the accountability of the executive government of the 
Legislative Assembly. In accordance with the usual crown 
corporation policy, the new corporation would not disclose 
payee information which would have been available had the 
activities remained the responsibility of a government 
department. 

 
This is something that I have said a long time ago and other people 
have observed as well. 
 

Your Committee explored this matter with 

corporation officials. It was indicated that the payee 
information respecting items purchased for government 
departments through the corporation’s purchasing agency 
would still be included in the Public Accounts; however, 
expenditures relating to the operation of the new corporation 
would be reported in the format normal for a treasury board 
crown corporation. 

 
One of the observations that has to be made with regard to the 
creation of the property management corporation is this, Mr. 
Chairman: in 1986-87 the property management corporation 
received $181.9 million in loans which should have been called 
expenditure. If this had been set out as an expenditure, it would 
have increased the total expenditures for the year by $181.9 
million in the Consolidated Fund — that, and would have 
increased the 1986-87 deficit from 1.2 million to $1.4 million. 
 
So what the effect of this was by the property management 
corporation was to reduce the deficit in the Consolidated Fund, 
which we’ve observed before; it’s not news. We’ve known all 
along that the decision to fund capital projects with borrowed 
money, outside the combined funds was reducing thereby the total 
reported expenditures and thus reducing the deficit. 
 
Another observation which I want to make, Mr. Chairman, is this. 
An auditor’s qualification had to do with this particular matter. He 
says that there was $135 million write-down of loans to Crown 
entities which should have occurred in 1985-86 instead of 
1986-87. 
 
In a sense it doesn’t really matter which year the write-down was 
attributed to, but there is a good political reason for having the 
write-down later. The significant political fact is that these 
write-downs were known to be necessary early in 1985-86, well 
before the election. They are cited in the ’85-86 auditor’s report to 
the public accounts of that year. The government chose not to 
execute these write-downs in the pre-election year which is a 
subtle manipulation of the debt of this province, and I don’t think 
the minister in charge needs to be complimented for that. I think 
he should reassess his position with regard to the observations that 
have been made by the Provincial Auditor, which I tend to side 
with. But I wonder where the minister may take the view that’s 
been taken by the member from Kindersley, who makes 
observations about auditors. It’s clear that the member for 
Kindersley, if he’s making observations about auditors, he’s 
making observations about this auditor here in Saskatchewan. he’s 
not making observations about auditors in British Columbia or 
Newfoundland, he’s making observations about the auditor in this 
province. 
 
And when the Minister of Justice says, as reported in The 
Kindersley Clarion, June 15, 1988: 
 

Auditors are people who bump against reality once a year. 
(They) live in a jungle-zoo and call themselves bureaucrats. 
They wear thick glasses because they’re looking at the fine print 
to see if every “i” is dotted. 

  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2592 
 

Well I’ll tell you that we could have a provincial auditor in 
Saskatchewan who only could read Braille and could go into this 
minister’s department and Crown corporation and come up with a 
report like this, indicates he’s not there just dotting the i’s and 
crossing the t’s. He’s got much more serious business to do than 
that. And I suspect what the minister from Kindersley had the 
temerity to suggest in this Assembly, goes for the minister in 
charge of the property management corporation as well. And I’m 
distressed to see that. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, what were the auditor’s fees in 
1986-87, in 1987-88, and estimated for ’88-89. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Was the question of what we pay the 
Provincial Auditor? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The question is: what was paid to the 
auditor for auditor’s fees in actual 1986-87, ’87-88, and estimated 
’88-89? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The figures are the following — and we 
don’t pay the Provincial Auditor, but to external audit: in ’86-87, 
30,000; in ’87-88, an estimate of 80,000; and in ’88-89, 
approximately the same 80,000 estimate. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — So the auditor’s fees from 1986-87 have 
gone to an estimated $80,000 from $30,000. That’s a fairly 
substantial increase, Mr. Minister. Can the minister supply me 
with the letter of engagement that went to the auditor? How about 
in each of those years, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We can’t provide it tonight. It’s not with us, 
but we can provide it to you at some time in the future. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I go to your report, your annual report, Mr. 
Minister. It says, more than once, the corporation will be run like a 
business. “This will give the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation the flexibility it needs to operate efficiently . . .” 
 
I notice you didn’t mention costs here, Mr. Minister. How do you 
explain going from $30,000 for the auditor’s fees to $80,000? I 
want to know why it went up so much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you’ll recall from Crown corporations 
discussions, the year of ’86-87 was, as I pointed out, the 
transitional year where, if you’ll recall our discussions of about 
two weeks ago, there were 25 properties that were under the 
Crown — the property management Crown — for that period of 
time, so that would indicate the difference in the fees. There was 
far less work to be audited in that year because there was very 
little in the property management Crown and most of it was still 
supply and services until the end of that year where then it moved 
into the property management Crown. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, the cost of auditing, if it was 
allotted to the area where it occurred, would have been much in 
excess of $30,000 in ’86-87 because that 

was for a partial year or for a partial Crown corporation. There 
would have been other audit fees which you wouldn’t have been 
charged for. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. In that year the other portions would 
have still been in supply and services and that would have been 
done by the Provincial Auditor, and there’s no charge for that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I look forward to seeing the letter of 
engagement in each of those three years, Mr. Minister, in due 
course. 
 
I want to ask you some other questions, and the first one has to do 
with staff in the department. I want to know who the ministerial 
assistants are for the minister: names and salaries as at December 
31, ’87 and the same for March 31, ’88, at the conclusion of the 
fiscal year. 
 
I might say, Mr. Minister, it’s not necessary to have that 
information at this time, if the minister will provide it for those, 
covering all ministerial assistants, executive assistants of a 
political nature in the minister’s office or in the Crown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I’ll get that across to you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I would like to, in due course, Mr. Minister, 
get a listing of the amount of money which the property 
management corporation presently owes in mortgages and loans. 
And I suppose you would arrive at a logical cut-off date. It may be 
March 31, ’88. Perhaps the minister can state what the cut-off date 
would be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I indicate to you that the owings would be 
about $450 million as of March 31, ’88. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Could you provide me, Mr. Minister, with a 
breakdown as to mortgages, loans, or any other identifying 
significant amounts, and also provide who they are with, the 
interest rate, and the term of the loan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we would be more than pleased to 
provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I would also like the property management 
corporation, Mr. Minister, for the period ’86-87 — during that 
time, they received loans in the range of 181.9 million — to 
provide a accounting of these loans, especially how much the 
payments are, and over what length of time they were taken. Can 
the minister provide that in due course. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — For the member’s information, in the annual 
report of ’86-87, the information you’re requesting is on page 11 
under items 3 and 4. But let me add, if that isn’t sufficient, if the 
member finds that he wants more detail than is provided in section 
3 and 4 on page 11, we would be willing to provide that to you. 
But if you find that sufficient, that’s where my officials indicate 
the information you’re requesting is recorded. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay, Mr. Minister, I will get back to that 
matter if I feel that it’s necessary at a later time. And you’ve 
agreed to provide more detail on that in the event 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2593 
 

it’s required. 
 
I wanted to, Mr. Minister, deal with a specific request. It’s about 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, Melville quarters. I imagine that is 
handled by the property management corporation. Can the 
minister tell me the arrangements there: was it lease; were the 
quarters built for the client? What’s the case with regard to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s a leased facility. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It’s a leased facility. Was the arrangement 
made prior to the construction of the facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, it was constructed new for the tenant. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — What were the terms and conditions of the 
arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If it’s okay with the member, my officials 
are digging that information out. We can continue on with 
subsequent questioning if that’s acceptable to you. We will 
provide you with the information that you’re requesting just as 
soon as it’s available, but they’re having to take a little time to dig 
it out. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — All right, Mr. Minister. I would want to 
know the financial terms that are involved, the owner, the length 
of the lease and so forth. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could provide me some information 
with regard to the executive aircraft hangaring arrangements in 
Saskatoon. Can you tell me what the arrangement is there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That again is a leased space and perhaps if 
the member . . . We’re digging out this information for you. And I 
would imagine you’re wanting to know whom it’s leased from and 
what the financial term is and the length of the lease. I’d be more 
than pleased to provide these things for you and maybe to expedite 
it. If there are other areas or buildings that you would want that 
information, you could request it and we would provide the 
necessary information. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, my understanding is that an 
agreement was reached in 1985-86 in hangar number five, 
Saskatoon airport; and that the, among other things, the 
department of government services leases for executive aircraft an 
aircraft stall which runs in the neighbourhood of 1,000 to $1,200 a 
month where there is an option to . . . where the option is, that if 
the government wanted to lease space, it could lease it at the rate 
of $100 a day. My understanding being that the executive aircraft, 
in the period of time which I’m talking about, ’85-86, was in the 
executive aircraft stall in the hangar about two, maybe three days, 
for the entire year, which, had you been leasing on the daily basis, 
would have cost 2, $300, but if you’re leasing on the monthly 
basis would cost 1,000 to $1,200 a month. I want to know any 
other kind of renovations which were undertaken by the 
department of supply and services or the property management 
corporation with regard to ancillary 

facilities at the Saskatoon airport for the executive aircraft terminal 
there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The reason for having an adequate space 
that we can put the planes in, of course — and I think you realize 
this, that if the planes were up there in a day when there was a bad 
wind or anything of that nature, we wouldn’t want to see any 
damage. So we have this good space reserved in which the planes 
can be put while they’re in Saskatoon. 
 
You asked about were there any renovations, and there were some 
to the . . . what we might call the office space attached to the 
hangar, and we would be pleased to provide those renovations to 
you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Can you provide me, Mr. Minister, also 
how often the aircraft has been hangared in those facilities in, say, 
each of the last three years — how many days. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know if we would have a record of 
where it was in for a total day or that. I know sometimes when I 
use the plane and go up there and have business in Saskatoon, it 
goes into that hangar and then when one comes back from your 
business, whether it be two hours or three hours — whatever it 
may be — the plane comes out of there now. So I don’t think we 
really have a record of how many full days there could be that the 
planes were hangared in that facility. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to trust 
the minister’s memory on this. I’d like an accurate report of it later 
on; I’d be satisfied with that. But my understanding is that it is 
seldom used, and as a consequence we’re paying for space that 
we’re not using. So I’d like to have information on that with more 
detail later on. 
 
I suppose the centre-piece of this property management 
corporation’s identification in Saskatchewan would have to be 
empty office space running into tens of thousand of dollars a day, 
Mr. Chairman, and I want to deal with that very briefly. I’m 
referring to an article which appeared in February of this year, in 
the Leader-Post. It says that: 
 

The government owns or leases . . . totalling 10.5 million 
square feet of space across the province of which 4 per cent 
is currently vacant . . . 

 
And we did some calculations on the amount of space that was 
vacant and came up with a figure. We are not alone in these 
observations about government space that’s unoccupied — sitting 
vacant on which we’re paying for it. For example, here’s an article 
from the chamber of commerce, March 14, ’88: 
 

The movement of government departments and cut-backs in 
staff has resulted in a surplus of space in some government 
buildings. One of these is the T.C. Douglas Building in 
Regina — the marble palace at the south end of Wascana 
Centre which housed the Health department. About half the 
building is empty so someone came up with the 

  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2594 
 

idea that it could be used to house the soon-to-be-homeless 
Mackenzie Art Gallery in Regina. The gallery will move to 
the west wing of the building some time this year after 
renovations have been completed. It puts the gallery away 
from the downtown area and perhaps out of the way, but it 
does house it in an artistic building and a very pleasant, but 
expensive, location. 

 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you give us some details with 
regard to the use of the T.C. Douglas Building and arrangements 
that have been arrived at with regard to the Mackenzie Art Gallery 
and renovations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I want to back up again to the planes for a 
moment because I don’t want to leave you with the intention, or 
the understanding, that I could supply that information. It’s solely 
at the discretion of the pilot and we don’t log whether it goes in or 
not. In other words, the pilot may go up and it’s windy when they 
arrive there, they decided to put it in there for an hour or two that 
day, or another day they decide, no, they won’t put it in. So there 
is really no record kept of how often the planes go into that 
hangar. So I don’t want to leave you with the understanding I’d be 
able to supply you with that because we don’t have that statistic. 
 
In regard to the vacant space, yes, there is some vacant space held 
by this government. I think one has to realize what some of that 
space is, and I’m sure the member does. Certainly Whitespruce at 
Yorkton comprises a good percentage of it. What was known as 
the Weyburn mental hospital at Weyburn, now not in very much 
usage, comprises another large portion. Some of it is at the former 
mental hospital at North Battleford, or Saskatchewan Hospital 
North Battleford where there is some more of this vacant space. 
 
So when one looks at vacant space of the government, certainly, 
there is some vacant space. Some of this has been vacant for some 
time, and it is rather difficult to find alternate uses for some of that 
space. 
 
Pertaining to the Mackenzie Art Gallery and the health building or 
the T.C. Douglas Building, it is the intention to move into the west 
wing of the T.C. Douglas Building. 
 
You ask about the financial commitments, and that would be that 
there is going to about $3 million coming from the federal 
government, and the portion from the provincial government, 3 
million, and then I think about the same amount from a group 
called, Friends of the Mackenzie Gallery. 
 
So, yes, it is the intention to move the art gallery into what is 
known as the west wing of the T.C. Douglas Building. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, will you . . . First, I want to 
give you some examples where I don’t mention any of the 
buildings you have mentioned as being unoccupied space. 
 
There’s the 1986-87, the Regina TD Bank building, a certain 
amount of space was vacant there, 353 square metres which would 
have cost the government approximately $76,000 for that 
unoccupied space. 

There’s another 800 square metres in that building which would 
have cost another 86,000 for the six-month period it was vacant. 
There is a Regina Canadian building with 148 square metres at a 
cost of $32,000 to the Government of Saskatchewan. So these are 
some of the figures. 
 
In Saskatoon, we had the Sturdy Stone Building, at one point had 
about 3,000 square feet of office space, and some of this at this 
time that this occurred, the space had a value of over $60,000 — 
vacant space. And at exactly the same time, the Premier was 
moving his cabinet office to the new premier’s office which was 
one and a half times the size of the space he had in the Sturdy 
Stone Building, the reason being there wasn’t enough space in the 
Sturdy Stone Building. 
 
The facts belie that statement that there’s not enough space in the 
Sturdy Stone Building. There was plenty of space in the Sturdy 
Stone Building. But it was left vacant and the Premier moved out 
into the new premier’s office which, I say, is one and a half times 
as large as the space he had in the Sturdy Stone Building. I wonder 
if that, to you, is efficient. Is that efficient way to run this 
government? 
 
With regard to the executive aircraft, if you say one of your 
criteria is efficiency, as you’ve said in your reports, then I think 
you better start examining whether the executive aircraft is in that 
space two or three days of the year, or whether it’s in . . . There’s 
365 days in the year, and if it’s only occupying that space for two 
or three days of the year, we’d be much better off, from an 
efficiency and economic point of view, to lease the space at $100 a 
day to put the executive aircraft in, even if it had 20, 30, 40 days. 
So I think the minister should look into that. 
 
And I want the minister’s comment about this unused vacant space 
which I’ve cited, which none of the ones the examples the 
minister’s given. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think you’re always going to have vacant 
space in government buildings, especially in the city of Regina 
here where the majority of government offices are held, and as 
you move departments around and as functions change and the 
size of departments change, it’s normal to have some periods of 
time when there will be some vacant building space. And I don’t 
think this is peculiar to this government, I think it has taken place 
across the history of the province of Saskatchewan. And also in 
various other jurisdictions in Canada, I think if you examine you’d 
find similar types of situations. 
 
In regard to the premier’s office, I think the one thing that one 
should keep in mind in that instance was the accessibility to it, 
with a store-front office at street level in Saskatoon. I have visited 
the office and I find it very accessible, and I think that is in the 
best keepings for the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, that 
they can walk right in and meet people in the Premier’s staff, raise 
concerns. There’s no reason that it isn’t very . . . anyone in 
Saskatoon can’t find that office. It’s very identifiable, and it is a 
nice facility, and I believe the office of the Premier of a province 
should be a nice facility. We have pride in our province, and 
certainly to have the Premier housed in a nice office, very 
accessible to the public of 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2595 
 

Saskatchewan, is something that I think should take place. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: I recall going to the cabinet office in 
Saskatoon. I just walked in, had a nice 10-storey ride to the top 
floor, and there I was in the cabinet office. Didn’t seem like it was 
an inaccessible place to me, Mr. Minister. It seemed quite 
accessible. 
 
I think what this Premier of Saskatchewan wants is more street 
identification in Saskatoon, and I would reassess that if I was the 
Premier because it hasn’t done him much good in Saskatoon. 
Perhaps he should, rather than looking at street identification in 
Saskatoon, he should look at some of the policies he’s carrying out 
in a number of areas — health, property management corporation, 
prescription drug plan, dental program — to find out what’s 
wrong in Saskatoon, because all you’ve got from Saskatoon now 
is one token Tory representing that city. 
 
The people of Saskatoon have spoken to you, and they were 
speaking about the cabinet office and they were speaking about 
health care in that by-election. And, Mr. Minister, they were 
speaking about the ward system, but I don’t want to get on to that 
subject; I want to save that for tomorrow. But the problem is that 
you have a Premier here that’s not listening. He’s got his mind 
made up and he’s going ahead, and he wants a little grander palace 
in Saskatoon and a little more street appeal. I suggest the 
Premier’s looking in the wrong area. 
 
I want an assurance from you, Mr. Minister, that in the event that 
the T.C. Douglas Building is occupied in part by the Mackenzie 
Art Gallery, that the name on the T.C. Douglas Building will not 
be changed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly there’s no plan to change the 
name at this time. I can’t give you a commitment as to 20 or 30 
years from now. Probably both you and I will not be present in 
this House and there will be other people making decisions and so 
on. I can’t commit that it will never be changed, but I can tell you, 
at the present time there’s no design to change the name. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I would prefer the minister to say, over my 
dead body, it’ll be changed. But what we have here is a building 
named after an outstanding pioneer of this province, a person who 
served longer than any other person as premier of this province, 
who was one of the most innovative premiers this province has 
ever seen. And the minister stands up and says, not at this time, 
we’re not going to change the name of that building. I would like a 
little more unqualified support of the idea that the minister is not 
going to change the name of that building, period. And don’t give 
us that qualification. 
 
I want to get into the idea of the free enterprisers in our system that 
want to take part in the free enterprise system. And I’m looking at 
an article from a rather well-known newspaper journalist where he 
talks about the Ramada Renaissance hotel and convention centre 
in Regina. 
 

It’s a private sector project that very clearly wouldn’t have 
happened if it were not for significant government 
involvement, (he says). At the municipal level, the city has 
permanently 

waived the property tax on the convention centre, a subsidy 
estimated to be wroth $120,000 per year. 

 
It’s interesting to note, and I have an article here about Mr. Remai, 
who is talking, “labour of love builds an empire.” And he’s like 
that free-enterpriser that I hear from from Alberta, Peter 
Pocklington, and it says in the article: “Always a true believer in 
the “private enterprise system.” The complex was built without 
public funds.” 
 
Well that sounds like Peter Pocklington when he says he’s a great 
believer in the private enterprise system. 
 
(2215) 
 
And I want to know, what is the arrangements with regard to this 
building? How is the people’s money being involved? 
 
You must have known, Mr. Minister, you must have known what 
the concessions were made by the city of Saskatoon because you 
had something to do with putting together the lease for the 
building before the building was even built. So you must have 
known all the quid pro quos, the trade-offs, and I want to know 
whether you can confirm that the property tax concession on the 
convention centre is $120,000 per year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We don’t know what the tax concessions 
from the city of Regina to the Ramada are. We have no knowledge 
of that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Would it not be fair to say, Mr. Minister, 
that the tax concessions that were give by . . . or concessions, let’s 
call it concessions, given by other parties involved in this 
arrangement would have been within the knowledge of the 
minister, because the minister was obviously making some 
concessions by signing an agreement, a lease, in advance for space 
which he held vacant for some time before he could occupy it. 
And I don’t know the extent to which it is occupied at this time, 
but the minister is telling me — is this correct? — that you knew 
not of any other concessions that were made in the promotion of 
this trade centre in Regina, or does any other minister? Can you 
specify any other minister that would have know of concessions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I wasn’t the minister at the time and I 
have no knowledge of that. The first I’ve heard of it is when you 
raised it tonight, and certainly my officials indicate that they were 
not knowledgeable towards it either. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — This journalist goes on to state: 
 

In fact, one cabinet minister (from your government) in his 
first term said he was shocked to hear later that the 
government had become a major tenant in the hotel. “I 
remember the proposal that government-leased office space 
being brought to cabinet when the hotel convention centre 
was in the early planning stages. It was turned down by 
cabinet and never to my knowledge was the idea brought 
back to 

  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2596 
 

cabinet again,” says the one-time minister. 
 
So it seems to me that there are ways and means of doing these 
things that don’t involve even the cabinet, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you can shed any light on this charge that has been made by a 
previous cabinet minister in your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know what cabinet minister you’re 
talking about, and I don’t know what he’s talking about. He may 
not have been at cabinet, I don’t know. I don’t know who you’re 
referring to. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I think I’d stick to that line if I was you, 
Mr. Minister. Just throw up your hands and don’t know. 
 
So what we have here with the creation of the Ramada 
Renaissance convention centre is an over-production of 
commercial office space in Regina, and consequently in the 
province, and using the taxpayers’ money to legitimize private 
development. That’s exactly what the minister has done. He’s 
done it to someone who says that he’s a private enterpriser, but is 
standing there prepared with his hand to take the concessions that 
government is offering such as Mr. Pocklington, that private 
enterpriser from Alberta who has such a way with the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to deal with some of the estimates directly, Mr. Minister. I 
see Economic Development and Tourism has a 34.7 per cent 
increase in this year’s estimate, and I wonder if the minister can 
give some explanation of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — While my officials are looking that up for 
you, I would just indicate to the member opposite that it is nothing 
new for governments to commit space for the development of 
buildings. And just to jog his memory, I would just list two or 
three of them that had happened previously — same type of thing 
— private individuals wanting government contracts for their 
space if their building was built. There’s a Dairy Queen building 
on south Albert, London Life building, and the H.A. Roberts 
South Broad Plaza, Chateau Towers, and those are built prior to 
our term in office. So it’s nothing new. It happens across the 
country, it happened with the previous government with some of 
the ones I’ve cited, and it has happened with this government and 
other governments across Canada. It’s quite a common occurrence 
for that type of commitment to take place to facilitate and 
encourage private development of various types of office towers 
or convention facilities. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, the one distinguishing 
observation a person would have to make with regard to the 
information you’ve put forward is that construction of office space 
under the previous administration never resulted in such a glut of 
office space in the city of Regina or in the province generally. And 
the consequences of your policy is that you have a glut of 
high-quality office space for which the government won’t tell us 
what they’re paying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — On your question about Economic 
Development and Tourism, the increase that you had indicated, 
one of the reasons for the increase, the main 

part, is the inclusion of the North Portal visitor reception centre. 
And I know when I was minister of that portfolio we had looked at 
a very good reception centre for people coming in from the United 
States. I think there’s a capability to change the money and so on 
at that reception centre, which I think is something that we like to 
have, a good welcoming place for our American visitors. Another 
$60,000 has been provided for repayments on some capital 
projects, and the remainder of the increase is attributable to normal 
escalation factors based upon operating costs and lease 
escalations. So, I guess, in short, the answer, the main thing, would 
be the North Portal visitor reception centre. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I wanted to investigate for a 
moment or two what departments of government that you lease 
space to, or agencies or commissions, where the space has 
remained static between last year and this year. And let me give 
you an example: in the Department of Telephones, the minister 
stated that the amount of space under the previous budget and this 
present estimates was essentially the same. Are there a number of 
areas where it’s been essentially the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. There are many areas where it has 
remained virtually the same. If there’s specific ones you want an 
indication about, I’d be more than pleased to provide those for 
you, but there are a number of them that have remained, shall we 
say, static. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I wonder, in order to save time, if the 
minister can agree to go through the blue book, identify the 
departments or agencies where the space was essentially static 
over the two-year period so that I can, at a later time, determine 
what the increase has been due to, if in fact the rents were static. I 
wonder if the minister can provide that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you can be fairly specific. You want it 
exactly the same, or where there isn’t a great deal of change. 
They’ll get working on it and have that ready for you as soon as 
possible. I don’t know if we’ll have it ready tonight, but certainly 
by tomorrow. We can have it ready tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, if it’s not available right now, you 
know, in a week is fine. I don’t want to rush the department. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How exact do you want it? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No, it doesn’t have to be exact. If the 
variation in space was minor in relation to the size of that agency 
or department, then it would be essentially the same. So I want to 
identify those ones that are the same. 
 
The amount of money that’s going into the supply and services 
and now into the property management corporation has increased 
substantially over the years, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 1984 
the ordinary expenditures of the department were $71.9 million; in 
’89 they’re $122 million. In other words, since 1984, provincial 
expenditures on supply and services have increased by $50 million 
or 70 per cent. That is 11.6 per cent increase per year. 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2597 
 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, with the phrases that you’ve used, like 
smaller government getting out of these kind of operations and 
being efficient, why is the department of supply and service and 
now property management corporation increasing its budget by 
$50 million from 1984 to the present? And, in fact, Mr. Minister, 
the period from 1987 when the property management corporation 
was created was the largest jump — 1987, ’88, and ’89 were the 
large jumps in the amount of money supplied to the property 
management corporation. Why did it occur then, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I guess the big difference was when we had 
the department of supply and services, the capital aspects were not 
included in that budget, as you well know. The capital in Health 
was in Health, and the capital in education was in Education. So 
that would indicate a considerable increase in budget because 
under SPMC the capital budget is held within the department. 
Actually . . . I think that’s the explanation that — unless there is 
something further that you wanted to know, please respond, but 
for the largest increase it would be the rolling in to capital into the 
Crowns’ budget. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, I suspect, Mr. Minister, that if you 
were to take — and I have some figures here that take the entire 
cost of the property management corporation out of the budget — 
this consideration this year and you will find that Agriculture, 
instead of a 2 per cent increase in its budget this year; when you 
take out the property management corporation, it’s minus 7.4 per 
cent. Take Environment, it shows a 1.7 per cent increase; when 
you take the property management payments out, it’s actually 
minus 8.5 per cent. 
 
You take the Department of Education, which shows a 6.57 per 
cent increase; if you take out the property management 
corporation segment, it is just 0.8 per cent. If you take the 
Department of Finance, which shows a 34.7 per cent increase in its 
budget this year, if you take out the property management charges, 
it’s down to 1 per cent increase. 
 
So what you see, in effect, is a artificial inflation. And I want the 
minister to respond in due course with examples to show that this 
is not true, but I believe it to be that the government is using the 
property management corporation to artificially inflate the budgets 
of a number of departments. For example, take the Department of 
Health. In ’87 it was 10.7 million; in ’88-89, it’s 12.1 million — 
an increase of 12.6 per cent. If you add in capital, if you add in the 
capital, in ’87-88 it was 4.9 million; in ’88-89 it was 16.7 million, 
for an increase of 235 per cent. So this means a total increase of 
83.2 per cent as a result of increases to the property management 
corporation of 13.1 million, of the increase the government claims 
to have given to the Department of Health, will go directly out of 
the Health budget — $13.1 million. 
 
(2230) 
 
Over 20 per cent of the increase in Health has gone to the property 
management corporation. If you take the Department of 
Education, over 42 per cent of the increase has gone to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. If you take Parks and Recreation, Mr. Chairman, of 
the increase, 72 per cent went to Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. So instead of getting the 6.8 per cent 
increase as promised, the government has given the department 
only 1.8 per cent. 
 
If you take into consideration the inflation rate, which is about 5.9 
per cent, the increase of 1 per cent, 1.8 per cent, is actually a cut of 
4.1 per cent. So what the minister is doing, and I suspect that he 
cannot defend this position, is that the property management 
corporation budget is being artificially inflated so that at a time 
more convenient to the minister in the future, the department of 
. . . or the property management corporation can loosen the purse 
strings and appear to have done miracles under its mandate. 
 
And I want the minister to be able to defend against the increases, 
when you take the property management factor out of the figures. 
I want the minister to give me numerous examples which will 
make the case that he wants to make, because I don’t think he can 
make that case. 
 
While using the relative profit and loss of a corporation is in most 
instances a good indicator of the efficiency of that operation, in the 
case of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation this 
does not hold true. In this case, the clients of the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation do not have the right to seek 
the cheapest alternative, a supplier of services in the market, or, for 
that matter, to even negotiate the amount which will be paid to the 
property management corporation for services provided. 
 
When the Minister of Telephones was here, he said, I have to pay 
the property management corporation a 14 per cent increase. And 
he says, my department’s static; no change in the department. 
Now why does the Minister of Telephones have to pay you over 
14 per cent increase? 
 
If the government wants to make more money available during an 
election period, it need only increase each department’s payment 
to the property management corporation in the preceding years, 
then in an election year they can draw on the accumulated profit, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
A further consequence of this system is that the government can 
use perceived increases to each department’s budget to publicly 
build a perception that government is giving generous increases to 
various departments while, in fact, they are not. 
 
It is precisely these processes which appear to be taking place at 
present. In its ’88-89 budget, the property management enjoyed an 
increase in revenues of 11.5 per cent from the ordinary 
expenditures of government departments. As well, the property 
management corporation received an increase of 193.4 per cent on 
capital expenditures. In total, the property management 
corporation received additional revenues of 32.7, or an increase of 
27.3 per cent over its 1987-88 revenues. 
 
And these are the concerns that we have about your 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2598 
 

property management corporation, Mr. Minister. I’m not satisfied 
with your answers; I want to see your examples. What the minister 
has done is he’s been tardy on tabling his reports in the House. He 
has not conformed to the rules and procedures which the auditor 
has set down for all departments and agencies of government. The 
minister has not substantiated with examples, and I look forward 
to receiving those examples if he has them, to show that the 
Saskatchewan Property Management accounts or billing is not 
being artificially inflated. I want to see that from the minister, and 
until such time as that occurs, Mr. Minister, I’m going to have to 
withhold my approval of your estimates in this department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the member opposite has to realize 
that it’s just a different way of accountability. I believe that it is 
good to have the departments accountable for the expenditures 
they make, and this way, with the property management 
corporation, they are. There may be others, and you maybe want 
to argue that no, it is better for the departments just to request 
through supply and services all their demands and supply and 
services picks up the tab. I think there is something to be said in 
having that in the budgetary process so that the departments have 
to defend their requests for expenditures for space and furniture 
and whatever they may want to spend their money on. 
 
Now there may be a difference of opinion here, and your right to 
yours if you feel different, but I think, and from discussions with 
people, there seems to be a fair degree of support for that degree of 
accountability. 
 
Now you talk about the inflating budgets. Certainly the way that 
one could inflate budgets is by capital expenditure, which 
previously was shown within the departmental expenditure. Take, 
for example, in Parks — if you wanted to go ahead with some type 
of a capital type of construction, it would put that year’s 
expenditure in Parks up a considerable amount. 
 
Now what we have felt, and we’re following the lead of the 
Auditor General of Canada — and many of the other provinces 
such as British Columbia, Manitoba, Alberta, are all looking at the 
same type of management of third-party, large constructions, of 
amortizing them over a longer period of time rather than a 
one-year expenditure in the capital side of the budget of the line 
departments. Now you may disagree with that, and if you do, 
that’s your right. 
 
But certainly we believe that those two aspects, and through the 
main premises upon which property management Crowns are 
founded, not only in Saskatchewan but only in many other 
jurisdictions across Canada, is that you hold your line departments 
far more accountable for their expenditures by having them as a 
budgetary process in their budget rather than just a request to the 
big central area of supply and services, and I won’t repeat myself 
again, but with the third departments amortizing those loans, 
payable back to the departments on a yearly basis with interest 
over a longer period of time of the cost of the building of the 
project, I should point out that in discussions with contractors and 
with third parties that seems to have been quite well received by 
the general public of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, it’s incumbent upon you not 
to wander too far afield when you’re talking about what the 
auditor wants. We can’t be concerned about what the auditor in 
British Columbia, or Ontario, or somewhere else, or the Auditor 
General of Canada wants, we have to conform to what the auditor 
here in Saskatchewan wants, and that’s something that you didn’t 
do, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want you, Mr. Minister, to give me a commitment that you will 
take each of the departments — this is in addition to information 
already requested — and break the payment to the property 
management corporation down into major components such as 
mail, service, central vehicle agency, photographic services, 
accommodation, whatever the main headings may be, for each 
department that’s listed in the book; and a comparison for the 
previous year for the . . . what amount was under each component 
in the previous year. Okay? I want the minister to undertake to 
supply that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think you’re asking me to do it in — let’s 
take a figure of six or eight major topics — and, yes, I’d be more 
than pleased to provide you with that information. I might go a 
step further to even have some of my staff meet with you to 
explain the various aspects of it if that would facilitate it for you. 
 
But we would provide that, and I think you’re being reasonable. 
You’re not wanting every little expenditure, but along the main six 
that any department would incur. If that’s fine with you, we’ll 
provide that for you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I think I can say, Mr. Minister, that I’d 
appreciate receiving that broken down into major components and 
all of the minor ones put in a heading called “Other,” so that when 
I get the figures totalled up, I’ve got the total figure that appears in 
the blue book, so I know the amount of increase. And I must 
indicate to the minister that I would be satisfied to receive that as 
soon as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, we will do that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 168 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 168 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Capital Projects 

1988-89 Capital Expenditure by Sector 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? Agreed. I’d like to thank the 
minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to take the 
opportunity tonight to thank the officials that assisted me 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2599 
 

in these estimates. I’d like to thank the critic for his questions. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I’d like to join 
the minister in thanking his officials for being here this evening to 
answer questions. 
 
(2245) 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Participation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, I’m pleased to see the members opposite, 
the members of the Conservative party, applauding these 
estimates. Mr. Chairperson, this is indeed a historic evening. It’s a 
historic evening because for the first time in the history of our 
province we are going to be debating estimates for the department 
of privatization. 
 
We have here a disturbing trend on the part of the provincial 
government. We have here, clearly, a government that is 
committed to the privatization ideology, which is a right-wing, 
narrow ideology. And it’s no secret, Mr. Chairperson, that they 
have now turned to Margaret Thatcher of Great Britain for their 
ideological inspiration in this latest economic fad of the PC Party 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
They’ve even sent the Premier’s principal secretary, his chief 
political adviser, off to England before the last election to study 
the ideology in action, and that’s the privatization of British 
Telecom. They’ve even invited the right-wing professor of 
privatization, Dr. Madsen Pirie, to explain his ideology to the 
provincial government, and they’ve even hired a consultant, 
Oliver Letwin, from the British merchant bank, Rothschild and 
Sons, to bring that right-wing ideology to the Tory government 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But while the Tory members opposite are eager and enthusiastic 
about this latest Conservative fad of privatization, they refuse to 
acknowledge or admit that it’s the same old Tory philosophy that 
has been tried and tried, and failed and failed, in every western, 
democratic, industrialized nation in the world. 
 
For once in his life, the minister of privatization is correct when a 
few weeks ago he told the press that privatization is the wave of 
the 1890s. Unfortunately, Mr. Chairperson, the minister is about 
100 years out of touch. What Saskatchewan people need is a 
vision and a solution for the 1990s and the year 2000. We don’t 
need the minister’s frank admission that his privatization policy is 
geared toward the 1890s. His PC privatization ideology is old and 
outdated, and it’s old and outdated, and it’s been discredited from 
one end of the world to the other. 
 
Now this minister of privatization clearly doesn’t understand the 
history of our province. He clearly doesn’t understand the history, 
because that history has not been characterized by private greed or 
private self-interest and private profit as a supreme motivator of 
human activity. 

Nothing could be further from the truth here in Saskatchewan. 
Their version of history is simply wrong, Mr. Deputy Chairperson. 
In his desperate attempt to rewrite Saskatchewan history, the PC 
privatization version of history, this minister has grossly 
misunderstood Saskatchewan people. He’s grossly misunderstood 
our history and experience of Saskatchewan people working 
together. He has deliberately tried to misrepresent the common 
experience of Saskatchewan people, and that is one of sharing. 
 
The facts are these, and if the Tory members opposite decide to 
dispute it — our version of the facts, the real history of 
Saskatchewan — I invite them to check with their constituents, 
particularly those constituents in rural Saskatchewan. It was our 
pioneers, here in Saskatchewan, which found themselves in the 
vulnerable position within the world economy, separated by huge 
distances from their markets and from sources of manufactured 
goods. Even when farms and homesteads were much smaller, a 
quarter section, they were isolated and often separated from one 
another by significant distances. 
 
They found themselves with rich and open land, but in return they 
had to endure the hardships of a severe and unyielding climate. 
The centres of economic powers were far away. They were 
unresponsive to Saskatchewan needs and the needs of 
Saskatchewan pioneers and their families. 
 
They had to endure the insensitive railroads. They had to endure 
the Winnipeg grain exchange, which was dominated by private 
grain companies determined to maximize their private profits. 
They were dominated by the big eastern banks who were 
successful in pursuing the private self-interest of their 
shareholders, but were unresponsive to the needs of Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
And from that adversity, Mr. Chairperson, they developed 
courage, strength, resilience, and vision. They knew, and rightly 
so, that the blind forces of greed in the world market would not 
meet their needs and would not allow them to develop their vision. 
And so they developed it for themselves together with their 
neighbours, and they did so co-operatively. 
 
They put the common good above private greed; they put the 
community interest, the public interest, above self-interest, and in 
their determination to pursue that Saskatchewan vision for 
themselves and their children, they sought to use all of the tools at 
their disposal, all of the tools at the disposal of the community — 
private business, to be sure, but also co-ops and the public sector. 
 
And their determination and their courage and their hard work, 
Mr. Deputy Chairperson, forged the Saskatchewan mixed 
economy, the unique, made in Saskatchewan solution to the 
circumstances that they faced. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was 
a Saskatchewan response to the private grain companies on the 
grain exchange. Saskatchewan credit unions were developed and 
owned and controlled here in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan 
people as an alternative to the eastern banks. The Consumers’ 
Co-op Refineries here in Regina was the first 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2600 
 

co-op refinery in the world, and when private greed and private 
self-interest and big, out-of-province investors failed to meet the 
needs of Saskatchewan people, our pioneers decided to meet those 
needs for themselves, using the public sector. 
 
Rural telephone services, rural electrification, rural bus service, 
provided by the public sector; basic car insurance at affordable 
rates, provided by the public sector; and most important of all, Mr. 
Chairperson, comprehensive hospitalization insurance and 
medicare, developed by Saskatchewan people by using the public 
sector. 
 
Now when Saskatchewan people realized the potential and the 
opportunities for economic growth and security that were afforded 
by our bountiful and valuable resources, they realized that in order 
for those resources to be developed in Saskatchewan’s interests — 
and I stress, Saskatchewan’s interests — they had to be developed 
by Saskatchewan people. 
 
And was there a foreign investor willing to develop our sodium 
sulphate resources? No, it took the public sector through 
Saskatchewan Minerals. Was there any major oil company built in 
Saskatchewan by private greed? No, Mr. Speaker, it took the 
public sector to develop Saskatchewan Oil. And was there any 
foreign corporation or non-Saskatchewan group of investors who 
were willing to establish a major potash corporation or hard rock 
mining company based here, with its ownership and control here 
in Saskatchewan? No, there wasn’t one. It took the determination 
and the courage and the vision of Saskatchewan people acting 
together through their public sector to develop the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation. 
 
And finally I want to turn to one other example, and that’s the 
example of Ipsco here in Regina. And I think that everyone would 
agree that the middle of the Regina plain, hundreds of miles away 
from iron or coal, is a pretty unlikely place for a steel mill. It was 
first developed and established by private investors as a pipe mill. 
It soon obtained public sector equity investment from the 
provincial government and became a sound and successful steel 
and pipe operation. It’s another example of the Saskatchewan 
partnership, the Saskatchewan pragmatic approach, the 
Saskatchewan mixed economy. 
 
And in this government’s haste to rewrite Saskatchewan history, 
this minister of privatization grossly and unfairly misrepresents 
our shared and common experience as a province and a people. 
He’s unwilling to admit, or afraid to admit, that the Saskatchewan 
tradition is one of practicality. It’s one of a mixed economy, men 
and women working together in their communities for the 
common good not merely private gain, and for the future of their 
family and their children; for the public interest, not merely for 
their private interest; the reality of the Saskatchewan economy, not 
the myth of PC privatization. 
 
And so I submit to you, Mr. Minister of privatization, that your 
ideology of privatization is simply one of myth. It’s based on 
myth. You know that it runs counter to the 

actual daily experience of this province and its people. You know 
that your PC privatization agenda is a betrayal of Saskatchewan 
and her people. You know that this privatization policy is being 
opposed by Saskatchewan people, and that is why you have such 
difficulty explaining it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have travelled this province for and wide. 
You’ve had your meetings on privatization in a number of 
communities throughout Saskatchewan, and so it’s obvious that 
you must have some sort of plan for privatization. Tonight I would 
like you to explain to the people of this province what exactly your 
plan for privatization and how does the privatization of the 
school-based children’s dental plan fit into that plan for 
privatization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I listened with interest 
to the opening remarks of the member opposite and, before I 
would respond to them, I’d like to introduce my officials who will 
be with me tonight. Seated beside me is the deputy minister of the 
Department of Public Participation, and that is Mr. Graham 
Parsons; and behind him is assistant deputy minister, Mr. Ken 
Brehm. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s beside you? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m sorry I missed that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Ken Brehm and Graham Parsons. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Brehm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Brehm. Seated right behind me, right behind 
Mr. Parsons. 
 
I listened with interest to the member’s comments who indicated 
. . . I think she started off talking about ideology, and I think it 
would be interesting if the member opposite would acknowledge 
that there are many countries around the world, of various 
ideological stripe, that are embarking upon a large number of 
public participation initiatives, and just for the knowledge of the 
people here I would just list a few of these: Poland, Portugal, 
France, Spain, Finland, Denmark. And the list goes on: Belgium, 
Sweden, Turkey, the U.S.S.R., West Germany, Australia, New 
Zealand, Guam, Iraq, Israel. 
 
(2300) 
 
In fact, if I went through all of these pages, Mr. Chairman, that I 
have here, I could take up considerable time in the House tonight 
indicating various countries around the world, various countries 
around the world — approximately 50 — of all different political 
stripes, right from the U.S.S.R. to Great Britain, for example, 
where we see various initiatives of public participation. 
 
So yes, it is the wave of the world that we live in; it is the wave of 
the 1990s; and, yes, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are going to 
be taking part in it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Saskatchewan way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s correct. As my colleague says, we 
will be doing it the Saskatchewan way. I see the 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2601 
 

member opposite, and I hear the member from Regina starting to 
. . . Lakeview . . . laugh and cackle about the Saskatchewan way. 
Now that’s fine if she wants to laugh at things that are done the 
Saskatchewan way. Personally, as a person who has lived all my 
life in Saskatchewan, I’m very proud of the things that we do the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Because we do have a unique blend, we do 
have a unique way of putting things together in this province — 
albeit we are a small population of 1,000 people; albeit that there 
are people that have suffered from time to time with the droughts, 
with the problems of nature; where it is not easy to making a 
living in this country; where our ancestors came here, settled in a 
prairie land and built a society through various types of 
movements, be they co-op movements, be they private individual 
movements, partnerships, various blends of entrepreneurships that 
we as Saskatchewan people are all proud of. 
 
And the member opposite mentioned a number of co-ops. And 
certainly there is a great similarity between the co-op movement 
that is a strong part of what is the Saskatchewan fabric. Many of 
us, I would imagine every member in this place today has, at some 
time belonged to some type of a co-op, or his family has. 
 
But I can tell you that what we’re wanting to do with the assets of 
the province of Saskatchewan is very closely related to the growth 
of the co-op movement, and that is to take these assets that we 
have as a government and to share them with the people of this 
province with true ownership, true ownership, and the ability for 
them to be true partners in building and developing this fine 
province — in providing jobs, and in diversifying our economy — 
so that the ordinary person of Saskatchewan, as can be attested 
today, can share in a Power Plus Bond, can share in real shares of 
the development of this province in this year and in subsequent 
years that they can use for themselves for their collateral or pass 
on to succeeding generations. That’s what public participation is 
the Saskatchewan way, and that’s the kind of development that’s 
taking place across this country. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, when the member opposite mentions that, yes, 
there’s the co-op movement was big in building Saskatchewan, I 
don’t deny it played a significant part. I don’t deny, either, that to 
build some of the things that we’ve built in this province that 
we’re all proud of, like our medical systems and so on, that we did 
get the advice of outside expertise. I remember when the medicare 
system started in this province, and I remember that some of the 
people who came over here to guide it and to help build it came 
from Great Britain, the same as there are people who are coming 
today to help and advise us in the development of public 
participation, as they are around the world to many other 
countries. 
 
And I’m not embarrassed to say that this idea started in Great 
Britain, started under a Thatcher government, started under a 
Conservative government, because, by golly, I think when we 
heard Prime Minister Thatcher speak the other day in the 
Parliament of Canada, that 

people around the world said, yes, there is a great leader; yes, there 
is one of the greatest leaders of the 20th century, and I support her 
. . . and I support her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As do many other people across this nation 
and around the world. So I want to say to you at the beginning: 
yes, we are in vogue with the times; yes, we are doing what other 
people are doing around the world; and yes, we will get the advice 
of people where we can get it, the best advice available to us, 
because I think that’s only prudent and wise; and yes, we will have 
public participation the Saskatchewan way, hatched here, made 
here, delivered here — not for just the present — for succeeding 
generations. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve just received a very 
feeble response, but I just want to talk about the Saskatchewan 
way that you’ve just gone on at some lengths about. You talk 
about the Saskatchewan way and how your privatization strategy 
is the Saskatchewan way. And then you talk about Margaret 
Thatcher and how she was in Canada and gave a wonderful speech 
and how . . . You know what you’re showing me, Mr. Minister? 
You’re showing me that you can do nothing other than cling to the 
skirt of Margaret Thatcher. That’s what you’re showing me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And you tell me . . . you tell me, Mr. Minister 
of privatization, that this is the Saskatchewan way, and then you 
acknowledge that you’ve imported this privatization ideology, this 
economic fad of your government from Britain, from the premier 
of Britain, of Mrs. Margaret Thatcher. 
 
Now I want to talk about the Saskatchewan way, and you talk 
about participating and being involved and being stakeholders in 
this privatization strategy of yours, and I want to talk about how 
people have been stakeholders. Let’s talk about the Poplar River 
mine, Manalta Coal, Fred Mannix of Calgary. How were 
Saskatchewan people stakeholders in this sell-out of a 
Saskatchewan coal mine? 
 
I want to talk about the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
drag-line, another deal to Manalta Coal, Fred Mannix of Calgary, 
where we lent them, or we guaranteed the note on the Toronto 
Stock Exchange so they could purchase this $45 million asset. 
And then what do we do? We rent it back. Some deal, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And let’s talk about how Saskatchewan people participated in 
PAPCO’s (Prince Albert Pulp Company) sell-off to 
Weyerhaeuser. Here we have Weyerhaeuser from Tacoma, 
Washington. How is that Saskatchewan people participating — 
participating in the sell-off of a Saskatchewan asset? 
 
And then we had Saskoil; then we have Saskoil. This is a 
company, a good, solid, Saskatchewan oil company that fired 25 
per cent of the workers within one year. How is that participation 
for Saskatchewan workers, Mr. Minister? And then you bought a 
$65 million Alberta oil 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2602 
 

company. How is that participation for Saskatchewan people? And 
within one year, 75 per cent of the shares were held by people 
outside of Saskatchewan. How is that really Saskatchewan people 
having a stake in this Saskatchewan oil company? 
 
And then we had the Highways department. You laid off, you 
fired 157 Highways workers, and you sold $40 million worth of 
Saskatchewan equipment for $6 million. How is that 
Saskatchewan people participating in privatization? They lose 
their jobs. That’s how they participate. 
 
And then you have the sell-off of SaskCOMP and SaskTel, and it 
becomes WESTBRIDGE. You haven’t released any details of the 
agreements. No details have been released, no documents, no 
agreements, nothing. 
 
And then we have Saskatchewan Minerals. Let’s talk about how 
that particular company encouraged Saskatchewan ownership. 
Sold to two companies outside of Saskatchewan — one in 
Ontario, and one in Quebec. And what happens? You go to 
Chaplin and you guarantee those workers’ jobs, and people are 
laid off — some guarantee by this minister of privatization who 
says Saskatchewan people will have a stake in this company — 
lay-offs and sell-offs to an out-of-province company. And then we 
have the privatization of parks. How have those park workers 
participated? How have the workers at the Moose Jaw Wild 
Animal Park, how have they participated, Mr. Minister? Answer 
that question. 
 
And then we have the privatization of the dental plan. We saw 
how Saskatchewan people participated in that particular 
privatization — 411 dental workers fired by your government, 
dismissed, herded into hotel rooms and told: you’re gone; we’re 
privatizing the school-based children’s dental program. The 
services are poorer in rural Saskatchewan; there are very few 
dental clinics that people in rural Saskatchewan have access to. 
They used to have access to 338 clinics, now they have access to 
70 dentists that are practising in rural Saskatchewan. Some 
participation, and you call that the Saskatchewan way. That’s not 
the Saskatchewan way. And then you sell off SED Systems to 
Fleet Aerospace of Ontario, and then you buy back the bricks and 
mortar — no guarantees that Saskatchewan people will have jobs, 
no guarantees that that technology won’t be moved out of 
Saskatchewan. And you call that the Saskatchewan way? Some 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
You didn’t answer the question, Mr. Minister. I asked you what 
your plans were for privatization. Either you have one or you 
don’t. And if you have one, you should table it, and if you don’t 
have one, you’re nothing but a floundering minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly the member just goes on and 
on and misquotes facts — her figure on Saskoil shares is simply 
wrong, simply wrong, and she continues to say that. But I mean, I 
guess that’s her prerogative to give the wrong figure. But I will 
certainly indicate to you . . . she mentions Weyerhaeuser, and I 
know that the opposition are against Weyerhaeuser. They 
preferred to 

keep PAPCO and losing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — $91,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, $91,000 a day, that’s correct — 
$91,000 a day in the 20 months prior to the sale; I think it was 
$26,000 was lost by PAPCO in the 20 months after the sale to 
Weyerhaeuser — $63.5 million has turned to the government. 
 
I said many times, and I see members from Prince Albert in 
attendance tonight and they must know that it’s correct, that there 
are approximately 700 people working there, building a paper 
mill. And that’s a considerable number of people in my mind, 700 
people building a paper mill, a paper mill that is state of the art, 
one of the best in the world, right in Prince Albert, that will have 
150 permanent employees, bringing in about half a million dollars 
a month into Prince Alberta, Saskatchewan. And the member 
opposite criticizes that — you criticize that. I don’t know from 
whence you come, other than you believe that the government 
should own everything. 
 
You are against the Weyerhaeuser deal. We have done a poll. 
Decima Research, they’re a very credible research group, have 
polled in Saskatchewan’s a large number of people. And you 
know what the people say? Seventy-five per cent of the people 
polled are in favour of the deal with Weyerhaeuser, but still the 
NDP opposition in this House stand up and say it was a bad deal. 
 
Now I noticed with interest, and I see the member from Lakeview, 
who was, I believe, earlier from Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan. I 
happened to be in her home town just last week with 3,000 of the 
people from the Meadow Lake area. Well I see the member, who 
wasn’t there, says there was 2,000, but that is difficult or 
misleading. She didn’t attend, but she says there was 2,000. 
However, I don’t know how she knows when she wasn’t there, but 
well be it, it’s probably like her statistics on Saskoil. 
 
However, they were there, and I saw an opportunity and I visited 
there three or four weeks before and talked to the employees from 
Green Lake and from Meadow Lake. And I said, you know, what 
about public participation, or what about buying into this saw 
mill? And you know what? Ninety-five per cent of them said, right 
on the money; let us have an opportunity. 
 
And I met with the local tribal council, 10 Indian bands and their 
chiefs, sat around the table with them, had a good chat with them, 
a very good talk. Are you interested in this? And they said, we 
certainly are. Ten Indian bands as the shareholders along with the 
employees. 
 
And new products. Can you believe chopsticks in Meadow Lake, 
Saskatchewan? You know how many they’re going to produce? 
Over a billion year. And I don’t know, probably the member from 
Rosemont has an idea of what a billion chopsticks are like, but I 
don’t know what a billion chopsticks represents. So I said, could 
you boil it down to me into something that the average person 
understands of what a billion chopsticks looks like? And in the 
terms that I think everyone over there could understand, it means 
about two train carloads of chopsticks a day being produced in 
Meadow Lake, 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2603 
 

Saskatchewan, and that translates into jobs, and that translates into 
new products, and that is what public participation Saskatchewan 
is. 
 
And you know when we raised this in the House, you know what 
the Leader of the Opposition said? I’ll reserve judgement. I’ll 
reserve judgement. Look, can you not stand up once and say 
something is right, that something is good for Indian bands, that 
something is good for employees? Do you have to say, because 
there is building and diversification and development, I’ll reserve 
judgement, because that’s exactly what the NDP said. And I 
cannot understand how a person who grew up in the town of 
Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan, got their education there, had their 
roots there, wouldn’t stand up in this House and say: right on; 
right on, for my home town! Build jobs, diversify, and give our 
people an opportunity to take part in the development of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(2315) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: I’m afraid, Mr. Chairperson, that the minister of 
privatization obviously didn’t hear the question, so I will restate it 
again. Mr. Minister of privatization, I ask you whether or not you 
have a privatization plan. And either you do and you should table 
it; either you do and you should outline it to the people of 
Saskatchewan tonight, because you have said that this process is 
going to be open . . . So I ask you tonight to articulate your 
privatization plan for Saskatchewan in order that all Saskatchewan 
people can know what you’re up to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Most certainly, I’d be more than pleased to 
do that. The public participation . . . Let’s get one thing straight 
right at the beginning. The member opposite insists on saying the 
privatization plan. I must say, and there are some from their seats 
. . . The member from Saskatoon who usually speaks from his 
seat, very seldom stands in this House, says piratization. Well you 
can put whatever label you want on it, but I want to explain to you, 
Mr. Chairman, that there are four dimensions in public 
participation, and that’s what we’re undertaking, is public 
participation the Saskatchewan way. 
 
And let me illustrate to you what step one of public participation is 
and what our plan is. Public participation in Saskatchewan is the 
offering of bonds and shares to the people of Saskatchewan. And 
certainly I think that you see today, before the people of 
Saskatchewan, are the Power Plus bonds, in which the ordinary 
people of Saskatchewan can access a bond for as little as $100. 
And it will be those people who are served first, that there is a 
guarantee of a bond for every Saskatchewan person who would 
want to buy one — $100. They can buy them through their power 
bill; they can buy them through the local credit union; they can 
buy them through their bank, or they can buy them through a 
broker — whatever way they would want, in dimensions of as low 
as $100. And you don’t have to come up with the full $100 at the 
beginning — you pay a quarter down and then three other equal 
instalments. 

So that’s one aspect. Now that bond, that power bond, has a 
convertible factor. If the person wants to exercise his authority to 
convert that bond into a Saskoil share, he has three years in which 
to do that. 
 
So that’s one part of public participation, is the offering of bonds 
and shares to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, with . . . 
employees can get them, government employees can get them by 
payroll deductions. They’re accessible to all people, and the small 
denominations will be served first. 
 
Now let us go to a second aspect of that. She mentioned the 
WESTBRIDGE Computer company, and correct — in the not too 
distant future there’s going to be shares in the WESTBRIDGE 
Computer company offered to the people of Saskatchewan. Again, 
easily accessible; again, in dimensions that the ordinary person can 
afford. And I believe that these are the things that people are 
saying to me as I travel the province and saying, yes, we want an 
opportunity to participate in the building of this province, and yes, 
we want to have a share in one of the largest computer-based 
companies in western Canada. 
 
So I cite that as one example of our plan of public participation. 
And there will be more; there will likely be shares in SaskTel. 
There may be bonds in SaskTel. There may be government bonds. 
There may be other share offerings as further things are put out for 
public participation. Certainly we are looking at the possibility of 
putting out shares in the general side of SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). So those are some examples of one plank 
of public participation, see after the plan — that’s part of it. 
 
Secondly, employee buy-ins, we would like to see . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . I’m on to the second one; you’re going to get all 
four; just bide your time. The second one is employee buy-ins, and 
that is where employees who are providing a service for the 
government at this time may say to the government, look it, we 
would like to buy into that service, form a company or corporation 
or whatever it may be, and take over the delivery of that service. 
And I think one can think of many ways in which that could be 
exercised. So employee buy-ins is a second aspect of public 
participation. 
 
A third aspect of public participation, and some that is going on at 
this time, is the contracting out of services, where services that are 
being provided now by in-house staff may be provided by people 
in the private sector. And I guess the one that I would cite in that 
as a good example is the auditing of the Crown corporations. 
Previously it was all done by publicly employed auditors, and now 
we have a lot of that being done by the auditing expertise that’s 
out there in the various parts of Saskatchewan. I think it’s being 
well received and being done very well. 
 
Ditch mowing in the highways, last year we had contracts for that 
— I think about 10 contracts if I remember correctly — and they 
came in at a considerable saving over the in-house cost. And I 
believe we have about 25 contracts that are going out this year in 
various parts of Saskatchewan to contract out the ditch mowing to 
farmers or whoever may want apply for this. That’s the 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2604 
 

third aspect. So there’s bonds and shares, there’s employee 
buy-ins, and then there is the contracting out of services. 
 
The fourth one, the fourth one is what the member alludes to, and 
that is what I would call privatization. And I call privatization the 
sale of a publicly owned asset to a private firm, and I cite 
Weyerhaeuser as the example — and we’ve just been through that 
discussion, and to expedite the estimate I won’t go over that again, 
but we can look at Weyerhaeuser where we all know there’s been 
a lot of value added. We can look at Sask Minerals, the peat moss 
division, and the sodium sulphate plant where we have about $16 
million coming into our province which can be used to build and 
diversify. 
 
So if the member wants the plan, certainly that is the plan. It is a 
four-dimensional plan. Many of them are taking place. They will 
go forward simultaneously. You will see bond interest . . . bond 
purchases and share purchases going on simultaneously. You’ll 
see employee buy-ins. You’ll see contracting out. You’ll see some 
sale of assets and asset development taking place over the next 
few years, all as part of Public Participation. So I hope that gives 
you some indication of the plan that we have in store. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I could have articulated that 
plan that you just articulated to the legislature by simply reading 
Michael Walker’s comments in the Fraser Institute Forum 
booklet. I mean that’s nothing new, Mr. Minister — that’s nothing 
new. 
 
I mean, we know that privatization . . . your agenda is not 
restricted to Crown corporations. We know that you’re going to 
contract out work that’s presently done by the public sector to the 
private sector. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like the dental nurses. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Like the dental nurses, as my colleague says. 
You’ve contracted that work out to dentists. We know that you’ve 
introduced user fees, whereby only those who require services like 
prescription drugs pay for it as opposed to paying for it through a 
system of compulsory taxation. And we know that you’ve been 
involved in deregulation of certain operations of government 
which leads to a reduction of the number of public employees 
doing work in Saskatchewan. That’s not new. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you say that privatization is only such when 
you privatize assets that are publicly owned and you sell them off 
to places like Weyerhaeuser. How do you explain, Mr. Minister, 
the word “privatization” in the Crown investment corporation 
annual report . . . or the Crown Management Board annual report 
where they say that the audit services of the Crown corporations 
have been privatized. You say that’s contracting out, but your own 
Crown Management Board of Saskatchewan says that that’s 
privatization. How do you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I’ll just explain it that . . . I’ve explain 
what I call “contracting out”. You asked me for the plan. I believe 
that the . . . if you want to quibble over a word, that’s fine, if that’s 
important to you, but I believe 

when you have something that is done in-house and you contract 
to a professional group outside, in my mind that’s contracting out. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, your own Crown 
Management Board calls that privatization. That’s not really 
having the public participate in the delivery of services in this 
province. They don’t participate in ownership; that work is done 
by private enterprise, private individuals, and people who used to 
do that as public sector employees are laid off. That’s 
privatization, and hardly public participation. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’d be interested in knowing what your overall 
philosophy, as the minister of privatization, is. I’d like to know 
what your philosophy is and what are your goals and objectives 
for the next year. How will you know whether or not you’ve been 
a success? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I guess one of the ways that you’ll 
always measure if you’re a success, and I think all governments do 
that, is by polling, and the recent poll was not discouraging, let me 
put it that way. There was a lot of people who were very, very 
supportive of various aspects of public participation. 
 
What are the goals and the objectives? The goals and the 
objectives of public participation the Saskatchewan way is simply 
to diversify this economy, to give people, Saskatchewan people, a 
greater stakeholdership in the building of this economy, where 
possible to have value added, new products developed, and to 
have job creation from these initiatives, as well, as I might say, to 
improve the level of delivery of the services that would be put up 
for public participation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have a paper here that 
obviously is a paper delivered by yourself, dated March 1988. And 
this is how you say you’re going to evaluate public participation. 
You say that: 
 

The department will evaluate all public participation 
opportunities with the objective of ensuring that the people 
of Saskatchewan receive: 
 
(1) full benefit from the use of public assets to increase 
employment and increase employment and create economic 
and investment opportunity; 
 
(2) increased opportunities for personal and employee 
ownership; and 
 
(3) more effective and efficient public services at good value 
for money. 

 
Now those are your objectives, Mr. Minister, and I just want to 
review those objectives because you’re the minister of 
privatization, you’re the person that has set these objectives down 
for yourself, and I want to just do a little work tonight here, Mr. 
Minister, determining whether or not you’re met your objectives. 
 
Now you say that you intend to ensure that Saskatchewan people 
get full benefit from the use of public assets to increase 
employment and create economic and 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2605 
 

investment opportunities. Let’s just evaluate this. 
 
Did the highways workers who were fired in the sell-off of the 
highways equipment, did that increase employment and create 
economic and investment opportunities? No, it didn’t. The dental 
plan, when you fired those 411 dental workers, did that increase 
employment and create economic and investment opportunity? It 
certainly did not. The drag-line to Manalta Coal, did that increase 
employment opportunities and create economic and investment 
opportunities here in Saskatchewan? No. The Poplar River mine, 
the answer is no; Sask Minerals, no; SED Systems, no. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Minister, based on those examples, you have failed, 
and failed miserably on your first objective of privatization. Now 
then you say you want to ensure that Saskatchewan people receive 
increased opportunity for personal and employee ownership. 
 
Let’s just evaluate some other privatizations — the PAPCO sale to 
Weyerhaeuser. Did that increase opportunity for personal and 
employee ownership here in Saskatchewan? No. SED Systems 
sale to Fleet — increased opportunities for people here in 
Saskatchewan? Personal ownership, employee ownership? The 
drag-line and mine to Manalta? No. Sask Minerals? No. The 
dental plan? No. 
 
You’ve once again failed, Mr. Minister, in meeting the second 
objective of privatization. In every one of these examples, Mr. 
Minister, not one share is publicly available to Saskatchewan 
people — not one share. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you go on and you say that your right-wing 
PC ideology is trying, you’re trying to meet these objectives. And 
at least you’re consistent on that score. You seem to have both feet 
planted in the past and you’re facing backwards. That’s what 
you’re doing, Mr. Minister. 
 
And then you go on and you say that you want to meet the third 
objective of a more effective and efficient public services at good 
value for money. And the one I think about, Mr. Minister, is your 
little privatization of the children’s school-based dental plan. You 
certainly did not meet that objective, Mr. Minister, when you 
decided to fire those 411 people. You haven’t created an effective 
and efficient public service. Farm families have to drive mile and 
miles. They no longer have the opportunity to have that service 
provided for them at their school. The opportunity is no longer 
there. And once again, Mr. Minister, you’re not providing a 
service for good value for money. You’re not doing it, Mr. 
Minister. So I think if you look at how you’ve succeeded in terms 
of meeting your objectives, Mr. Minister, clearly you’ve failed on 
all counts. 
 
(2330) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would be interested in knowing if you can 
tell me the cost of some of these high flying people that you’ve 
brought in from England and elsewhere to advise you on how to 
privatize and sell off Saskatchewan assets. And I’d like you to 
explain to the people of this province how bringing in people like 

Madsen Pirie and Oliver Letwin is really the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I see the member opposite mentions 
many things that have taken place prior to the formation of the 
Department of Public Participation. But be that as it may, if that’s 
what she wishes to do, I will give you some indications here of 
just the impact upon the various aspects of public participation 
upon Saskatchewan people. Just roughly adding up here, I see 
about 50 million . . . excuse me, 50,000 different owners of bonds 
in the SaskPower series that have come forward over time. And 
also in the revenues that have come in, about $160 million in 
Saskoil shares and bonds, about 20,000 owners. And in 
Weyerhaeuser about $236 million in revenue, as I said previously, 
700 jobs, 150 more to come; also a dividend by Weyerhaeuser of 
$63.6 million in the first 20 months. WESTBRIDGE computer 
company, about 50 new jobs to date and 6 million in new 
contracts outside of the province of Saskatchewan. Sask Minerals 
at $12.5 million of revenue coming in, an employee profit sharing 
plan that was not there before. Premier Peat, at $3.4 million of 
new money coming in, some new technology in the peat moss, 
plus a grant to the university. 
 
Meadow Lake Sawmill, $6 million, about 400 jobs coming into 
Meadow Lake — modernization, diversification, new users of 
both hardwoods and softwoods. I was impressed the night I was 
up there when I heard the man who was heading up the new pulp 
mill at Meadow Lake indicate that they would using a technology 
— and I don’t understand this technology, but it was called a 
steam explosion technology, and it would be the first of its type 
used in the world. And I think that’s significant for a town like 
Meadow Lake of 4,000 people to have a world-leading technology 
to locate in their town. That has significant benefits for the town of 
Meadow Lake. 
 
The Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park, about $15,000 coming in 
there, some 13 jobs — $800,000 new amusement park through the 
investment. So you know, I mean, maybe you want to criticize that 
kind of activity, I don’t know. So those are some of the benefits to 
the people of Saskatchewan, where they do share, they are having 
an opportunity to be in the building and the diversification of our 
province. 
 
You mentioned that you didn’t think the contracting out of the 
auditing services was public participation. Well I ask you who the 
auditors who got the contracts were if they were not the public of 
Saskatchewan? They have an opportunity to take part and to make 
money and to earn money by doing work for the government. And 
I believe that is public participation. 
 
You ask about Madsen Pirie, the amount of money or something 
paid to him. I can indicate to the member opposite that in the case 
in the Madsen Pirie there was no action and no activity between 
Madsen Pirie and the Government of Saskatchewan. I believe it 
was a group of private individuals around the province of 
Saskatchewan that contracted to bring Madsen Pirie into our 
province. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, how about Oliver Letwin? 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2606 
 

How much are you paying Oliver Letwin to advise the 
Government of Saskatchewan how to sell off the assets that have 
been built up by the people of this province over many, many 
years? How much is Oliver Letwin, the British person who now 
works with Rothschild & Sons, how much is he being paid by 
Saskatchewan people and how is that the Saskatchewan way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In regard to Mr. Oliver Letwin, who I 
should point out has been and is a consultant to many 
governments around the world, the Department of Public 
Participation engaged the firm. He works for a firm. We engaged 
the international consulting firm of N.M. Rothschild & Sons 
Limited from February 1, 1988 to March 31, ’88. And Dr. Oliver 
Letwin is a member of that firm and has thus consulted in this 
province as well as in many areas around the world. 
 
The objectives of the contract was to advise the minister and his 
department on public participation policies and practices. As well, 
the contract called for a review of the possible public participation 
program in Saskatchewan and provide a report outlining the public 
participation opportunities available in the Crown sector. The 
contract was completed as drafted, and the firm was paid £20,000 
for the report and the advice. The specific words from the contract 
are as follows, and I quote: 
 

To undertake a review of assets and activities of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and its Crown corporations 
that could be candidates for public participation initiatives 
and to provide a final written report on the findings and 
recommendations on financial and strategic options. 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — So the people of Saskatchewan paid out over 
$44,000 for one month’s work to Oliver Letwin of Rothschild & 
Sons, which is a British corporation, to come in here and advise 
our minister, advise our government how to sell off Saskatchewan. 
How is that the Saskatchewan way? You didn’t answer that, Mr. 
Minister. How is it the Saskatchewan way to bring in some person 
from out of Canada, out of Saskatchewan, in Great Britain, to 
advise your government how to sell off Saskatchewan? And how 
is that the Saskatchewan way? You didn’t answer that, Mr. 
Minister. How is it the Saskatchewan way to bring in some person 
from out of Canada, out of Saskatchewan, in Great Britain, to 
advise your government to sell off Saskatchewan? And how is that 
the Saskatchewan way which you see to be trotting all over 
Saskatchewan, talking about the Saskatchewan way? We see it on 
television. We hear it on the radio. We see it in newspaper ads, 
Mr. Minister, and how is bringing in Oliver Letwin the 
Saskatchewan way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well first of all, let me reiterate to the 
member that the contract with Rothschild’s, and it isn’t just Oliver 
Letwin, it’s with their firm, so there’s a number of individuals. She 
said one month; it was two months. There were about three 
individuals that were here. 
 
And she said, how is it the Saskatchewan way. And I guess she 
failed to listen to my opening remarks, or chose not to, where I 
said that what is happening, and you can check Oliver Letwin, and 
you can check Rothschild’s credentials, and I think they will 
measure up with any in the world. I would challenge you to do 
that. I would ask 

you to contact various countries in which Rothschild’s have gone 
in as advisers to all political stripes right around the world. They 
are, I suppose, the best in the business, so to say. 
 
You say, how is this the Saskatchewan way. I tell you it’s the 
same type of Saskatchewan way that your predecessors of your 
ideological stripe, Woodrow Lloyd and Tommy Douglas, when 
they were working on medicare, if you check back in the records, 
you’ll find that some of the main architects of the Saskatchewan 
medical care system were people who had come over from 
Britain. Exactly the same sort of thing. And I think you would say 
that that was the Saskatchewan way in those days when Woodrow 
Lloyd and Tommy Douglas were trying to put together a medical 
care system. And they brought people in from England, and I 
don’t think anyone complained. 
 
We are in Public Participation. There is a firm in England, 
Rothschild’s, who are leaders in the world in this. We have 
contracted some of those people for their advice, and I believe that 
is the Saskatchewan way, to find the best advice you can to advise 
you on how they see it could be done. You take that advice. You 
go out and talk to the people of Saskatchewan, as I do almost 
daily, to talk to people in various parts of this country to get their 
ideas and their concerns. And together that blend . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . and if you want to keep mumbling, please go 
ahead. Some time I’d like to see you stand in this House and say 
something, but if you like to mumble and grumble as the night 
goes on, you go right ahead with that, please. But I just want to 
indicate to you that I believe that is the mix and that is the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I have some 
questions as well, Mr. Chairperson, to the minister who hides 
behind the skirts of Margaret Thatcher and the coat-tails of Oliver 
Letwin; who imports foreigners into Saskatchewan to tell 
Saskatchewan people what the Saskatchewan way is and to tell the 
government how to sell off Saskatchewan assets, Mr. Minister, 
Mr. Chairperson. I have some questions for the minister who 
listens to right-wing extremists like the Fraser Institute while the 
rest of the Tory seals back there sit back on their flippers and clap 
their hands in mindless unison, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
And I want to direct the government’s attention specifically to the 
school-based children’s dental program, which was the first, the 
very first thing that this government privatized after the election in 
1986, Mr. Chairperson, which is a prime example of how 
privatization by the PC government does not work, Mr. Minister. 
They took an extremely effective program, a program that was 
effective from the point of view of reaching out to many, many 
children in Saskatchewan, and effective from the point of view of 
it being a first-class preventative health care program. They took 
that program and they reduced the services, they reduced the 
number of children to whom it was available, and as well they 
reduced the number of services that were available under the plan. 
And in doing so, in privatizing this plan, they reduced the 
utilization of the plan, even, as a percentage of those people who 
are eligible under the new privatized plan. 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2607 
 

They reorganized it, they privatized it, they put it in the hands of 
the private sector while cutting back on services. And, Mr. 
Chairperson, I would like to just bring to the minister’s attention, 
if he hasn’t already seen it — and I’m sure he has — a quality 
evaluation of specific dental services provided by the 
Saskatchewan dental plan, which was a final report dated 
February, 1976, by a number of people who were looking 
independently at the Saskatchewan dental plan and giving some 
assessment as to how it is working, and I wish to quote from this 
report, Mr. Chairperson. They talk here about the results, the 
results that were obtained under the Saskatchewan dental plan: 
 

. . . indicating that just over 20 per cent of amalgam 
restorations placed by dentists tended towards a rating of 
unsatisfactory, whereas from 3 to 6 per cent of restorations 
placed by dental nurses were so rated. Conversely, 
approximately 15 per cent of deciduous tooth amalgams 
placed by dentists tended towards a rating of superior, while 
amalgams placed by dental nurses were rated as approaching 
a superior standard in 45 to 50 per cent of the restorations. 

 
It goes on to talk about other tables with respect to permanent 
tooth amalgams and goes on to illustrate, according to the tables, 
that the quality of health services under the public Saskatchewan 
dental plan was first-rate, Mr. Chairperson, if not superior . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — . . . if not superior to the private sector. And the 
evidence seems to indicate it was superior to the private sector, 
and there’s probably a good reason for that, and the reason is is 
that children take time, they take patience, they take a control, and 
it takes time for a person working on the teeth of a child to 
develop a rapport. And let’s face it, people in the private sector 
don’t have the time that a dental therapist may have had. 
 
And so the evidence is clear, the evidence is clear that the public 
plan was a high-quality plan, and probably a superior plan to any 
privatized plan in Canada. But this government blindly went ahead 
with an ideology gone wild, a right-wing ideology to privatize as 
much of the public sector as they possibly can, regardless of the 
cost, regardless of the cost financially, and regardless of the 
human cost, Mr. Chairperson. They’re blindly bent on the 
destruction of valuable, important public services, Mr. 
Chairperson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And this, as I said, the dental plan is just a prime 
example of their ill-conceived, ill-advised, short-sighted 
privatization policies which, Mr. Chairperson, will end up costing 
the taxpayers of this province more in the end, because when these 
children who are not utilizing the plan at this time get cavities and 
decide that they are going to utilize the plan, it’s going to cost a lot 
more to maintain their dental health care than it would have had 
we maintained the public plan which, in effect, was reducing the 
very need for its own services 

because it was operating so effectively as a preventive health care 
measure. 
 
(2345) 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you to tell me, with respect to the 
privatization of the school-based children’s’ dental plan, who wins 
under this, Mr. Minister? Do the dental workers, some 411 dental 
workers who were let go, fired, as a result of the privatization of 
this plan — do they win? Do the children over 14 years old who 
no longer have accessibility to this plan, Mr. Minister --- do they 
win? Do the children under five years old, the pre-schoolers who 
don’t have accessibility to this plan, Mr. Minister — do they win? 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, with respect to the privatization of this 
dental plan, who are the winners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I noticed that the 
member opposite started off her speech, her ripping speech I 
guess, it rips things up in here, with a kind of, again, saying it’s 
ideologically driven, you see. And I have here a number of 
examples that I think would be very interesting to share with 
members of the Assembly and with the viewing public. But, 
seeing that I think that most of the viewing public have gone to 
bed, I would hold this for tomorrow, because I think it would be 
very interesting; I just wouldn’t want to take the time of reading it 
twice. 
 
But I think many of the viewing public would be most interested 
in hearing about the long list. And you can see there is 
considerable number of initiatives of public participation in such 
conservative countries as Cuba, China, Hungary, the U.S.S.R., 
Sweden, Portugal, and Spain. But I think we’ll leave those till 
tomorrow so that we can share that with a bigger viewing 
audience than right now, because I’m sure that most people are 
doing something else rather than watching this debate. 
 
The member again indicates she wants to talk about the dental 
plan. I think my colleague, the member from Meadow Lake, has 
described in great detail in the Health estimates the whole plan on 
extended dental services to where many areas of the population 
that didn’t have access before to dental services now are getting 
them, and I mean that, the adult population. 
 
The members opposite like to always say that there was a clinic in 
every community, but they always failed to mention — I was a 
schoolteacher for 15 years, so I know from which I’m speaking — 
that those clinics were in those schools for sometimes as short as a 
month or two months. And they like to say that that was a ongoing 
clinic servicing all the society, which is simply not right. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake, the present Minister of Health, 
taught in the schools for many years. We both know what the 
school dental plan was like, and I know that the Minister of Health 
is using all his energies and all his abilities to build a true rural 
dental program in which people, both children and adults, will 
have access to dental services. 
 
But we could talk about this more and more in here, but I 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2608 
 

believe under the Health estimates, which just ended earlier this 
evening and had been going on for about three weeks, this has 
been gone over time and time again. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you attempt to justify your 
privatization on the grounds of public participation. I ask you, 
where is the public participation in the new school-based dental 
program when 14- to 17-year-olds are no longer covered; when 
under five is no longer covered, Mr. Minister; when 411 dental 
workers are now out of work? Mr. Minister, where’s your public 
participation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, Mr. Chairman, I don’t mind debating 
people who get their facts right, but those who do not are 
somewhat questionable, I mean, there are not 411 people. I heard 
the Premier a few days ago indicate the number of dental 
therapists that were not employed, but we can debate that again if 
it is the wish of the member. 
 
Certainly she excludes, as I said, the senior citizens, the adult 
population that do now have access to dental services that didn’t 
before. She says the 14- to 17-year-olds don’t have access. That’s 
simply not correct, they do; perhaps not insured, but they have 
access. But the member opposite stands up and again attempts to 
mislead and misled. Now let’s be fair in these estimates. And I 
don’t mind debating a point at all, that’s what estimates are for, 
but for goodness sake, let’s try and get the facts straight before we 
stand on our feet and give misleading statements, as the other 
member did about the number of Saskoil shares that were outside 
the province. 
 
I mean, there is a certain degree of dignity that has to accompany 
this place, and that is to . . . If you don’t agree with what is 
happening, that’s fine, that’s fine, and if you have a different 
political ideology, that’s fine, but do not try and exaggerate and 
expand facts to make your point. People want to see you be 
precise and to the point, and if there is disagreement, that’s okay, 
they will listen to both sides of the debate and the argument, and 
they will make their decision, and that’s what this forum is for. but 
don’t stand up and deliberately say things that are wrong. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, I can’t believe it. The minister 
who stands here and says there were not 411 dental workers put 
out of work and then attempts to chastise someone because of their 
facts. I suggest to the minister that once and for all he should get 
his facts straight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — There were 411 dental workers put out of work, 
Mr. Minister. Get your facts straight if you want to maintain your 
dignity, Mr. Minister. 
 
And with respect to access, who are you trying to fool by saying 
14- to 17-year-olds living out in rural Saskatchewan who may 
have to drive 50 to 100 miles to get to a dentist have access. That’s 
not access as they knew before, Mr. Minister, and the truth is, the 
facts are they are no longer in the plan. The truth is, the facts are 

there were 300 school-based community dental clinics out in rural 
Saskatchewan, and there’s only something like 71 now. And I 
understand — and I’ve asked the minister tonight how many of 
those dentists have backed off with respect to these clinics. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest before you accuse someone of not having 
the facts straight that you better get your facts straight, Mr. 
Minister. And I want to know from the minister, does this 
government, does this minister of privatization have any idea at all 
as to what is happening with respect to this dental plan and where 
it is heading? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Chairman, I have to 
draw your attention to it. The member stands up and says that 
there are 17-year-old students in this province that have to drive 
— and I’ll ask you to check the record — she says, a hundred 
miles for dental service. I’ve heard the Minister of Health say in 
this House that it is 50 kilometres. Now 50 kilometres is a heck of 
a lot different than a hundred miles, but the member opposite 
stands and says a hundred miles. 
 
Now she tries to insinuate that there is not expanded service. I’m 
going to take the time of the House — I’ll take the time of the 
House to run down the list. And I’m sure the Minister of Health 
has done this before, but it seems to be a real point with the 
member from Lakeview, so if she will sit quiet and listen we will 
give her all of the satellite clinics: satellite locations in Big River, 
in Blaine Lake, in Cupar, in Cut Knife, in Debden, in Delisle, in 
Dysart, in Earl Grey, in Edam, in Ituna, in Kelliher, in Lestock, in 
Lipton, in Maidstone, in North Battleford, Paradise Hill, Radville, 
Raymore, Saskatoon, Southey, St. Walburg, Strasbourg. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take it as read. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, she wanted to know where they were — 
Turtleford, Waldheim, Wawota, and Wolseley. Those are 
satellites. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — New principal locations: Assiniboia . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You forgot Shaunavon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well they say I forgot Shaunavon. Yes, I 
think that’s one that just came on in the last few weeks. 
 
Principal locations: Assiniboia, Lloydminster, Meadow Lake, 
Nipawin, Outlook, Prince Albert, and then Regina, Saskatoon, 
Swift Current, Warman, and Weyburn. And there’s a number in 
the cities. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I think that illustrates that what the Minister 
of Health has been doing, in consultation with the dentals . . . 
dentist society and the dentists, that there has been a growth of 
satellite clinics. There have been new dental clinics established. 
And once again let me indicate that these service the entire 
population; that the school children who are included in the dental 
plan are still in insured service, but the rest of the population have 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2609 
 

access to these dental services in a much broader perspective and 
much more than they did previously. So I think it is grossly unfair 
— grossly unfair — for the member opposite to try and stand up 
and take the population s a whole and say that dental services has 
been deteriorated, because as I read this and I see this, I see it as an 
expansion. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’ve just seen another fine 
performance of the minister of privatization where he accuses my 
colleague of not having her facts right, and he is wrong; where he 
accuses my colleague of misrepresenting the truth, and he’s 
wrong. And this minister of privatization says to the people of this 
province, trust me, I have a plan. I have a plan for privatization, 
when he doesn’t even have his facts straight. 
 
And this minister earlier tonight talked about Saskoil and how 
more than 25 per cent of the shares of Saskoil were owned by 
people in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Minister, I want to talk about 
the 1986 annual report of Saskoil. And here is a fact, Mr. Minister, 
and if you choose to go and get the annual report, you can confirm 
the facts for yourself. Now of the 19,636,238 common shares, 
only 3,793,328 are privately owned, and less than one quarter of 
those shares — 948,689 — are owned in Saskatchewan. That’s a 
fact. Of the 7,585,984 preferred shares, less than one quarter — 
1,869,197 — are owned in Saskatchewan. That’s a fact, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Earlier tonight, Mr. Minister, you said to the people of this 
province that Weyerhaeuser lost $91,000 a day, that PAPCO lost 
$91,000 a day. And tonight, Mr. Minister, I’m going to share with 
the people of Saskatchewan the truth, the truth that is the 
Saskatchewan way, because Saskatchewan people, if you know 
anything about us, tell the truth. 
 
Now here’s what PAPCO did. In 1980 under an NDP government, 
PAPCO made $23.5 million in profit — that’s a fact. In 1981 
under an NDP government PAPCO made $24.1 million — that’s a 
fact. You combine the two years, 1980 and 1981, the profit for 
PAPCO was $47.6 million, and that’s a fact, members of the Tory 
Party. 
 
Now let’s just examine what happened under a Conservative 
government — you know, that government that likes to call itself 
the keeper of business. They know how to run the province; they 
know how to make a buck. They say that they’re the private 
entrepreneurs, the private enterprisers of Saskatchewan. And they 
know efficiency, and they know how to keep the government on 
its toes, and run a mean and lean operation. Well let’s talk about 
. . . let’s talk about what happened to PAPCO under a 
Conservative government. 
 
In 1982 — that was the year that the Tory government was 
elected, April, 1982, we all remember that, PAPCO lost $9.4 
million — that’s a fact. In 1983 PAPCO lost, in the red, $29.1 
million — that’s a fact. In 1984 they made $5.2 million — that’s a 
fact. And in 1985 under a Conservative government PAPCO lost 
$33.6 million. So let’s compare the record. 
 
Under an NDP government PAPCO had a profit of $47.6 

million. Under a PC government, under a PC government — you 
know, the business people, the people that know how to run 
business in this province, the best brains of the Conservative party, 
lost $66.9 million — and that’s a fact. Auditor Peat Marwick 
Mitchell & Co checked the record. 
 
So when this government trots around the province and at their 
public participation meetings that they have in Moosomin and 
Rosetown and Estevan and Gull Lake, and they have information 
in their little package that they give to the public, they say PAPCO 
lost $91,000 a day, but they don’t tell the truth. PAPCO lost 
money under a Tory government, and PAPCO made money under 
an NDP government. And we know how to run business in this 
province. 
 
(2400) 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And this government is incompetent. This 
government’s privatization strategy has meant one of three things: 
you lose your job; you lose revenues to pay for health and 
education — that’s what happens; and you lose control over our 
own Saskatchewan economy. These guys want to give it away to 
big business and people in Ontario and Quebec and Tacoma, 
Washington, and who knows where else. 
 
And the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan, he sits there and 
laughs. Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, you can laugh your way out of 
a job, because the people of Saskatchewan are going to know what 
you people are doing, and they will defeat you in 1990 or 1991 
because you don’t know what you’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Deputy Minister, you can be sure of 
that because that will be a fact. 
 
Now I want the names and salaries and qualifications of all 
department staff of the ministry of privatization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well just to get the terminology right, I’m 
sure you must mean the Department of Public Participation, 
because there is no other department. If that’s what you’re 
wishing, then, Mr. Chairman, I’d ask her to ask that. 
 
But before then, I’d like to just indicate a few facts that would be 
of interest to you, Mr. Chairman, and others. I heard the member 
opposite talk about the shares, the Saskoil shares. I’d like to give 
you the facts on that: that on the first offering there were 8,165 
common shares, 8,294 preferred shares; and of those, of the 
common shares, 7,287, or 89 per cent, were held in Saskatchewan; 
and of the preferred shares, 7,254 — 87 per cent — were 
Saskatchewan holdings. 
 
Now the member opposite may see fit, in her ideology, to dictate 
to people what to do with the shares that they own. I believe that 
individuals, if they have shares, have the right to make the 
conscious decision of what they wish to do with those shares. And 
some people, as the share value goes up, may decide to sell that 
share. And 
  



 
June 27, 1988 

 

2610 
 

that is quite common in the stock market. That’s how it works. 
 
So just to have it straight, that when they were sold, 89 per cent of 
the common ones were held in Saskatchewan and 87 per cent of 
the preferred. And it’s very interesting to note, and I look at the 
report of the Crown Management Board, annual report ’87, and 
the last line on page 13 says: 
 
As a result of the share offering, CICs voting interest in Saskoil 
has been reduced to 47 per cent. 
 
So there still was, at that time, a 47 per cent ownership of Saskoil 
shares by the Crown investment corporation. 
 
The members on the other side, both of them who have spoke 
tonight — and it’s very, very strange to see, especially the one 
member who originally came from the North, being so critical of 
an issue that was to build and develop in reforestation in jobs in 
the North. But they’re very critical of the Weyerhaeuser 
transaction. 
 
I just want to add a couple more facts to the case that I think 
people would be interested in knowing about the Weyerhaeuser 
situation. I have indicated to you the 700 jobs; I’ve indicated to 
you the 150 new permanent jobs in Prince Albert; I’ve indicated to 
you the half a million dollars a month in wages from those 
permanent jobs that’ll be coming into Prince Albert. 
 
But here’s some other facts that might be very interesting to know. 
Of the subcontracts for the purchase from Saskatchewan suppliers 
and contractors, the subcontracts for the Weyerhaeuser project to 
Saskatchewan subcontractors and suppliers, $33 million. And that 
all relates into jobs and economic spin-off from that type of 
investment. The materials to the end of May, the materials, 
Saskatchewan purchased materials, another $31 million. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I think when you see facts like that, it is a 
strong indication that the objectives that I had laid out to you 
earlier for public participation, of diversification of jobs and of 
building and Saskatchewan people having a large share in this . . . 
Gosh, we were up there. My colleague, the member from 
Souris-Cannington who is seated beside me, and I, toured that, oh, 
two or three months ago. And I saw those 700 people working. I 
talked to them, and a large percentage of those workers were from 
Saskatchewan, and a very large percentage of them from right 
around the Prince Albert area, and most of them were right around 
the Prince Albert area. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Most of them are my guys. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member from Shellbrook-Torch River 
says he knows many of them that are working on that plant, and 
they tell him that they’re very proud of that expansion. They think 
it’s the right thing to do, and no wonder 75 per cent of the people 
of Saskatchewan say, right on the money, to that project. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, it being 12:05, I think we 
should adjourn tonight’s proceedings until tomorrow morning. So 
I would call it 10:00, I guess. 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:07 a.m. 


