


















































June 14, 1988 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 14, 1988 
 

 
2089 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, 46 grade 4 and 5 students from 
Palliser Heights School in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
already completed a tour of the building, and following question 
period today I look forward to having pictures with the students 
and sharing some drinks and the opportunity to answer questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 
me in welcoming these students to the Chamber here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, 
Mr. Speaker, introduce to you, and to the other members of the 
Assembly here today, 25 grade 7 and 8 students from Benson 
School in the constituency of Regina Rosemont. The students 
have been on a tour of the building. They’re accompanied by Dr. 
Ochitwa and Mr. Thompson, who’s doing the chaperoning. I’ll 
be meeting with them for pictures at 2:30 and then after for 
refreshments in the members’ dining hall. 
 
I take particular interest in welcoming this group. Dr. Ochitwa is 
my wife’s boss, and so I want all members of the Assembly to 
give them a particularly warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to introduce to the Assembly a group of 58 grade 
9 students from Assiniboia High School. They are seated in the 
east gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’ve had the opportunity to tour 
the building and I’ve had the privilege of meeting with them 
earlier today. They are accompanied by Mr. John Bumbac, Mr. 
Tim Nickel, Mr. Jim Stangel, and Ms. Sharon Uteck. 
 
I hope that the students and their teachers are enjoying their visit 
to the legislature, Mr. Speaker. I hope they’ve found it to be a 
useful experience. I hope they will enjoy question period, and I 
would invite all hon. members to help me welcome them to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
introduce some students here who are with us, 25 of them in the 
east gallery, grade 5 students from Henry Braun School in 
Regina, in the constituency of Regina North East. They are here 
to visit during question period, and I’m going to meet with them 
for pictures and some drinks and questions later on in room 218. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher Mrs. Ready; by their 
principal Mr. Wilson, and others: Mrs. Green, Mrs. Nolte, and 
Mr. Buchanan.

I would like to ask all of the members of the House to join with 
me in extending a warm welcome to these students who are with 
us here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce two gentlemen to you from the community of 
Moosomin, seated in the west gallery, two individuals who have 
really given of their time to work with the handicapped. Mr. Jack 
Ewasiuk, he’s manager of the Pipestone handicapped centre, and 
Mr. Gary Beckett, chairman of the Pipestone Kin-Ability board. 
Both of these gentlemen have really given themselves to working 
and providing service in the centre of Moosomin. I’m looking 
forward to meeting with them and members from the SARC 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres) this 
afternoon. 
 
Would you join me in welcoming them to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of Canada Post 
 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of 
the Minister of Rural Affairs, I’d like to address my question to 
the Premier. My question, Mr. Premier, is that I see in today’s 
press that Canada Post intends to go ahead with its plans to 
privatize all 5,221 rural post offices by 1996, and that’s not good 
news for the people of small town Saskatchewan. 
 
A week ago your minister met with Canada Post officials and 
came away happy. In fact, I quote, he said: 
 

If they do what they say they are going to do, postal service 
should even improve more in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Premier, I ask you: was your minister sold a bill of goods, or 
is your government selling the people of Saskatchewan a bill of 
goods? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have not received 
information from the minister with respect to the recent 
announcement, so I’ll take notice and respond to the individual. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
surely you’re aware of the negotiations between the federal 
government, Postes Canada, and your minister. Surely you’re 
aware of the effect of the closure of 5,221 rural post offices and 
the privatization of those post offices. I ask you, Mr. Premier: 
will you undertake to instruct your minister to inform Postes 
Canada that the government and the people of Saskatchewan are 
opposed to the closure and the privatization of rural post offices 
in our province? 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2090 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that our minister’s 
position with respect to protecting rural service has been very 
clear. And our government and the people of Saskatchewan 
support service in rural Saskatchewan, and we will encourage 
more and more service as opposed to less service. So the hon. 
member can rest assured that we will carry that message, and 
have carried it in the past. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. I’d like to 
know what method you’ll be using to carry this message to 
Canada Post. And I would like to know if you commit yourself 
to telling Brian Mulroney that his plans to privatize the small post 
offices in rural Saskatchewan are totally and unequivocally 
unacceptable to the Government of Saskatchewan and to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I ask you again, Mr. Premier: when and 
where will you carry this message? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we get many opportunities to 
carry the message to our counterparts, interprovincially and 
federally. And you just raised the point that the minister had been 
meeting with the federal officials, so that clearly explains that we 
do that on a regular basis and will continue to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — In light of the fact . . . supplementary. In 
light of the fact that the government has indicated their intention 
to privatize or close 5,221 post offices, I ask you, Mr. Premier: 
do you believe that your minister is being effective in his 
negotiations with the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that the ministers in 
this government have been very effective in negotiating with the 
federal government, and they have provided a great deal of 
money. 
 
The members opposite smile because they know, as a result of 
deficiency payments and as a result of drought payments and as 
a result of stabilization payments and changes to investment, 
changes to western energy policy, there have been tremendous 
advantages to rural Saskatchewan here and rural western Canada, 
so our negotiations have been very successful. 
 
I will also point out that he combines the whole thought of 
closure with privatization. He knows that we are encouraging 
more and more public participation and privatization, and in 
many, many cases it will provide, as he knows and as he sees in 
Prince Albert, 200 new jobs — not less jobs, new jobs, with 
complete new paper mill as a result of the private sector 
investing. 
 
So I am going to say, Mr. Speaker, that we will encourage the 
development of rural Saskatchewan and support it very much, 
and we’re making that message very clear in Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Premier.

Privatization in Saskatchewan has consistently shown a loss of 
jobs in areas where you’ve delved into that particular venture. 
And I want to suggest to you that in . . . the privatization of the 
rural post offices in Saskatchewan will cause a decline in 
services, a decline in jobs. 
 
And I want to ask you, on behalf of the people who work in that 
industry and on behalf of the small towns: are you willing to 
accept $4.50 an hour wages over the $12-plus that the postal 
people are paid in those rural towns? 
 
You’re doing all you can, Mr. Premier, to destroy small town 
Saskatchewan. You have done nothing to revitalize it. I want to 
know if you’ll review your policies and if you will unequivocally 
oppose privatization and closures of rural post offices in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s hardly 
an NDP represented in rural Canada any place . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And we know that. And those that are speak 
loudly from their seat and often even when we don’t request it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have defended and will continue to defend the 
growth of rural Saskatchewan towns and communities with rural 
gas, with individual line service, with irrigation, with deficiency 
payments, with all kinds of programs that will provide it. And we 
now see that the hon. member is more concerned about the wage 
levels of some individuals — some individuals — as he’s 
concerned about rural living, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why the NDP . . . the NDP have always come back to the 
. . . union leader will represent rural Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, until they learn that the union leader does not 
represent rural Saskatchewan, they will be isolated to one or two 
seats across western Canada at the best of times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Seizure of Assets by ACS 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s another 
example of how the Premier is helping rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, and it concerns the 
Ag Credit Corporation’s seizing of irrigation equipment 
belonging to one Harley Forsberg. Mr. Forsberg has been in 
arrears for some three years, yet you wait until June and he’s got 
his crop in and he’s got all of his input costs into his land before 
ACS walks in and takes off the equipment. Why let him go 
through all that expense just to now ensure that he’s not going to 
be able to reap a crop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the hon. 
member should recognize, and I believe that he knows that this 
case is before the courts, and the sheriff can move in when the 
sheriff sees fit. And it’s been five years, Mr. Speaker, where the 
individual has been in arrears in terms of payments and before 
the courts. And he knows that that’s the case. And I don’t control, 
I don’t control when 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2091 
 

the sheriff wants to come in and seize various kinds of 
equipment. And that’s exactly been the case. And while it’s 
before the courts, the hon. member knows that we don’t discuss 
it in great detail in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, a new 
question. Mr. Forsberg guaranteed a loan to his son. They were 
in trouble; they offered to give the irrigation equipment back. 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) said no, 
because they wanted more; they wanted the land as well. As I 
understand it, your new Bill 37 is supposed to give protection of 
sorts to this type of situation. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier: in light of your new Bill and all that 
you say it’s going to do to help Saskatchewan farmers, why are 
you now seizing property and not waiting until after you put the 
Bill through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know who’s been 
holding up the legislature, and it hasn’t been this side of the 
House. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. member that this 
case is before the courts, and he knows that it’s five years in 
arrears, and he knows when the court process finally takes in 
effect that the sheriff can make certain moves, and they have. 
And it is not my responsibility, nor is it under my control, to 
dictate when that will happen. 
 
Now obviously when we pass this legislation, then we will allow 
people to make changes and protect the home quarter. And still, 
at some point in time, Mr. Speaker, there has to be reasonable 
payments made to somebody because you can’t go on 
indefinitely without making payments. And if you’re something 
like five years in arrears, then the public and the taxpayer says, 
well at least make some contribution so that we know that there 
is reasonable good faith over time, and making it significant 
enough so that in fact we know that the farmer is serious. 
 
It’s before the courts, and I can’t add any more detail that that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary . . . or a new question, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Premier, the reason that we’re, as you say, holding 
up the Bill is that we allow time for people out in rural 
Saskatchewan to absorb an omnibus Bill like that, where you 
never let them have time, and now they’re finally having to see 
through this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Premier, once again this points out the real 
problem, and that’s your government’s inability to realize that 
the problem in rural Saskatchewan is debt, and you don’t know 
how to handle it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Instead, you’re putting another Saskatchewan 
farmer off the land. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have no answers. Your band-aid solutions 
aren’t working. There are many solutions offered by people 
around this province to restructure and

solve the debt problem. My question to you is: why don’t you 
respond? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say that we have 
responded every year we were in government, and we certainly 
responded prior to us forming government, and we offered many 
more programs that were a lot better than the NDP’s land bank. 
They still haven’t got anything else to offer. 
 
We have many programs that have provided literally billions of 
dollars of cash. And as you travel Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, or 
western Canada, farmers all over the place will say, it’s been the 
best Conservative government federally and the best 
Conservative government provincially that we’ve seen at any 
time in the history of the country to provide cash, Mr. Speaker, 
into the hands of farmers as the result of suggestions that they 
make. If there’s drought problems, if there’s grasshopper 
problems, if there’s debt, if there’s high interest, we were there 
with programs that the NDP just wouldn’t come up with. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the latest major poll which 
was the election in Manitoba where the NDP got wiped right off 
the map because they were offering the same sorts of things. 
Nobody believed them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Presentation of Legislation and Orders for Return 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a question to 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker, who has stood in this House under a 
number of questions and has refused to answer them, and has 
avoided them and simply tries to make a ranting speech about 
issues that are totally not relevant to the questions that are being 
asked. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, you made some comment about holding up 
legislation in the House. I want to point out to you that on this 
order paper in this Legislative Assembly there are over 10 Bills 
which have been on the order paper for over two weeks and are 
yet not printed. Now that is an atrocious mismanagement of the 
procedures of this House, Mr. Speaker, on the part of you and 
your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You have had over 45 Bills that have been 
introduced into this House in the last two or three weeks, even 
though the House’s sittings now nearly are over — 60 days, 60 
days. Now, Mr. Premier, the purpose of this House is for the 
government to be accountable and to provide information to 
questions which are being asked. On April . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ask your question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — If the Premier will listen, I might give him 
the answer, rather than interrupting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2092 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, if you will listen, on April 28 
I asked your House Leader a question about the status of certain 
information about orders for return which were ordered over 
eight months ago. At that time your House Leader said, and I 
quote: 
 

I’ll check into it and provide the answer for the member . . . 
 
Today, almost 8 months later, there has not been an answer, and 
7 weeks since I asked that question, we still have not got an 
answer. Will you, Mr. Premier, exercise your responsibility as 
the leader of that government and commit to this House that those 
answers will be provided today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — At least, Mr. Speaker, at least the House 
Leaders are talking now, and perhaps since we’ve started to 
communicate we can move toward getting some of this 
legislation through in a speedier fashion. 
 
The member talks about the orders for return that have been 
ordered for 8 months and haven’t yet been tabled. He said that 
question has never been answered. In fact, we spent some time in 
this House doing similar orders this year, Mr. Speaker, a few days 
ago, a few weeks ago, at which time I explained, Mr. Speaker, 
that we had some difficulty in going back through the archives, 
etc., because the way the orders were worded last time. We’ve 
got a little smarter, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve changed the wording 
for the returns this year so that, you know, we’ll get that done. 
 
And as it relates to the legislation, Mr. Speaker, this year was a 
little different in that we had the Supreme Court ruling that 
followed by our Bill 2, so that we didn’t have to table everything 
in both languages. And the, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are 
putting all kinds of pressure on. They want to see what the 
legislative calendar is, and so . . . I can’t . . . 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t 
heard such a lame-duck explanation of incompetency for a long 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The facts are that the orders for return 
were ordered eight months ago. Similar questions asked in Public 
Accounts Committee, the departments, three of them, provided 
the answer in less than three weeks. 
 
The only thing happening here is that the government has those 
answers. It’s sitting on them because it’s attempting to hide the 
information from the public of Saskatchewan under after the 
session, and I ask the House Leader now, since the Premier ducks 
the question when he finds that he’s embarrassed, will he make a 
commitment to provide those orders of return to this legislature 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute 
about lame ducks. If you’ve ever seen a lame duck, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a whole . . . what do you call . . . a gaggle of ducks, or 
gaggle of geese, or whatever they are, Mr. Speaker, those people, 
those people sitting over there, squawking and crying for the 
tabling of Public Accounts. They’re tabled. 
 
How many questions? Not one question on Public Accounts. You 
can give them . . . throw open a filing cabinet. They couldn’t 
function as an opposition in any event. Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s 
report is tabled. Not one question. Give them all the information 
there is in government. They’re totally ineffective as an 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, totally ineffective as an opposition. 
 
We’ve got a drought going on out there. We’ve got all kinds of 
programs that we’re delivering out there. And they sit here, 
squawking, squawking about some order for return that they . . . 
that is the most compelling issue of the day today, Mr. Speaker. 
I simply can’t believe this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary. I 
think that in front of the children in the gallery today, for that 
kind of a performance, the Premier should be embarrassed about 
his House Leader today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now without a preamble, so that it doesn’t 
confuse the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a very 
straightforward question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. House Leader, put 
aside the rhetoric and tell this legislature and the people of 
Saskatchewan that you will table those orders for return which 
you have had sitting in your office for months, so that the public 
can know how you and your government have spent their 
taxpayers’ money. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
the returns, I will table them the minute that I have them ready. 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the returns, I will table them the 
minute that I have them ready, or at first opportunity once . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I thought so. Thank you. 
 
Just an observation, Mr. Speaker. I remember these people 
asking, always asking for more information, table this, table that, 
file the Public Accounts and the auditor’s report, Weyerhaeuser 
deal — they haven’t figured that one out yet; at least they haven’t 
asked any questions on that one either, Mr. Speaker. The specific 
question as it relates to orders for return, I’ll table them the 
minute that I have them ready, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Kaolin Processing at Wood Mountain 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Investment and Trade or the Minister of Finance, 
whichever is more appropriate. It has to do with the Ekaton 
resource development company which is seeking to establish a 
kaolin plant and operation at Wood 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2093 
 

Mountain. The minister will know that a critical issue is one 
relating to the flow-through shares question. In the last federal 
budget, this product, kaolin, was designated as qualifying for the 
advantages of flow-through shares, but it’s apparently on the 
agenda of the Minister of Finance federally to remove that 
particular provision in the process of federal tax reform, that is, 
eliminating this flow-through share ability. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could advise me what the position 
of the Government of Saskatchewan is on that issue, and will the 
Government of Saskatchewan argue for the retention of 
flow-through share advantages, at least in so far as it relates to 
the kaolin operation at Wood Mountain that we hope to see 
established there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the government has taken the 
position with regard to the flow-through shares that not only 
specifically with regard to the kaolin project but the small mining 
companies and the small oil and gas companies that would be 
affected. We have taken the position, for the smaller companies, 
we would like to see the flow-through shares continued. 
 
Having said that, the national government, I gather, is having 
some internal reviews as to the effect, and I’m not sure whether 
I can be optimistic that there will be some minor modifications 
which will at least deal with the smaller companies. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — I wonder if the minister would be prepared to 
provide us with some more detail on the position being taken by 
the Saskatchewan government and, in particular, what sort of 
lobbying effort is the Saskatchewan government launching with 
respect to the federal government to change their mind on this 
question so we can protect the advantages for companies like 
Ekaton and the development they want at Wood Mountain. 
 
Could the minister give us the details of Saskatchewan’s position, 
and when does he expect the federal position to be clear, because 
the uncertainty is a very debilitating thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we have lobbied, and I have 
lobbied the last couple of Finance minister meeting, for example. 
I think it fair to say that the strongest positions were taken by 
both Saskatchewan and Alberta in favour of at least some 
retention. Having said that, the federal government has a view 
that some of the modifications that it is proposing will at least 
alleviate the problem and in some cases solve the problem for the 
smaller resource companies. 
 
We are doing an analysis as is the federal government as to 
whether the modifications that they are considering will in fact 
alleviate or eliminate the problem. That’s not completed. That’s 
the best advice I can give the hon. member, except to say that we 
have taken the position, and again in fairness, as has the province 
of Alberta, that we want the benefits to the small resource 
companies and we’ve made that position rather strongly to the 
federal Minister of Finance. 
 

The Year Ahead 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education. Mr. Minister, another one of your many blueprints 
for taking education in 21st century has been severely criticized 
by LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors 
and Superintendents), by the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) and by professors at the university. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of their criticisms has been on your suggestion 
that committees should be formed to improve the efficiency of 
school boards and to control their spending. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: why do you think that 
you have the right to interfere in the autonomous workings of the 
school boards? And also, these advisers that you are 
recommending, are they the same advisers that have advised the 
Minister of Finance in creating a $3.9 billion deficit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that all 
school boards and school board trustees, their administrative 
officers, want to be as efficient as possible in administering 
public funds for education across this province. What we would 
want to do there is (a) respect their autonomy, but at the same 
time try and be helpful to them. 
 
And for example, Mr. Speaker, we have raised with them the fact 
that across Saskatchewan administrative costs per student range 
from $50 to $408. Now there may be very good reasons why 
administration costs range as high as $408 per student in some 
school boards, as opposed to $50 in others. There may be very 
good reasons. But I think all school boards would want to know 
what the school board is doing that can do it for $50, because 
there may be something there, some useful idea that they might 
be able to use. 
 
Our whole approach here, Mr. Speaker, is to be helpful and useful 
to school boards, and improve efficiency to whatever degree we 
all can, working together. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, is the same report, Mr. Minister, you are recommending 
that, or at least suggesting that we should go back to standardized 
testing. the STF, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association), and LEADS, and many other professional 
educators have told you they don’t want standardized testing. Are 
you going to take a leaf out of, or a page out of your colleague’s 
methods of dealing with the people of Saskatchewan, as he dealt 
with the urban people, and unilaterally impose standardized 
testing after everyone has told you this is a backwards step and 
they don’t want standardized exams. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member might characterize 
standardized tests as backwards; some others would characterize 
it as a bureaucratic invasion of the class-room. My view is that 
standardized testing is only one part of a very complex area of 
student evaluation and student assessment. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2094 
 

And I have no fixed position on this question of standardized 
testing. But I view it as important enough that we ought to 
investigate it and be open-minded about investigating it. And 
that’s exactly what I’ve asked my officials to do, and they have 
struck a committee with the teachers’ federation and with trustees 
across this province to examine that question and other questions, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Federal-Provincial Foreign Language Education Initiatives 
for Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advise in 
the legislature today that the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the federal government have concluded an important funding 
agreement. Under the terms of the agreement the federal 
government has agreed to assume most of the cost of translating 
statutes pursuant to our own Bill 2. 
 
This agreement also enables the province to undertake a number 
of important education initiatives, and I am pleased to outline 
these to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the legislature 
today. 
 
First, the federal government has agreed to assist with the costs 
of providing some form of management and control to minority 
language schools. This is to enable the province to deal with the 
judgement of the Court of Queen’s Bench with respect to French 
language schools. The agreement also provides financial support 
to help develop curriculum materials and other facilities that may 
be needed. 
 
Second, the agreement provides for additional French immersion 
and core French in our schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Third, the agreement contains a funding package for the 
reconstruction of College Mathieu in Gravelbourg. 
 
Fourth, a language institute will be established in Saskatchewan 
to serve western Canada. The institute will develop and offer 
training programs in 20 languages of cultural and economic 
significance to western Canada. 
 
Finally, we will be building on our distance education initiative 
in a very major way, Mr. Speaker, to offer more language 
training, more institute courses, and more university courses to 
more people in more places in our province of Saskatchewan than 
ever before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this agreement is good news for all of the citizens 
of Saskatchewan. It will enable us to make educational 
opportunities available in a way that was previously beyond our 
reach. And it will enable us to cope with our legal and 
constitutional responsibilities without penalizing our own 
taxpayers. 
 
Because so many groups, organizations and institutions have a 
vital interest in this agreement, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the 
Assembly to defer further details until we’re able to consult with 
each group. And I expect further information will be available 
over the next 24 hours, or even perhaps sooner, Mr. Speaker.

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly welcome this 
announcement by the Minister of Education. Let me say to the 
minister opposite that we have this trend of the federal 
government providing more and more funds in the field of 
education and post-secondary education is a welcome trend. This 
did not start in the ’80s. It started back in the ’70s under another 
federal government and another provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only thing that . . . the minister has not provided 
us with the details of the agreement so we don’t know exactly in 
what direction it is going to go and how much funds the 
provincial government is going to be putting into it. And as he 
indicated, he may not have those details. 
 
But I would welcome from the minister, as soon as he has the 
details, if he would make those available to us on this side of the 
House. We welcome anything, Mr. Speaker, that will strengthen 
the multicultural aspect of our province. I hear a lessening of that 
in this statement made by the minister; I hope that that is not true. 
 
Although we are a bilingual country, the significance of 
Saskatchewan is that we are a multicultural society, and that must 
be strengthened. And I hope that the agreement that the 
provincial government has signed with the federal government 
will do that and will not put all of its emphasis on bilingualism, 
which of course is good, but it does not meet the demands of the 
needs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the news. We hope that the 
funding is adequate to do an adequate job; that our students not 
only in the elementary schools but in our high schools and at the 
university will have sufficient funds to pursue all of the 
languages, all of the languages that they wish to take, and that 
includes the native languages, the Ukrainian language, the 
German language, and the French language as well, and that we 
have programs and adequate equipment, Mr. Minister, which 
I’ve indicated in estimates, that many of our schools had to . . . 
programs they had to do away with because of inadequate 
funding. In many of our school system . . . in many of our school 
systems, Mr. Minister, because of inadequate funding, many of 
those language programs were cancelled. This will only undo the 
harm that the provincial government did in its last budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we welcome the news. I hope the 
minister will make those details available to us. And I hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that this isn’t a ploy just before the federal election and 
that it will be defended by adequate funds so that we can have 
good programs and our children are able to meet the challenges 
of the 21st century. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2095 
 

Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to bring this motion 
before the Assembly, and at the end of my remarks I will be 
moving the following, moved by myself, seconded by the 
member from Rosthern: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan on the creation of the Saskatchewan 
Commission on Directions in Health Care, and generally, 
for the insight and the pragmatic and responsible approach 
this government has shown in meeting the challenges of 
providing quality health care for Saskatchewan residents. 

 
Mr. Speaker, with only 16 minutes to speak on the motion, much 
must remain unsaid. But let me try to cover at least one broad 
area in my remarks today. First, I will address a need for the 
commission in the historical context that we are proceeding in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for this commission arises because of 
changing times. It arises because of new demographic facts, new 
technologies, new attitudes, and unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, new 
diseases. 
 
Let us just look at one of these new demographic trends, the trend 
of an ageing populating. As the population ages, Mr. Speaker, 
there is increasing need for nursing homes, home care, and 
indeed all kinds of health care. This is a fact. And what context 
do we find ourselves in? Well we find ourselves in a situation 
where past governments refused to accept the facts, where 
governments refused to build nursing homes, where governments 
saw a cost crisis and decided to fight that crisis on the backs of 
the elderly. The member for Saskatoon South is well aware of 
what I’m talking about, and I take him to task for the hypocrisy 
that he has demonstrated in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members across the floor also like to talk about 
waiting lists. Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that this government 
takes the problem of waiting lists seriously, while the opposition 
has said that waiting lists were a sign of efficiency. We have 
committed significant extra funding and we expect the 
commission to look closely at the problem of waiting lists and to 
come up with some permanent solutions. 
 
This government does not believe that making people wait for 
surgery is a member of efficiency. It is true that there are waiting 
lists, and we are concerned and we are doing everything we can 
to reduce them. More funding, Mr. Speaker, new hospitals, 
discussions with hospital boards to find new solutions. And 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, it is working. 
 
The opposition has stated publicly that there is a serious problem 
with health care costs, and they have tried everything from 
moratoriums on nursing homes to creating waiting lists on 
surgery to address the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these nattering nabobs, these nattering nabobs of 
negativism have no new ideas, no solutions, and they offer 
nothing. And they have never been honest with the people when 
the crunch came.

Mr. Speaker, I feel good about the health commission, and I’ve 
had an opportunity as I travelled around the province for the last 
18 months, and more specifically while I’ve been the Legislative 
Secretary to the Minister of Health, to talk with people in the 
rural areas, primarily in the rural areas, as to what new ideas we 
might have in terms of solving some of the problems that we have 
in health today. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people out there, the 
people in the rural areas and indeed in the urban areas have some 
good ideas that they want to share with the government; they 
want to share with the people who have an opportunity to put 
those ideas into place. 
 
The commission, Mr. Speaker, will give every citizen of the 
province the opportunity to contribute their ideas and concerns, 
their knowledge and their experience. It will provide us with a 
basis for a blueprint for health care into the next century. 
 
The commission will address questions of prevention and cure, 
of priority and costs of new technology and new challenges, like 
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome). I will address the 
needs for our total system . . . it will address the needs for our 
total system from physical fitness to nuclear medicine. It will 
address our life-styles. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this point I’d like to compliment the 
Minister of Health on the quality of the commission that has been 
appointed to look into the serious problem of health care around 
the province. 
 
The head of the commission will be Dr. Bob Murray of 
Saskatoon; he will be the chairman for the commission. He is a 
well-known ophthalmologist and former dean of college at the 
University of Saskatchewan. He is an academic, Mr. Speaker, 
and will bring his academic credentials to the quality of this 
commission. 
 
Walter Podiluk, the former deputy minister of Saskatchewan 
Health, will assume duties as executive director of the 
commission. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like just to take a minute to 
make a comment and tell the member from Regina Lakeview 
how disappointed I was just a few days ago when she personally 
attacked the credibility of Walter Podiluk in this House. 
 
Mr. Podiluk is a former director of education for Catholic schools 
in Saskatoon. He was on the board of directors for a Saskatoon 
hospital, St. Paul’s Hospital. He has served the Government of 
Saskatchewan well as the deputy minister of Social Services and 
also as the deputy minister of Health. 
 
(1445) 
 
I thought it was appalling, Mr. Speaker, that a member of the 
opposition, the member from Regina Lakeview, would attack the 
credibility of this individual. And I must say that I have received 
numerous phone calls from individuals in Regina, and also letters 
from Saskatoon about the comments made by that member. I am 
still waiting for that member to stand up and apologize to Mr. 
Podiluk for the unfortunate remarks she made about him. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2096 
 

Other members of the commission are equally well qualified, Mr. 
Speaker. Morris Anderson of Regina, executive director of 
development, and former president of Luther College. Berva 
Farr, a registered nurse, executive director of the Santa Maria 
Senior Citizens Home in Regina, and executive of Saskatchewan 
Health-Care Association. 
 
Sylvia Fedoruk, chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon, known for her work in cancer research. There may 
be, perhaps, no one else in Canada who is as well informed on 
nuclear medicine as Dr. Sylvia Fedoruk is. A Ph.D in nuclear 
physics, Miss Fedoruk has devoted much of her life to the 
development of nuclear medicine in this province, and people 
throughout the world have benefitted from her work. 
 
Maureen Kurtz of Tisdale, a former public health nurse, is 
another member; Bishop Blaise Morand of Prince Albert, 
member of the social communications committee of the 
Canadian Catholic council of bishops and of the Saskatchewan 
Order of merit on the selection committee; and Ernie Moen, a 
Cabri farmer, past president of the Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association and known for his active community involvement. 
In my travels in recent days around the province, I’ve had 
numerous comments from people in the rural areas about the 
quality of the health care commission. I wish them well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quality health care in Saskatchewan is our top social 
priority. The need to maintain excellence in service and to 
responsibly manage our delivery system must be managed 
harmoniously to produce maximum long-term benefit for the 
people of this province. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan face a number of urgent issues in 
the health care delivery. Some of these issues are driven by 
increased use of the health care system; others are driven by 
changing demographic and population trends; while still others 
are driven by rapidly rising costs. The shaping of our health care 
system to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people into the 21st 
century and beyond, represents our major financial and service 
delivery challenge for the future. Change is necessary if we are 
to continue delivering quality health care services which are both 
affordable and relevant to the needs of all. 
 
Government policy cannot be determined in isolation. It must 
reflect the will of the people, their needs, and their aspirations. It 
must incorporate the social and economic realities of our 
environment, and it must effectively utilize professional 
expertise in knowledge, in design, and in implementation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
will investigate a full range of issues impacting on the quality, 
availability, accessibility, and cost of health care services, with 
particular consideration of the differences between rural and 
urban Saskatchewan. 
 
It will, two, identify and priorize emerging and long-term issues 
affecting health care delivery. 
 
Number three, it will recommend policy options to the 
government on ways to improve health care delivery and

efficiency on the system, while maintaining quality and 
accessibility of service. It will manage to future health care 
delivery needs including funding and servicing, education, 
technology, and training requirements. 
 
The terms of the reference for the Commission on Directions in 
Health Care will have responsibility to inquire into and report on 
the future health care requirements of the residents of 
Saskatchewan, an appropriate means by which these 
requirements may be met including, but not limited to, the 
following areas: institutional treatment and support services such 
as hospital, special care homes, ambulance, and home services, 
and drugs; community health services such as public health 
services, mental health services, and health promotions; the 
impact of social factors on the needs, delivery, and cost of health 
care, such as demographic trends, changing life-styles, and 
consumer expectations; the supply, education, and qualifications 
roles in distribution of health care professionals and 
paraprofessionals; the nature and distribution of health care 
facilities and services; the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of new 
technology in diagnosis and in treatment; the organization and 
delivery of health care services with emphasis on the equality of 
access and cost-effectiveness; the communication of health 
information, illness prevention, and the education of the public 
in personal health matters; the assurance of quality of all aspects 
of health care; the utilization of health care services, and the 
funding process for health care services. 
 
In conducting the inquiry, the commission will also receive 
briefs, both written and oral, from individuals and organizations; 
will organize and conduct public hearings in such places as the 
commission believes necessary to allow the public a reasonable 
opportunity to present their vies, and may seek such other advice 
as is deemed necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite every person in Saskatchewan to put 
forward new ideas to the commission. I invite them to join with 
their neighbours and put forward the solutions they would like to 
see. I ask them not to listen to the Leader of the Opposition, to 
withhold their ideas until they get such direct personal benefit as 
possibly ever being re-elected, because I say that every time one 
of us contributes to the health care system, all of us benefit, even 
the members opposite. 
 
This task force will provide us with a vision of the strongest and 
most enduring health care system on the continent. It will be an 
historic effort, and an effort that all can take part in, will come 
away with great pride. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Rosthern: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan on the creation of the Saskatchewan 
Commission on Directions in Health Care, and generally, 
for the insight and the pragmatic and responsible approach 
this government has shown in meeting the challenge of 
providing quality health care for Saskatchewan residents. 

  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2097 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour for me to 
rise in the Assembly this afternoon to second this motion on this 
historic subject. 
 
The Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care I 
believe represents a significant opportunity for the people of the 
province to participate . . . perhaps it should be better said, to 
preside over the further establishment of a fully modern and 
sensitive health care system. 
 
Let me say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that I do not think that this 
should be a partisan issue. To me it seemed that it is far too 
important an issue to become a matter of rancorous debate among 
political parties. Rather, it is an opportunity for us to work 
together in harmony and co-operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly believe that there is room for co-operation in 
such a fundamental issue and subject, and I sincerely ask the 
opposition to put away, to put away the bitterness, the rancour, 
the ill feeling that may still be around after the last two election 
defeats, and rather think about the good of the province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve going to revert back to my true form and my true 
personality here, and so today I do not intend to bash the NDP 
for their errors past, present, and over the weekend. I would 
instead like to discuss why this commission is a real opportunity, 
and in fact will be marked as an important event in the history of 
this province. 
 
We have today many, many challenges in our health care system. 
And those challenges are indeed diverse. And I know that some 
members across the floor have specialized interests in some of 
these challenges, and hopefully they will bring their expertise, 
their concerns, and their knowledge to this commission. 
 
I think, for example, from the member from Saskatoon 
University and the concern that he has about farm chemicals and 
the implications for health. Bring them forward, I say. Bring 
them forward and let the commission deal with them. 
 
There are also members on this side who have direct and personal 
experience from the health care system. And I think of my friend 
and colleague from Kinistino who has this great interest and 
concern on the eye bank and the work that he is doing with it. 
And I think certainly that as members of the legislature, we can 
have a direct and an important and significant impact on this task 
force as it goes around the province. And I would ask all 
members to participate, to fully participate. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we will gain insight from those who deal 
with the challenge of alcohol and drug abuse, especially among 
our youth. We will hear from all the professional organizations 
and the non-profit groups, like the cancer society, as an example. 
 
We’ll be able to gather all of these people together

through the offices of the commission, and we will have the most 
complete picture of our health care system that has ever been put 
together. And we will benefit dramatically from the energy and 
the vision of our people. Innovative ideas will be put forward, 
tested, and recommended. 
 
I think of one example, Mr. Speaker, of the possibility of greater 
uses of nurses in the system. Now I’m not fully cognizant about 
the implications of the idea, but I can see two immediate results. 
Accessibility to health care would be broadened, and costs would 
be reduced. 
 
But there are those who feel that this might not be such a great 
idea. To them I say, bring your ideas forward. That’s what this 
exercise is all about. Bring them forward and you will be heard. 
 
There are important considerations we can learn from the 
technicians and laboratory people. Perhaps there are ways that 
equipment can be used more intensively, or perhaps that they can 
be delivered so that we have faster results, more rapid results with 
less cost pressure. Perhaps the role of midwives should be looked 
at as it has in other provinces. Certainly we need to explore ways 
to maximize the use of our rural hospitals, to encourage doctors 
to staff them and people to use them. And already I’ve heard 
suggestions to ensure that more of the medical students that we 
graduate will remain in our province. 
 
So the field is just a very vast one, and one that holds out, I 
believe, a great deal of promise for us all. And that is why I 
sincerely invite the NDP to put forward their proposals for 
improving the health care system. I say to them, the problem is 
larger than any one of us. Let us co-operate. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that there is already an indication that 
they’re willing to co-operate when the announcement of the task 
force was made just a few days ago by the Minister of Health. 
Immediately some of them jumped up and began to criticize the 
good offices of some of the members of that commission. They 
recognized the error of their ways. I understand that they already 
have apologized to those members, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that 
that certainly is an indication perhaps of better things to come. 
 
Because I feel, Mr. Speaker, that surely they must have 
something to offer more than just to say, spend more money. And 
on that point I also invite them to say exactly how much more 
should be spent, where should it be spent. It seems that the 
member from Saskatoon South has abandoned his support of 
waiting lists and closing nursing homes. So where should we be 
spending, and how much? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s all very well and good to say, spend 
more, but do they mean spend more on cancer research, more on 
diabetes, more on sudden infant death syndrome, more on AIDS, 
more on new hospitals, more on new nursing homes, more on 
home care, more on alcoholism and drug abuse, more on renal 
disease, asthma, tuberculosis, trauma centres, obstetrics, hearing 
aids, heart disease and so on. The problems, the realm of 
possibilities, Mr. Speaker, are simply countless. Surely it 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2098 
 

is easy to simply say, spend more. 
 
(1500) 
 
But what are your priorities, what are your priorities, and how 
much more will we spend, and where? And the fact is that this 
commission, Mr. Speaker, this commission will give the people 
of Saskatchewan an opportunity to address those questions. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: is that really a bad thing? Because, 
Mr. Speaker, ultimately, our goal must be to ensure everyone has 
access to excellent care in all areas. And that will not be 
accomplished simply by spending more money, by throwing 
more money at the problems. 
 
So in seconding this motion, Mr. Speaker, let me repeat my 
heartfelt invitation to the NDP and to every person in this 
province to get involved in this commission. Think about the 
important questions and put forward your suggestions. And as 
the Leader of the Opposition indicated on the weekend, this 
government will listen to good ideas, and this government will 
implement them. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure, and I’m 
very proud to second the motion by my hon. colleague from 
Regina Wascana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not surprised at the last 
member who was speaking thinks that this should not be a 
partisan debate and wants to keep politics out of it. I’m not 
surprised, Mr. Speaker, because the PC government in 
Saskatchewan is responsible for the health care crisis that we’re 
facing in Saskatchewan today, and if they can avoid having 
themselves connected with the health care crisis, and if they can 
avoid any partisan debate on the matter, then that is what they 
would choose to do. I’m not surprised he’s made that statement, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has systematically dismantled medicare as we 
know it today, Mr. Speaker. They destroyed the prescription drug 
plan, which was an excellent preventative health care plan in 
Saskatchewan — a plan that helped people to maintain a level of 
health so they didn’t require further assistance from a doctor. 
Simply by taking drugs, it could prevent hospitalization and 
further doctor visits. 
 
But they’ve made it impossible for people — not for everyone, 
but for many people in Saskatchewan — to acquire prescription 
drugs, simply because people can’t afford the 100 per cent 
up-front cost. They destroyed the prescription drug plan. Now 
they want a task force to solve the problem for them. 
 
Well we could have told them, Mr. Speaker, when they came out 
with that policy, that all they had to do was maintain the 
prescription drug plan instead of destroying it and then trying to 
find a way or an excuse out of their bad policies. 
 
They destroyed the dental plan in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
the school-based children’s dental plan, by removing access as 
far as children are concerned. It’s much more inaccessible than 
what it was before.

The children’s school-based dental plan was one of the best 
preventative health measures in this province, in North America. 
It was a world-wide known plan and was considered one of the 
best of its kind. They destroyed it, Mr. Speaker. The Tory 
government destroyed it. 
 
And now what do they do? They set up a task force to tell them 
that either they did the right thing or that there’s some other way 
of delivering dental services, like perhaps a public administered 
dental plan based in schools. 
 
They cut back some $18.5 million in the Health budget in 
1987-88. No wonder we have hospital waiting lists that are 
unprecedented, that never existed at these levels in Saskatchewan 
before. No wonder, Mr. Speaker, we have such long hospital 
waiting lists — people waiting for urgent surgery, surgery they 
need now; people waiting for cancer treatment. In one case, one 
woman I know has had to wait three months for radial therapy 
with respect to breast cancer — totally unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They’re responsible for it because of their underfunding of the 
health care system and their cut-backs. And now they’ve set up a 
task force to tell them what they should or shouldn’t have done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — They talk about health care being too costly, and 
that’s the PC rhetoric that we see — constant discussion about 
the cost of health care being too costly. 
 
Well last week I brought a number of statistics and evidence 
before this House that shows that that is simply a myth that the 
Tories want to perpetrate so that they can justify further cut-backs 
in the health care system, because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Because they’re philosophical. 
 
Ms. Simard: — That’s right, because of their philosophical bent, 
which is to privatize health care and to reduce its universality and 
accessibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — They are attacking the very foundation of 
medicare as set out in the Hall commission report and as 
established in this province many years ago by Tommy Douglas, 
Woodrow Lloyd, and Allan Blakeney. 
 
Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, has the PC betrayal of Saskatchewan 
been more evident than in their attacks on health care — 
nowhere, Mr. Speaker. And it was a tragic irony that they picked 
1987, the 25th anniversary of medicare, to attack the 
corner-stones of medicare: comprehensiveness — 
comprehensive programs available to the people of 
Saskatchewan; universality — medicare that applies right across 
this province equally to everybody; accessibility — accessibility 
that allows access to medical care services, comprehensive 
medical care services by every man, woman, and child in this 
province; and public administration, whereby medical care is 
administered by the public, by the province, as opposed to private 
corporations coming in and 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2099 
 

administering our hospitals, for example, or as opposed to the 
imposition of deterrent fees which reduces access to health care, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what this government has been up to over the last two 
years — slowly and methodically dismantling and destroying 
medicare. And now what do they want to do? They want to send 
up a task force to tell them what they should or shouldn’t be 
doing. Well, Mr. Speaker, I say that that’s absolutely hypocritical 
on their part, totally and absolutely hypocritical. And they don’t 
want this to be a partisan debate because they know, they know 
that as far as the partisan politics are concerned, that they don’t 
have one single shred of credibility with respect to health care. 
And now they’re hoping that by setting up a task force, they can 
salvage some of this problem with respect to their credibility. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, every single person on that side of 
the House, including the member from Regina Wascana who 
spoke on this debate, and anyone else who was involved in 
making these decisions and implementing these heartless and 
cruel policies, should be ashamed of themselves in the way that 
they have hurt Saskatchewan people. And they, Mr. Speaker, 
bear a very heavy burden that rests on their shoulders for these 
insane and cruel policies of firing people and underfunding 
health care so that people can’t get their needed surgery. Every 
single one of them, Mr. Speaker, is saddled with the knowledge 
and the responsibility of those decisions. 
 
Earlier last week we indicated, Mr. Speaker, that while their Tory 
rhetoric is continuing with respect to spiralling health care costs, 
that there is a number of things that they are doing that does not 
support attempting to make the health care system more efficient 
and less costly. And this just shows you what hypocrites these 
people are. 
 
For example, the Tory government supported the drug patent 
legislation out of Ottawa. What has that done? It’s raised the 
costs of drugs at an unprecedented rate in Canada. And they say 
they’re trying to control costs? They say they’re trying to control 
costs, Mr. Speaker. Well I suggest to you that that’s simply 
hypocritical on their part. 
 
They’ve cut back in preventative programs like the prescription 
drug and the dental care program. They’ve cut back on those 
programs. And they say they’re trying to save costs, Mr. 
Speaker? We know that preventative programs like prescription 
drug, like the dental plan, actually reduce costs over a long-term 
period, so if the PC government legitimately wanted to reduce 
the costs of health care over the long term, they would have 
improved those programs, Mr. Speaker, not dismantled them and 
emasculated them. 
 
So it’s clear from their actions, Mr. Speaker, that they aren’t 
interested in keeping down the costs of health care, that what they 
want to do is get the public thinking it’s too costly so they can go 
about privatizing the health care system and making further 
cut-backs to health. 
 
And let’s look at their free trade, the support for the free trade 
agreement in Ottawa. That’s going to allow for American 
companies to come in and administer our hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s going to allow for

American companies to come in and administer our nursing 
homes, Mr. Speaker. And is that going to reduce the cost? No, 
because the evidence and the statistics show that the cost of 
administration of hospitals in the United States is substantially 
higher than what it is in Canada, Mr. Speaker, because of their 
privatized system. Their supporting the free trade agreement is to 
go along with increased administration costs with respect to 
hospitals and nursing homes. So how can they come to this House 
and tell the public of Saskatchewan that they’re trying to reduce 
health care costs, Mr. Speaker? I suggest that that is very 
hypocritical. 
 
The evidence shows that this province, Mr. Speaker, has been — 
vis-a-vis the rest of the provinces — in Saskatchewan has been 
paying less and less respect to health care. In fact, with respect to 
the national average, they’re at something like the third lowest in 
the provinces with respect to public contribution vis-a-vis the 
national average . . . the third lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
And yet they say that the costs of health care are getting out of 
hand, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome 
the opportunity to enter the debate at this time because there’s no 
doubt about it that the importance . . . of the importance of health 
care in this particular province. And I find it interesting to listen 
to the member from Regina Lakeview carry on, as we’ve heard 
her on several occasions in this House, talking about some of the 
changes that have been taking place over the last couple of years. 
 
It always amuses me somewhat that the NDP get the blinders on 
and can’t face reality about the fact that the economy has not been 
all that good in this province in the last couple of years. But they 
like to talk as if there are barrels and barrels of money that can 
be dipped into and simply carry out all of these programs like we 
have in the past. 
 
I would assure the members opposite that this government is very 
committed to first-rate health care in this province, and we’re 
spending a good substantial amount of money more at the present 
time that your government ever was. And there’s no doubt about 
it that we are having to look at different changes in the way that 
we deliver services. 
 
We get a lot of opposition from the other side with regard to the 
formation of the health commission, and I would simply point 
out to members opposite that this is not the first time in the 
history of this province that a commission has been set up to 
study a particular topic, and certainly health care is a very, very 
important topic. 
 
I think, if you consider going back to the year 1944, that it was a 
former premier of the province, Tommy Douglas, who set up a 
task force to look at health services within the province, and that 
was a model that was used throughout the ’40s, the ’50s, and 
probably on into the ’60s. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2100 
 

But times are changing and I know that the members opposite 
find it difficult to accept change. But times are changing. I 
certainly support very strongly the commission that is being set 
up because it is time for us to review the services that are being 
provided in this particular province. We can’t carry on as we 
always have in the past. 
 
I give you one good example, is the prescriptive drug plan. When 
you consider what it was costing when that program was first 
brought in, and take a look at what it was costing for 1987 where 
it had gone, I think, from in the neighbourhood of 18 million or 
$16 million up to some $85 million, how long would it be, how 
long would it be before we didn’t have any type of program at 
all? 
 
And people that I talked to have indicated that they do not mind 
paying a bit of money in so far as the drug plan is concerned, if 
it means that they are going to have some assurance in the future 
that there will be a plan. 
 
(1515) 
 
So I think we have to take a look at reality when we see some of 
these programs that are increasing in the costs from year to year. 
So there’s nothing wrong with taking a look at old programs. 
Certainly we’re very proud of programs that have been set up, 
not only in the last six years but programs that were set up by the 
previous administration. 
 
But at the same time we have to consider that times are changing. 
When there’s lots of money available, it’s easy to provide all 
kinds of programs. The school-based dental program was another 
good example of there having to be changes. We have many 
people indicating today that the problem with drug and alcohol 
abuse is a very, very growing problem, and I’m proud of some of 
the things that have been done in this province in the last months 
with regard to the moneys that are being spent in this particular 
area. 
 
There’s no doubt about it that the facility that was just opened at 
Whitespruce, Mr. Speaker, is a first in Canada. It means now that 
young people from this particular province no longer have to go 
south of the border to receive treatment in this particular area. 
And I think that’s good for the province. It’s certainly good for 
our young people, in that they can now receive their treatment 
here in Saskatchewan and at the same time carry on their 
educational programs. 
 
Going back to the setting up of the commission then, I think when 
we consider the membership on that particular commission, that 
we have very highly respected people from throughout the 
province and from a variety of backgrounds. These people are 
going to be involved in, over the next few months, listening to 
people from all over the province, from all walks of life, 
receiving submissions as to suggestions that should be . . . the 
direction in which the health system should be going over the 
next few years. 
 
It’s unfortunate that the member from Regina Lakeview chooses 
to use scare tactics in talking about possibility of

Americans coming in and setting up private systems and all of 
the rest of this. There’s certainly no indication that that is going 
to be the case; and it’s unfortunate that she uses these tactics. 
 
The commission is something that is very essential at this 
particular time so that we do get a sampling then from the people 
at large throughout the province. The recommendations that are 
going to be made here can be used, certainly, for providing the 
format for the service that is going to be provided throughout the 
province for the next few years as we move into the 1990s and 
beyond, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I commend this government for the leadership and the vision 
that it has shown in moving in this particular direction. And it 
seems odd that it was fine for the opposition to have set up a task 
force back in 1944 to look at the needs of the future of health care 
in the province, but not really a good idea for this government to 
do it. So it’s really strange that it’s okay for one but not for the 
others. 
 
I would as well point out that the expenditures that we have seen 
on health care in this particular province have increased 
dramatically over the last few years. The members opposite know 
full well that we are spending now, I think one out of every three 
dollars is being provided for health care within the province. 
That’s a pretty hefty sum of money, considering the population 
that we have in Saskatchewan and the services that we are 
providing. 
 
We feel that our system in Saskatchewan is still the best in 
Canada, and we will certainly be doing all that we can to improve 
on our health care system. 
 
I know that they talk an awful lot about the long waiting lists that 
exist in our hospitals in Saskatoon, and I know that is a concern, 
and I have many calls, certainly, in that regard. 
 
But at the same time we recognize the fact that the waiting lists 
have not just started; you people had waiting lists back in your 
time. Granted, they weren’t maybe as long, but I guess at the 
same time you have to consider . . . well you have to stop and 
consider some of the reasons why they’re there. We . . . You 
know, when you go back about . . . when you go back 10 years, 
you had a lot more services being provided in our smaller rural 
hospitals than you have today. More and more of these people 
want to come into Saskatoon. 
 
You’ve got a much higher number of specialists in the city of 
Saskatoon, and as a result, we not only have people coming from 
Saskatoon and the surrounding area but we’re serving the 
northern two-thirds of the province. And in fact if you were to 
take a look at the people that are on those waiting lists, you would 
find that a good number of them are not only from the northern 
two-thirds of the province but they also come from southern 
Saskatchewan. So we’re attracting them there because of the 
services that we have. 
 
As well, if you were also to consider the new technology and the 
new equipment that we have in the hospitals in 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2101 
 

Saskatoon, there’s good reason why people are coming in there 
for treatment. 
 
It’s unfortunate that the lists are there . . . the lines are there. We 
have been spending more and more money to try and take care 
of those long waiting lists, and we hope that with some of the 
changes that are taking place this summer, because of fewer beds 
being closed down for the summer — and that’s certainly 
something that isn’t new, that beds are closed — but fewer of 
them will be shut down for the summer, with some of the new 
day surgery units that have been opened up in the last while, that 
these will also help to alleviate the problem. 
 
But it’s not something that there is a quick solution to; it’s 
something that takes a lot of time. But a lot of money is being 
spent when you consider that the total budget for Health in the 
1988-89 budget is 1.2 billion of dollars, and that’s an increase of 
68 per cent since 1982. So that’s a pretty healthy increase and, I 
think, a pretty heavy commitment by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to health care for its residents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the present health care budget then is, as I 
say, one of the largest in the country as far as on a per capita 
basis. There’s no doubt about it that the expenditures are not only 
for hospitals, but we can see that over the last few years that there 
has been increased funding for ambulance services. There’s been 
a lot of increase, as I indicated, to combat the drug and alcohol 
problems that we have. We’ve also got increased expenditures as 
far as nursing home construction. 
 
And it’s unfortunate back in the late ’70s, and on into 1981, when 
the revenue in this province was considerably higher, and the 
previous administration would place a moratorium on the 
construction of nursing home beds, because that’s something that 
this government has had to try and play catch up then, ever since 
they came into power. So you’ve got to consider, as well, the 
legacy that you left from the five-year moratorium that you 
placed on hospital . . . or on nursing home construction. 
 
You also have to consider the amount of expansion that has taken 
place in the major hospitals . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, from the outset I want to say that 
I have no intentions of supporting the recommendations put 
forward by the members opposite in commending the 
government for its responsible health care programs because, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt, if anybody looks at this in a 
rational and logical point of view, you couldn’t support it. This 
government, Mr. Speaker, had it given the priority to health as it 
should have, we wouldn’t have needed the royal commission. 
There is no need for a commission. 
 
And I want to say to the member for Mayfair — and by the way, 
I want to congratulate him for the first time since he’s been 
elected that he’s stood in this House and has defended, or has 
spoken about health care; that at least is commendable; he’s 
getting a start — but Mr. Speaker, for

him to say that he is concerned about the waiting lists and said 
that there were waiting lists before when we were the government 
— it is true that there were; but he isn’t fair with the people of 
Saskatchewan when he doesn’t indicate that the waiting lists are 
four times what they were in 1982. 
 
A little while ago the people in Saskatoon and our three major 
hospitals had 11,000 on the waiting list. People, for the first time, 
had to wait in line for chemotherapy at Saskatoon, for the first 
time in the history of this province. How can you commend the 
government for that kind of irresponsible policies and programs 
and priorities for health care? 
 
I want to say to the member from Mayfair, it’s time that you stand 
up for the people of this province and make some positive 
recommendations to your government on health care. Mr. 
Member, you are being dishonest with the people of 
Saskatchewan when you say that the Health budget has increased 
by 68 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — All of you people did, all you people did in your 
untruthful way of doing things is to transfer programs from other 
departments, $250 million worth of programs from other 
departments into the Department of Health, and then you say that 
the health budget has increased by an astronomical amount. That 
is being dishonest; that is being untruthful with the people of this 
province, and that is why, Mr. Minister, the member for Mayfair, 
that is why people can’t believe you. 
 
Mr. Minister, my concern is not with the members of the 
commission; my concern is with the terms of reference, that 
everything is on the table; the four principles of medicare are on 
the table — that concerns me. The privatization of health care is 
on the table, and as I pointed out last night in this House, you 
people are following exactly what is happening in the United 
Kingdom where Margaret Thatcher, being advised by Madsen 
Pirie, who you brought in to this province, is also saying that 
health care should be privatized. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out exactly where these 
people are coming from, the members opposite. I want to quote 
from an article which says: Medicare too sacred to question, is 
it? And this was written by a former member on that side, and 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know her well, Gay Caswell. 
 
And this is what Gay Caswell says about medicare and where 
you people are coming from and where you stand on medicare. 
She says: Nothing I have experienced . . . She says she was in the 
hospital, and she says: 
 

Nothing that I have since experienced has relieved my 
anxiety that the inevitable results of the present welfare 
state, in particular medicare, will destroy the freedom of the 
individual and greatly inhibit the original purpose of the 
healing art. 

 
She says very clearly that she opposes medicare, she opposes the 
principles of medicare and, Mr. Speaker, I’ll bet my last bottom 
dollar that many members opposite 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2102 
 

are exactly say the same this as Gay Caswell is saying. And 
they’re hoping that the commission will recommend that the four 
principles of medicare are not sacred, that those four principles 
ought to be re-examined — the principles of accessibility, of 
comprehensibility, and the universality, and publicly funded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gay Caswell goes on to say this: 
 

But somewhere along the way, medicare became so sacred 
that no editor or politician would even suggest that 
compulsory medicare insurance implemented by the state 
as a monopoly might not be the best way to deliver health 
care. 

 
The last thing I want to quote from her is this: 
 

Why (she asks the question) Why do we need medicare 
insurance that is compulsory and a government monopoly? 

 
I think Gay Caswell speaks well for the people opposite. This is 
what they want; that’s what the Minister of Finance wants; that’s 
what the Minister of Health wants. They want the commission to 
recommend that we should re-examine the principles of 
medicare. And I say to the Minister of Finance, we have had two 
royal commissions by Emmett Hall, in the ’60s and in the ’80s, 
to examine the principles of medicare and hospitalization, and 
the people of Canada have said a resounding yes, those things are 
sacred, and if you touch them, you do it at your peril. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say, the Minister of Health again 
clearly indicates, clearly indicates that he does not support 
universality in medicare. He says, “Health plans will die without 
cuts.” In the article he goes on to say, “The province can’t afford 
open-ended programs.” Open-ended, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
simply another word for universality. He says, we can’t have 
open-ended programs any more, so it will chop about 60 million 
from its dental and prescription drug plans, fire about 330 staff, 
and change or eliminate some coverage, he said. Now he didn’t 
fire 330; he fired over 400. 
 
But the point I want to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this: these 
people are not committed to the principles of medicare and 
hospitalization. They want to get rid of it, and they want to 
privatize it. That’s why they did not limit, or exclude from the 
commission, the four principles of medicare. That is why they’ve 
done it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister says we can’t have universal 
programs. We can’t afford them. And the member from Mayfair 
said, well the economy has been bad in the last few years. Well 
in large part, Mr. Speaker, we are now in the position of long 
waiting lists where people have to wait for surgery in our 
hospitals. They’ve got to wait for chemotherapy at the cancer 
clinics, where people can’t afford drugs and have to choose 
between foot and drugs, where people can’t get the dental 
programs that they were accustomed to in the past. We have that, 
Mr. Speaker, because the members opposite used the wrong 
priorities. They can have universal programs in the production 
loan program so that cabinet ministers on the opposite side who 
have farms can qualify

for a subsidy; so the Premier, who in 1986-87 was paid over 
$100,000 from the public purse; so he can qualify for a 
subsidized loan. 
 
(1530) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have enough money to commit to 
health care, so that our people have to wait. It is a shame, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And is it any wonder that some people start 
questioning hospitalization and medicare when these people 
allow the waiting lists in our hospitals to get to 15,000 in 
Saskatoon and Regina? Is it any wonder that people start 
questioning the principles of those programs? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of my speech today I want to 
move the following amendment: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
continuing attacks on medicare and important health care 
services, it’s refusal to correct its harmful health care 
policies, and its attempt to distract public attention from its 
attack on medicare. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will move that amendment now, but I will 
continue to say to the members opposite . . . I will say to the 
members opposite, you must give . . . if you’re committed to the 
principles of medicare, you’ve got to give health and 
hospitalization the priority that it deserves. 
 
The economy, Mr. Speaker, has nothing to do with it. We had 
lots of money for the oil companies. In fact we gave up about 
$1.7 billion from 1982 to 1986 when oil was the highest in the 
province — the highest. We’re giving about 300 million a year 
now which could be given for health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is the money; we have the money. It 
needs the commitment from this government to make sure that 
our health programs are well funded, and we need universality in 
our health care programs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a point of order. The 
member from Saskatoon South, in his remarks, very clearly and 
specifically before wrapping up, said that he would . . . he is 
moving the amendment. He then went on to read that 
amendment. He used the words, “I move that amendment now, 
and will conclude my remarks.” 
 
Very clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that amendment that he 
moved is on the record, and I would ask that you accept it and 
deal with it accordingly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Your point of order is not well taken 
because the member said he was moving the amendment, he 
never announced a seconder, his 10 minute elapsed. I now 
recognize the member for Morse. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2103 
 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a 
few remarks on this point to the Assembly here today from a 
couple of perspectives. 
 
I want to deal with it from the first perspective of having come 
from a part of the province where we have had this kind of 
medical care probably longer than any other part of the province, 
and I can appreciate the involvement that the community, the 
doctors, the medical staff, and the people in that community have 
had over the years and their contributions to it. 
 
Now we are dealing here with a number of things that I think 
need to be addressed. I want to indicate that some of this side of 
the House have indicated to me that we need to have a 
commission set up that deals with providing some inputs into the 
direction that health care should take in the future. 
 
Now if we want to continually do as we have done in the past, 
we will never allow ourselves the freedom to be innovative and 
creative and have some discretion and discernment in dealing 
with aspects of health care that are always available and new ones 
always coming in. 
 
I want to say to the Assembly here today that I believe that we in 
health care have done a lot to further the kinds of things that are 
necessary for increased health care in the communities. I just 
want to indicate to you some of the things that have been done in 
the area of the province that I come from. And I know these are 
probably not significant to some of the members, but they are to 
me and to the people who live in the communities that I represent 
and those areas in the south-west. 
 
We had a number of comments made that we had not done 
anything in the health care side, that we were limiting our vision 
and we were limiting the amount of potential that we had. And I 
would disagree with that, Mr. Speaker. There have been a 
number of things that have been done that I want to point out. 
 
First of all, we have changed a direction and improved the 
opportunities in small rural hospitals to have people who have 
lived in these communities all of their lives have an opportunity 
to stay involved in their community by having level 4 care 
facilities established in those small communities. I want to point 
out a number of these, Mr. Speaker, and one of those is the 
Herbert Nursing Home, which was built in 1960 or thereabouts, 
had need for a lot of renovations in 1982. And together with the 
minister of Social Services at that time, we put together 
replacement beds of 19 and added a couple more to enhance the 
opportunity for the nursing staff to facilitate the needs and the 
requirements of level 4 care people in that home. 
 
And I believe that that added to the community; it added to the 
comforts and the needs of those people who were in the home. 
I’ve had a special relationship with that home. My grandmother 
lives in that home, and so I’ve been aware of the needs and the 
concerns of people in that community. 
 
Another area that comes to my mind is the hospital at a

small town called Vanguard. They have had a hospital there for 
quite some time. They’ve been in a condition where they need 
repairs, and the Department of Health has facilitated that 
opportunity, and I think that’s greatly appreciated. 
 
I want to include, also, some of those areas that just neighbour 
my seat, and one of them is the integrated facility at Mankota. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that there we have had an opportunity to 
see how a hospital and a level 4 care facility can move together 
to provide some of the benefits that can accrue when nursing 
staff, doctors, and the people in the community work together. It 
also places into some positive perspective the attitude that the 
community is a community to deliver all of the health services in 
that area. 
 
It’s rather difficult, Mr. Speaker, for people in communities that 
have grown up in these communities to be delegated or relegated 
to areas hundreds of miles away, to have their families split up. 
There are a lot of people who have had their husbands or their 
spouse had to go to a nursing home which is hundreds of miles 
away. That extended care that is able to be given by members of 
the family is not able to be done. And we have taken and put that 
into one unit, and I believe that as we go through time, that’s 
going to become more and more evident as the way to go in the 
small communities. 
 
There’s a new hospital been built at Gull Lake, Saskatchewan, 
just right on the outside edge of my seat. It’s going to assist and 
facilitate the people that are in that community. 
 
I’m going to mention one that is going to be built in this fall and 
through next winter, and that’s the Cabri integrated facility. 
There’s some history here, Mr. Speaker, I think, that has to be 
identified and has to be pointed out. The one thing that is 
extremely important, one of the members of the board, who is a 
member of the commission that was established just in this past 
week by the Minister of Health, was a member of the Cabri 
Hospital board. His name is Ernie Moen, and he’s been in a 
health care concern for a long time, and one of the things that he 
tried to do in the early ’70s when he was the reeve of the 
municipality down there, is he wanted to have a health care 
facility that would accommodate seniors in his community. 
 
And through the ’70s he worked on it and worked on it and was 
never able to reach that goal or accomplish that opportunity to 
have the seniors looked after in a town of 650 people. It was 
always denied them. And when we started talking about an 
integrated facility in that community, that’s when he really got 
excited about how to put this all together. He has worked through 
the time when the member from Saskatoon South was the 
minister of Health and dealt with the moratorium on dealing with 
the care for level 4 patients. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
those kinds of people will never, ever forget how they impeded 
the progress on developing health care. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, continually had to deal with some of the 
problems that arose because of the backlog on facility planning 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We have had to deal with it. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2104 
 

I want to touch on one more item that deals with dental care. And 
we’ve had people on the opposition side raise this on a number 
of occasions. The town of Shaunavon has two dentists today; in 
fact, yesterday they opened the dental offices in Shaunavon — 
two dentists. Now there’s some history in this, Mr. Speaker. They 
did not have dental service from the time that the program was 
introduced for child dental services in the school till yesterday. 
They do not have services in the town of Shaunavon till 
yesterday. Now they have two dentists there. You know why he 
left? Because the volume of service was not extensive enough, 
when the dental program for the children came in, to provide 
dental services to the community. 
 
Now that’s an erosion of service. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, he’s 
providing services in dental care to the towns of Ponteix and to 
Eastend, having satellite offices. Now that, Mr. Speaker, is 
clearly something that we in the south-west have wanted for a 
long time, and we were not able to get it. But yesterday was a 
historic day in the town of Shaunavon for having that happen. 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to see communities 
like that developing all over the province, where they can initiate 
that kind of response. And I believe that that’s positive. 
 
Now one of those . . . that’s a couple that came down to the town 
of Shaunavon, and they are going to be an added benefit to that 
community which was not there before. 
 
I want to also indicate, Mr. Speaker, that we have had in areas 
where we have long distances to travel, and many people . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to enter into this debate, and when I look at the blues for 
today, I note with interest, Mr. Speaker, that the motion before 
us is a complimentary motion where the government has chosen 
to pat itself on the back for its health care task force and its insight 
on the pragmatic and responsible delivery of health care. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, that statement in itself is a joke if it wasn’t so 
ridiculous. 
 
And I listened very carefully to the member from Morse, who 
made not a single reference to the health care task force, because 
I contend, Mr. speaker, that not even the member from Morse, 
not even he believes the gobbledegook that is included in this 
motion here. He understands that the health care task force is a 
political smoke-screen, and he cannot stand and speak in pride 
about the health care record of the Government of Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And consequently, Mr. Speaker, I am moving, I 
will be moving, at the conclusion of my remarks an amendment 
to this motion that will be seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon South, to change all the words after the word 
“Assembly” . . . be deleted and replace . . . and the following 
substituted therefor: 

condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
continued attack on medicare and important health care 
services, its refusal to correct its harmful health care 
policies, and its attempt to distract public attention from its 
attack on medicare. 

 
(1545) 
 
And I’m moving the amendment, Mr. Speaker, because I firmly 
believe that that is what this health care task force is all about. 
It’s a political smoke-screen to try and distract public attention 
from the fact that this government has been literally devastating 
the security of health care in the province of Saskatchewan since 
it came to office, and particularly since July 1 of last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this health care task force is an attempt to provide 
a political smoke-screen to deflect the record and also to deflect 
any pressure, as much as this government can possibly manage, 
brought by the people of Saskatchewan to remedy what it has 
done and to improve the health care system. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because on July 1 of last year, on the 
anniversary of the introduction of the first medicare program in 
Canada here in the province of Saskatchewan, the most beautiful 
gift that the people of Saskatchewan have ever given to Canada 
. . . And how did our PC government in Saskatchewan decide to 
celebrate the 25th anniversary of medicare? How did we decide 
to celebrate it in Saskatchewan? By piratizing health care, by 
eliminating the children’s dental care program, and by 
introducing their devastating changes to the prescription drug 
plan in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Now I can understand, Mr. Speaker, I can 
understand why this government does not want its health care 
record looked at by the people of Saskatchewan because they are 
angry. They’re angry about the piratization of the children’s 
dental care program which took preventative, preventative care, 
dental care for children in 338 communities in this province. 
Preventative health care that was, as a matter fact, less expensive 
per child every year because kids in Saskatchewan were growing 
up with good teeth — growing up with good teeth because they 
were involved in a high quality program that was offered by high 
quality employees of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And how did we celebrate the 25th anniversary? They said, no 
more children’s dental care program; we’re going to piratize it. 
We’re going to transfer it to the private sector. We’re going to 
lay off 400 dental care workers and we’re going to save a half a 
million dollars. And by the minister’s own words in this 
Legislative Assembly, nine months later he admitted the 
participation in that dental care program is only 40 per cent. And 
I say, shame; what a way to celebrate the 25th anniversary of 
medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, then to compound the problem 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2105 
 

on this exact same day, on July 1, the 25th anniversary of 
medicare, we got the changes, the amendments of the 
prescription drug plan for the people of Saskatchewan because 
the Premier of Saskatchewan said, we can’t afford this 
prescription drug plan; it’s being abused. And I ask, Mr. Speaker, 
who’s abusing it? Who’s abusing this program? Is it the doctors? 
We didn’t see the Premier trotting around saying to the doctors, 
oh, you’re abusing the prescription drug program; you’re going 
to have to stop that. No. So are we to conclude, Mr. Speaker, that 
all across the province of Saskatchewan, in the mind of the 
Premier of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Health, that there 
are renegade senior citizens that are breaking into doctors’ 
offices and stealing prescription pads and writing out their own 
prescriptions and dashing down to the pharmacists and getting 
them filled out and taking drugs and getting hooked? Is that what 
we’re to assume? 
 
You know, one of the most shameful acts since I’ve sat in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, took place just across the floor, when 
the Premier of Saskatchewan stood in his place and made an 
analogy. He made an analogy between the use of, he said, free 
prescription drugs and criminal activity — between the use of 
medicine and criminal activity. What a shameful act by the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, the Premier of a government who has 
said, we can’t have any more of this socialized medicine. 
 
You know, that’s an old-fashioned idea; we’ve got to have new, 
improved, piratized medicine. We’ve got to change this 
prescription drug plan because you know, Mr. Speaker, up until 
July 1 of last year, the 25th anniversary of medicare — up until 
June 30 of last year — there was this strange ritual that the people 
of Saskatchewan would go through. They’d get sick, they’d go 
to their doctor, they’d get a prescription they’d go to . . . they’d 
take $3.95 or less, they’d go to their pharmacist, they’d get their 
medicine, they’d go home and take it, and they’d get better. What 
a strange notion — what a strange notion. 
 
We can’t have any more of this socialized medicine. We can’t 
have Saskatchewan people running around, getting sick, going to 
the doctor, getting a prescription, taking $3.95 or less, going to 
the pharmacist, getting their medicine, going home and taking it 
and getting better. We can’t have that. We’ve got to have a new, 
improved way. We’ve got to have the piratized medicine that this 
government has introduced on July 1. 
 
And so we have in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, we have in 
Saskatchewan today a new ritual, the ritual of piratized medicine. 
And how does it work? It starts the same, Mr. Speaker. You get 
sick, you go to the doctor, you get your prescription, and then 
you go to the bank. That’s what happens. Or worse yet, Mr. 
Speaker, you wait until the end of the month; or worst of all, 
because of the piratization of the prescription drug plan in the 
province of Saskatchewan, people go without. 
 
Is there any one of us, is there any one of us in this Assembly 
who has not had the personal experience some time in the last 11 
and a half months of being in a drug store and seeing a young 
mother or a senior citizen walk up to the counter and put down 
their prescription and hear how much it costs and turn around and 
walk away?

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is not the kind of health care, 
that is not the kind of security that people in Saskatchewan have 
come to know and to love and to be proud of in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The attack of this government opposite on the 
security of health care, the delivery of accessible, high quality 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan is devastating. And 
that’s what this motion is all about, when they’re trying to create 
a health care task force to create a smoke-screen. 
 
That’s what it’s all about. It’s because they don’t want to talk 
about and they don’t want to defend their records on accessible 
children’s dental care program, and because they don’t want to 
talk about and they don’t want to defend their record on the 
prescription drug plan because, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they 
know that their record is indefensible, indefensible. 
 
And so what is the response? The Minister of health says, you 
know, the response is then we’re going to do two things to fix 
this up. We’re going to give you all a plastic health card. 
 
Now I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker, but people have not 
been clamouring to me and saying, you know, what this health 
care system needs is a plastic health card. I haven’t heard that. 
 
But that’s the most creative notion that we’ve had from the 
Minister of Health so far. That and to create a health care task 
force to create a political smoke-screen for their record. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude by moving that all the 
words after the word “Assembly” in this motion be deleted, and 
the following substituted therefor: 
 

condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
continuing attacks on medicare and important health care 
services, its refusal to correct its harmful health care 
policies, and its attempt to distract public attention from its 
attack on medicare. 

 
And that’s seconded by the member from Saskatoon South. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I’m afraid that the seconder is 
indeed not acceptable because he has already spoken. The debate 
continues. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Point of order. Mr. Speaker, there are a whole lot 
of folks clamouring on this side to second that motion. The 
member from Prince Albert agreed to second the motion, the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. It is true that the hon. member did 
make an error by naming the member for Saskatoon South as a 
seconder. However, I will accept the seconder which he now 
named. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have leave to 
introduce guests. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2106 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me this 
afternoon to introduce to you some students and their teachers 
and chaperons from Mortlach, Saskatchewan. They are sitting in 
your gallery. There are some 20 grade 7 students who are visiting 
the legislature this afternoon. They have with them their teachers. 
Erwin Engel and Rodney Jahnke, and chaperons Wendy Brandon 
and Donna Young. 
 
I hope that the students have enjoyed the half hour in question 
period; that you’ve learned something about the democratic 
system which we all love so dearly. I’ll be happy to meet with 
you afterwards for pictures and drinks and also to discuss what 
you’ve seen in the Chamber today, and hope that I can answer 
the questions most adequately. 
 
So I would like all members of the legislature to please join with 
me in welcoming the grade 7 students from Mortlach. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like an 
opportunity to perhaps wrap up this debate and say a few things 
with regards to this commission that has been appointed. I think 
that the selection of the commission, Mr. Speaker, is in fact an 
important thing that the selection has in fact been done by very 
prominent people in this province. And I think it’s very important 
that prominent people are the ones that are chosen and selected, 
as the Minister of Health has in fact done with regards to this 
commission. 
 
In particular, Dr. Bob Murray who is, I think, by anybody’s 
standards — no one could accuse Dr. Bob Murray of being 
anything but his own man. And that particular individual, former 
dean of the College of Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan — I’ve met him on several occasions, socially and 
otherwise — and I believe this individual will bring to the 
commission a wider sense of the health care question that we in 
this province, and people around the western world, must come 
to grips with. 
 
Sir Morris Anderson who is the past president of Luther College 
in Regina, again his own man, his own individual. 
 
You have Syl Fedoruk who is the current chancellor of the 
University of Saskatchewan. Syl Fedoruk, for anyone that does 
not know Syl Fedoruk, Syl Fedoruk has distinguished herself 
over a long period of time in the academic field. She is now the 
chancellor of the university. She has done a tremendous amount 
of work in nuclear medicine and cancer research and is, I think, 
held in high regard by anyone who has crossed her path. 
 
Bishop Blaise Morand. Now I think that he will bring to this 
commission, Mr. Speaker, that sense of . . . a wider

sense, not just from the church, but from the various parishioners 
that he would come in contact with — has come in contact with, 
many, many, many occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Ernie Moen, who perhaps more than anyone else in this 
province has experienced, knows, understands both the meaning, 
the function, the requirements of very small hospitals in this 
province. Ernie Moen is from Cabri. For those that are not 
familiar with the geography of the province, Cabri is in fact a 
very, very small town. And Ernie Moen will bring to the 
commission, in my judgement and in my view, the dimension of 
health care in rural Saskatchewan into the future. 
 
And that’s an issue, Mr. Speaker, that we must all attempt to deal 
with. It’s not something that is simply a political issue from one 
party to the other party. The issue is far larger than that, Mr. 
Speaker. And the people of rural Saskatchewan don’t see that 
issue as purely a political issue between one party or the other. 
They see it as an issue that deserves attention, an issue that 
deserves study, an issue that deserves people, particularly rural 
people, applying their imagination to maintaining and improving 
the level of health care. 
 
Then you have Berva Farr, a registered nurse, who is also the 
present executive director of Santa Maria Senior Citizens Home 
in Regina, and that brings to the commission, Mr. Speaker, the 
other issue, which is the wide issue of . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 
(1600) 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 7 — Changes in Canada Post Affecting 
Towns and Villages 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to put this motion before the House today. And I 
would want to indicate that I think it’s especially appropriate that 
this motion be debated in the legislature, in light of the fact that 
the Premier had no answers for the people of Saskatchewan 
regarding rural post office closures this afternoon on question 
period. 
 
And the motion, Mr. Speaker, that I intend to move today is as 
follows: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada that it sees the closure or privatization of small post 
offices across Canada as seriously undermining the 
economic and social well-being of rural communities, 
placing hardships on seniors and physically disabled 
citizens, and threatening thousands of rural jobs, many of 
them currently held by women; and further, that this 
Assembly urge that rural post offices continue to be 
federally owned and operated institutions maintaining a 
permanent presence in Canadian towns and villages. 

 
I want to say that I was disappointed with the Premier’s response 
and I was disappointed that he wasn’t in tune 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2107 
 

with what his minister has been doing with negotiations 
regarding maintaining our rural post offices in Saskatchewan. 
 
We on this side of the House have been consistently asking this 
Premier and his cabinet and his caucus to develop a strategy, or 
at least work towards a strategy, or at least understand that there 
is a need for a strategy to repopulate rural Saskatchewan. 
 
By tearing the heart out of small Saskatchewan communities, you 
don’t attract people to those communities. The hub in the centre 
of our rural towns in Saskatchewan has been, and will continue 
to be, the post office where farmers in the area and small-business 
people can go and get that service. And I think it’s disappointing, 
Mr. Speaker, that this government sits idly by while the federal 
government contemplates the removal of 5,221 rural post offices 
in Saskatchewan by 1996. 
 
It makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, whether this government has 
any feelings for the texture of rural Saskatchewan. They pay 
lip-service to viability of rural towns. But what happens when 
they enact legislation, or when they negotiate with their federal 
counterparts, their friends in Ottawa, the Mulroney PC 
government? 
 
The reality is really quite the opposite. Every decision that this 
government makes is based on dollars and cents and based on 
profit and loss. When it comes to services to people, it’s dollars 
and cents. Not so when they’re governing and when they’re 
budgeting, unfortunately. But when it comes to services provided 
to rural Saskatchewan, it’s a matter of economics. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the reason — if the reason 
is that they want to fill the pockets of the Peter Pocklingtons at 
the expense of rural Saskatchewan and small town 
Saskatchewan. And I’m wondering as well, Mr. Speaker, if that’s 
the reason you see this government sit quietly by while bulk fuel 
dealers are going bankrupt, and while small grocery stores are 
going bankrupt, car dealerships are going bankrupt, implement 
dealerships are going bankrupt. 
 
And what has this government said, what has this government 
said to the small-business people in rural Saskatchewan 
regarding the financial difficulties they’re in? Not one single 
word, Mr. Speaker, have you heard from the lips of any cabinet 
or any back-bencher on that side of the House. 
 
And when it comes to keeping those rural towns viable, there 
isn’t one person in rural Saskatchewan that will tell you he 
doesn’t want his post office, and that that post office doesn’t keep 
that community tied together. But what do you hear from the 
minister? He comes out of a meeting with Canada Post and he 
says if they do what they say they’re going to do, postal service 
should even improve in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I ask that minister what commitment he’s got from his 
federal counterparts. You know, there was a time when the 
federal government understood that even if it cost money to 
supply postal service to rural

Saskatchewan and rural Manitoba and rural Alberta that it was a 
commitment to the people of Canada; it was a commitment that 
would tie our country together because they understood that 
people in rural Saskatchewan deserve the same kind of service 
that they do in urban Saskatchewan or in metropolitan Toronto. 
 
And this government comes out with a half-baked plan — we’re 
not even sure what it is — but a half-baked plan to destroy 5,221 
post offices in our province. 
 
And today in question period we asked the Premier time and time 
again: have you told Brian Mulroney, the Prime Minister of this 
country, and his government that we in Saskatchewan won’t 
accept the closure of any more post offices? Or did that Premier 
get up and say to the Prime Minister that we’re not going to 
accept the privatization of what’s left of what remaining post 
offices we have? We didn’t get that commitment from this 
Premier. 
 
And I want to say that the people of rural Saskatchewan 
understand that this Premier is in a shell. He’s not looking at 
what’s going on around him, and he’s no longer talking to the 
people of this province. And that’s why you get these kinds of 
answers in the legislature when he’s questioned on these 
important issues as he was today. 
 
And has this Premier given any thought to the dollar, the payroll 
that will be lost to Saskatchewan — federal tax dollars that were 
directed to Saskatchewan to deliver postal service. Has he given 
any thought to the money that would be revolving in those 
communities where the postmaster would walk over to the 
general store and buy his groceries on a Friday afternoon or a 
Saturday? Has he given any thought to where that money is 
going? 
 
I say to you that this Premier and this cabinet and members on 
that side of the House have no vision. They don’t understand 
what’s been happening in this province since they’ve been in 
government. And I would suggest this is just another example of 
PC incompetence that we’ve had thrust upon us in this province 
since 1982. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all know that with the closure of 
rural post offices, we all know and understand that that will mean 
lost services to those communities. And there are those in rural 
Saskatchewan in those small communities, that live in nursing 
homes, and who are unable to, for physical impairment, travel to 
other communities or to other areas to get that postal service that 
they require. And has this government given any thought to that? 
Has the minister responsible given any thought to that when he 
was down talking to his friends in Ottawa, and when he came 
back and indicated that if they do what they say they’ll do, postal 
service will improve. 
 
Every single form of privatization in this province has meant lost 
revenues to the province, it’s meant lost service to this province, 
and it’s meant a betrayal of the people of this province. 
 
And I want to say, whether it’s a provincial form of privatization 
or whether it’s done by their federal counterparts, their buddies 
in Ottawa, the end results are the same, Mr. Speaker — lost 
services, lost revenue, and 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2108 
 

increasingly lost hope for the people of this province. 
 
I look at what might happen if this government goes ahead with 
its decision to privatize STC, the bus service, the provincial bus 
service in this province. Is there any kind of a plan that will 
guarantee the right of people in rural Saskatchewan, the right to 
travel to a larger centre, or the right to travel to their dentist, or 
the right to travel to their doctor if they have to? If privatization 
of STC goes through, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it will be a direct 
parallel to what we see with the closure and the privatization of 
post offices in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government clearly isn’t thinking about the people any 
longer. They’re thinking about the survival of their own political 
fortunes. They’re thinking about their own philosophical, 
political agenda, and that being to destroy everything that the 
people of this province ever owned, or the people of this country 
ever owned, whether it be resource or whether it be services that 
we built. 
 
And you can go down the list from bus service to telephone 
service to power service to postal service. All of these things, Mr. 
Speaker, are based on this government’s philosophy that the 
people should own nothing and based on the philosophy that 
those that do own should be friends of the PC Party, the members 
on that side of the House. Because that’s what privatization has 
meant, and that’s what privatization will continue to mean under 
this government — never based on need of the service, never 
based on the economics of the corporation or of the service, only 
based on this government’s philosophical beliefs. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad commentary that a service that 
was promised to the people of western Canada and to rural 
Saskatchewan will be thrust to the side over the wants and the 
needs of one political party, and that being the PC Party that 
governs Saskatchewan today. 
 
And it’s more than services to people, Mr. Speaker — it’s the 
future of families and the future of jobs in the province. I’ve 
mentioned before that a number of people who are employed in 
the delivery of the postal service in Saskatchewan have made 
decent living and would continue to make a decent living, many 
of them subsidizing their farm incomes and keeping their farm 
operations viable. And if those opportunities are lost for those 
people, yet how many more bankruptcies, how many more farm 
bankruptcies are we to experience in Saskatchewan? 
 
Enough that a small town would lose the service of their post 
office, but to compound that, to lose one of their neighbours and 
one of their friends, and many of them have spent decades 
working in the post offices in those rural towns, but to lost 
another neighbour because this government has decided to 
privatize yet another service. 
 
And I think we all know what’s been happening to rural 
Saskatchewan in the 1980s. And I’ll agree that there was some 
of that before the 1980s, that to keep the rural areas viable has 
been a difficult chore and will continue to be a difficult chore for 
any government. But that doesn’t exclude this government of 
their responsibility. The

Premier and his cabinet and his back-benchers have a serious 
responsibility in the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I travelled throughout Saskatchewan, in rural 
Saskatchewan a week and a half or so ago when our caucus 
members were on a tour reviewing the drought conditions in rural 
Saskatchewan, and when I looked at the change in towns like 
Gravelbourg, a town that I grew up some 12 miles or 15 miles 
away from, and when I look at the change to that town and the 
number of businesses that have gone under, and when I have the 
town council or the mayor of the community indicate that their 
population is decreasing, it tells me that this government hasn’t 
done enough. 
 
And when I go to a town like Shaunavon and I see the changes 
in that town from 10 years ago, it tells me the government is 
abrogating its responsibility to keep those towns viable. And why 
then, why then, Mr. Speaker, would this government agree to 
allow the federal government, without a peep, without a sound, 
would allow the federal government to make such wide sweeping 
changes to those little towns, such as removing their post offices? 
 
Would there be any noise if it were a Liberal or New Democrat 
government in Ottawa, from this Premier? If the philosophical 
beliefs, or the political parties weren’t one in the same — PC in 
Regina, PC in Ottawa — would there be some noise from this 
government? 
 
(1615) 
 
There would be a hue and cry across this province, I say, Mr. 
Speaker, second to none. I would suggest to you that the cabinet 
and the Premier would be on a road show to Ottawa and they’d 
be lobbying the cabinet and lobbying the Prime Minister and 
they’d be out talking to the town councils in areas where they 
stand the risk of losing their post offices. But what in this case? 
 
The Premier gets on the phone in the middle night and cries for 
a deficiency payment. And what do we get in return? We got our 
deficiency payment, granted. But now what we get is we get . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . .You never got a billion dollars in 
Saskatchewan. The member from Rosthern has got his numbers 
crossed again and he knows it. 
 
But what did we get in return? We got a commitment from the 
Premier of this province to say, okay, Mr. Prime Minister, close 
down the rural post offices; I mean, we owe you, we owe you a 
big one, and we won’t harass you, we won’t hassle you; we’ll let 
you close them down one by one and we’ll let you kill off our 
small towns. That’s what’s happened, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
why this government is conspicuously silent on this issue, and 
that’s why the people of rural Saskatchewan stand to lose their 
post offices. 
 
I made reference to the texture of rural Saskatchewan. And I go 
through those small towns and I see the elevators gone because 
of variable rates. And where was this government? They’re 
amalgamating their services, the elevator companies are, another 
thorn for many of those 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2109 
 

small towns, elevators disappearing, farmers hauling their grain 
to other points, Small Town, Saskatchewan dying. And where is 
this government? 
 
I look at what’s been happening to hotels in rural Saskatchewan 
and the hoteliers and the problems they’re having making a living 
right now. And where is this government? Introduces a Bill 
before this legislature, Bill 50, an Act to deal with the sale and 
consumption of alcohol in the province, and are there any 
commitments in statute — commitments that the people of . . . 
the hoteliers of this province were asking for? No, it’s all in 
regulation. It’s all cards dealt to the minister in charge to shuffle 
around the cabinet table. And every one of these cards have no 
face on them, and the people that deal in that industry have no 
idea what’s coming, but this government marches blindly ahead, 
ramming through that particular piece of legislation as they’ve 
done every other. 
 
And I want to draw another parallel to the closure of the hotels 
. . . of the post offices and the privatization of post offices in rural 
Saskatchewan. And that particular piece of legislation that we’re 
dealing with is allowing store hours to be deregulated in this 
province, which is another nail in the coffin of rural towns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business people in rural Saskatchewan are well 
aware of the fact that they can’t compete with uncontrolled store 
hours any more than they can handle the loss of their post offices. 
But it’s just one little chunk on top of another that you’re piling 
on, one stone on top of another, until the small towns can’t carry 
the burden of that weight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan . . . rural-urban Saskatchewan feels betrayed 
by this government. And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’ve got good reason to feel betrayed by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the initial stages of my remarks I indicated that 
what this government should be striving for and striving to attain 
was the repopulation of rural Saskatchewan, and by that 
repopulation, I mean having some active, some useful, some 
meaningful industry in the small towns that will employ people 
and attract people to those small towns. 
 
And they talk about economic diversification, which hasn’t 
happened, and they have all the catch words, and they have all 
the phrases, and they have all the little remarks to make, but when 
it comes to actual implementation of a program that is going to 
be a positive benefit, there’s nothing there. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people in this province are 
feeling betrayed. They no longer have the faith in this Premier 
and in this cabinet that they once had. And it didn’t take long, 
Mr. Speaker, for that trust to disappear. 
 
And if this government is really serious about maintaining power 
in this province, I would suggest that it have a very close look at 
the by-elections in Saskatoon Eastview, now represented by a 
New Democrat. And I would suggest that they have a close look 
at Regina Elphinstone, or as the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd 
refers to it, elephant

stone. But I want to say that they should be taking a very close 
look. Mr. Speaker, at what’s happened in those ridings when 
they’re making their decision to sit quietly by while the federal 
government destroys this post office system that we have built in 
our province. 
 
People in this province understand clearly that the federal 
government made some commitments to the people of 
Saskatchewan and western Canada when we joined 
confederation. And part of that, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, was the 
maintenance of proper mail service and mail delivery in the rural 
parts of the province. 
 
And we on this side of the House understand that there and some 
small towns that you just simply can’t deliver the service to and 
make money, because maybe the volume is too high, or maybe 
the distance from a main drop-off point is too far. But are they 
second class citizens in small town rural Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not in our mind. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Not in the minds of the people on this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker, but I fear they are to the members on 
that side of the House, or they would be up defending the right 
of those people in rural Saskatchewan to have a first-class system 
of postal service. 
 
And it’s not only the people that live in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve been supported in their fight to maintain postal 
service by the United Church Women, who passed a resolution; 
by SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities); 
by SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association); 
the Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of Women; 
and 60 municipal councils in this province — a petition, Mr. 
Speaker, of 250,000 people. 
 
What more does this government need? And what more does 
Mulroney need? What more does the Prime Minister of this 
country need to understand that the people in Saskatchewan 
won’t accept the dismantling of that program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — How many groups — SARM, SUMA, the 
United Church Women, the action committee for the status of 
women, a 250,000-person petition? Is this Premier so blind, as 
clearly the prime minister of this province is, are these two men 
so blind that the only thing that they can see is maintaining power 
— which they can’t do by not listening, because the people aren’t 
going to accept it. 
 
This Prime Minister has a mandate until next spring, at which 
time he’s going to have to go to the people of Saskatchewan to 
ask them whether or whether not they support the changes to the 
postal system in this province. And the Premier has got a little bit 
of a reprieve. He doesn’t have to go to the people till 1991. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
have long memories, and they’re not going to forget the 
dismantling of the school-based dental 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2110 
 

program. They’re not going to forget what you’ve done to the 
drug prescription plan. They’re not going to forget the fact that 
you’ve given away just about every publicly-owned resource that 
there was in this province. They’re not going to forget that the 
utility rates have increased by 50 per cent since 1982. They’re 
not going to forget that there’s a three-point-some billion dollar 
deficit in this province. They’re not going to forget that there’s 
an $11 billion total provincial debt that’s been mainly created by 
the incompetence and the ineptness of this PC government. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of this 
province may think that he’s got until 1991 and people will forget 
all the hurt and all the inaction, but I say to you the people of 
Saskatchewan are wise to him, they don’t trust him, and he’ll 
know that. And clearly, Elphinstone and Eastview were 
indicators that that’s the case. 
 
And I challenge any member on that side if they don’t think that’s 
the case, and if you want to test in rural Saskatchewan of how the 
people of Saskatchewan feel, move out the member from 
Kindersley and let’s have a by-election, or move out the member 
from Thunder Creek, or move out the member from Meadow 
Lake — and that’s the one I’d like to test in Meadow Lake — or 
try the one in Saltcoats. Because I tell you the people in 
Saskatchewan are waiting for an opportunity to tell you that 
they’re dissatisfied, they’re disgusted, they’ve had enough, and 
they want a change in government. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province have 
turned a deaf ear to the people of Saskatchewan. A letter from 
the Archdiocese of Regina tells the Premier of this province that 
they’re not satisfied with the federal government’s moves. What 
more do they need? I mean do the people in Saskatchewan, of 
rural Saskatchewan, have to come and march on the steps of the 
legislature with baseball bats in their hand in order to knock some 
sense into this Premier? He’s got to understand that they’re not 
going to allow 5,221 post offices to be torn apart in this province, 
because they’re demanding that service and they demand it only 
because they deserve it. 
 
And I say to you, members on this side of the House are going to 
ensure that we’ll keep those post offices in their present condition 
as long as we possibly can, and I want to suggest that our federal 
counterparts in Ottawa are mounting a battle as well. 
 
This Premier and this government has got to understand that 
people won’t tolerate the cut-backs to essential services like 
postal service. And I would hope that this Premier will, before 
1991, understand that he’s got to change the way he’s governing 
this province, and he’s got to show some leadership and that he’s 
got to show some real commitment to the people of this province. 
 
And I would suggest that the Premier of this province, who’s 
already alienated just about every group in Saskatchewan, is now 
working on small town Saskatchewan, and I would say that that’s 
one of the last vestiges of hope he’s got, or had. And I would say 
to you it’s no longer there. All for philosophical reasons.

There’s money in this country, there’s money to be redistributed 
to deliver postal service to Saskatchewan. And how that has to 
be done, Mr. Speaker, is by taxing some of the people who have 
been avoiding tax in this country so that you can deliver postal 
service, and meaningful tax reform that will shift the tax burden 
from middle income people to the higher income groups so that 
we can have these kinds of systems in our province. We’ve seen 
them decimate the health care system, we’ve seen them cut back 
fundings to the educational system, we’ve seen teachers laid off 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh, and the Minister of Health says, not 
true. Prince Albert school unit number . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Of Education. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Of Education. Prince Albert school unit 
no. 56, nine teachers — nine teachers. But he says, oh it’s not 
me, not me, don’t point the finger at this government because it’s 
not our fault; no, no, we didn’t do that. You can’t tell that to the 
school boards, Mr. Minister, because they know better. You can’t 
tell it to the teachers, Mr. Minister, because they too know better. 
And you can’t tell it to the electorate because it’s becoming very 
clear to them what you’ve been doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — The member from Regina indicates that 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . from Regina Rosemont indicates that 
he’d want me to share a little bit about Regina Eastview and what 
the people in Eastview were saying about this government as I 
canvassed up there during the by-election. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Or in Saskatoon Eastview. And I want to 
tell you what they were saying up there. They were saying up 
there that we voted for this government in 1982 — and I’m 
talking some pretty elaborate homes and some high income 
people who would say to me, I’ve never voted New Democrat in 
my life; I’ve always been a Tory, but I never saw a Saskatchewan 
Tory government until I elected them in 1982, and boy, do I wish 
I could have that vote over again. 
 
(1630) 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — What they’re saying is that the dental plan 
affects them as well. What they’re saying is that the drug 
prescription plan affects them. What they’re saying is the deficit 
is affecting them and is going to affect them. What they’re saying 
is the flat tax is a betrayal after you told them you were going to 
reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent. What they’re saying 
is the Premier of this province can’t be trusted. What they’re 
saying is they



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2111 
 

want a New Democrat government. They want some sanity back 
in government in Saskatchewan, and they want it as soon as they 
can get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to quote from an article in the 
Star-Phoenix, April 26. And it says in the editorial section 
 

It is their current political masters who have invested this 
silly proposition that basic services to sparsely populated 
areas can be financially self-sustaining. They can’t. 
Canada’s geography guaranteed that at the time of 
confederation. And those who took to the rural areas 
through their circumstances would be recognized in 
perpetuity by having it an accepted fact that the cost of 
making them part of this country, with at least some 
services, would be shared coast to coast. 

 
Now so much for fairness to rural Saskatchewan. Where was the 
Premier? Where was the Premier? Surely the Premier would 
understand that federal government has a responsibility to deliver 
postal service to this province in a fashion that’s fair and 
equitable and affordable. 
 
But why the privatization? Is this another set-up for a patronage 
plum for friends of the party? And, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: are 
the members of the federal Troy party and of the provincial Tory 
party going to go through Saskatchewan town by town by town 
and do a litmus test on every business person to decide who gets 
it? 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the same scenario 
we’re going to see with the privatization or the franchisation of 
the liquor stores. It’s the same system, it’s the same people, and 
it’s the same kind of corruption. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if you were to privatize, if this 
federal government were to privatize the post offices, and if the 
people could have a guarantee that they would have adequate 
services, and if the people could have a guarantee that they would 
have the same kind of costs incurred, and if they were to have a 
guarantee of a commitment to fairness for everybody to have a 
chance at getting one of those post office franchises, you may 
have a chance to sell it. 
 
And they feel the same about the liquor stores and the 
privatization of the liquor stores. If everyone had a fair and an 
open and an honest chance at owning one of those, and if there 
wasn’t fear that this government would have it so full of 
patronage and corruption and kickbacks, then you may have a 
chance to sell privatization of liquor stores as well as 
privatization of the post offices. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people know the PC Party and they know 
this government and they know Mulroney’s government and they 
know the federal PC Party. And they know the litany of graft, 
and they know the list of cabinet ministers that the Prime 
Minister of this country has either had to fire or remove from his 
cabinet or ask to resign. And my colleagues says, eight, or is it 
nine? One would be too many, Mr. Speaker, but I believe it is 
nine. But people understand what this party is about, and they 
understand that it’s built on patronage, and they understand that 
there

no longer is a system of fair and open tendering, and that includes 
the government in Saskatchewan and the government in Ottawa. 
 
And they fear what this government, this federal government 
may do in terms of privatization of the post offices. We in 
Saskatchewan are not used to that kind of government, Mr. 
Speaker. We in Saskatchewan are used to a government that 
delivered a fair system of tendering, delivered an honest 
government and delivered a government that cared about the 
people. 
 
But if this form of privatization that seems to be supported by the 
Premier of this province is just yet another example of that, I say, 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier won’t be able to sell it and nor will the 
Prime Minister. 
 
I’ve talked about rural Saskatchewan and what’s been happening 
and how the small towns have been dying and the fact that this 
government has showed no leadership. I’ve talked about the 
small businesses going bankrupt in rural Saskatchewan without 
any assistance from this Premier and from this cabinet and this 
government. And I’ve talked about the fact that they feel 
betrayed. People who were once loyal to this party feel betrayed. 
Residents of Saskatchewan who at one time were non-political 
feel betrayed, and I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this will be 
a short-lived government, federally, because of it. And I would 
suggest as well that the Premier of this province is well on his 
way to his demise because of those same things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — No concern for the people, no concern for 
their communities. I would suggest that this government has lost 
its self-respect, or it would be out there fighting for the people of 
Saskatchewan, which it clearly isn’t going to. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I would want to move, seconded 
by the member from Regina North: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada that it sees the privatization of small post offices 
across Canada as seriously undermining the economic and 
social well-being of rural communities, placing hardship on 
seniors and physically disabled citizens and threatening 
thousands of rural jobs, many of those jobs currently held 
by women; and further, that this Assembly urge the rural 
post office continue to be federally owned and operated 
institutions maintaining a permanent presence in Canadian 
towns and villages. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, after some discussion with 
the House Leader and the opposition, I ask for leave of the House 
to revert at this juncture in this debate to government orders so 
that we may present second reading of Bill No. 86, a Bill 
respecting the registered nursing profession in the province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before . . .  
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2112 
 

We’re prepared to grant leave, of course, under the 
circumstances, but I want to make sure that it’s clear, because the 
member opposite didn’t quite complete it — I’m not being 
critical, but the leave is being requested for the second reading of 
this Bill, and then we will revert back to private members. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act respecting Registered Nurses 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thank you to all members of the House for granting leave. I want 
to draw to the members’ attention that there are a number of 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association in the gallery, and they were here as a result of some 
information that they had that this Bill would go forward today. 
And so I thank all members for their co-operation in that regard, 
because some of them have come from some distance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain these amendments to The 
Registered Nurses Act, 1978, which deal with a variety of matters 
intended to provide better protection for the public and to allow 
nurses to regulate their affairs in an effective manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association 
has been fully consulted about these amendments. I believe . . . 
They may say that’s an understatement, but I believe that they 
would agree certainly that they have been fully consulted, and 
there have been long and sometimes arduous discussions 
between us as we developed this legislation. And I might say that 
I believe very strongly that the SRNA wholly endorses them as 
necessary improvements in the practice of nursing in our 
province. 
 
One of the major changes to the existing Act is the deletion of 
reference to certified nursing assistants. Nursing assistants, 
through another Act soon to be considered here in the legislature, 
Mr. speaker, will soon be allowed to regulated the activities of 
their own profession. 
 
Under the existing nurses’ Act, it is not mandatory that nurses be 
registered in order to practise nursing. By enforcing registration, 
these amendments will ensure that the public receives the 
services of only qualified nurses. 
 
As a further protection, use of the title “nurse” will now be 
restricted to registered nurses and registered psychiatric nurses. 
 
To enable mandatory registration to be implemented, a definition 
of the practice of nursing has been incorporated into this Act. As 
a protection for other health occupations, exclusions from the 
practice of nursing have also been included. This will ensure that 
other health occupations and those providing basic personal care 
are allowed to perform the services for which they were trained. 
That is, these occupations will not be seen to be practising 
nursing and therefore will not be subject to

prosecution. 
 
An amendment to the Act will also allow for the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to appoint up to two public representatives 
to the council of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association. Public involvement in regulating the profession will 
be an asset to the association, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The concept of graduate nurse will be included in the new Act. 
This will allow those nurses who are recent graduates, but are 
awaiting the results of their national nursing exams, to practise in 
the interim with a four-month, temporary licence. 
 
Some amendments to the existing discipline provisions have 
been made as well, Mr. Speaker. Under the existing Act, a person 
who lays a complaint against a nurse need not be informed as to 
the outcome of their complaint. The association will now be 
required to inform the public complainant as to what action was 
taken on their complaint. 
 
An additional amendment will allow a nurse who was found 
guilty of incompetence or misconduct by the association’s 
discipline committee to appeal the decision to council or to the 
courts. In the present Act, the council, as opposed to the 
discipline committee, made the discipline decision, and therefore 
an appeal to council was not possible. This new amendment is 
seen to offer a more fair and less costly option to the nurse and 
to the association. 
 
A nurse who has been expelled from the profession will be 
allowed to apply to council for reinstatement at a future time 
under a new provision of this Act. If the nurse is refused 
reinstatement, she or he may appeal the decision to the courts. 
The revised process will provide fair justice to the nurse while 
still ensuring protection of the public. 
 
As a further protection, employers will be required to report to 
the association the dismissal of nurses for reasons of misconduct 
or incompetence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, additional amendments have also been made to 
elaborate on and clarify various regulatory processes carried out 
by the association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just ask all members that I believe we 
should all join with the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association in welcoming these amendments. 
 
And I want to say a couple of words now, Mr. Speaker, as it 
relates to the process — I made some early reference to it — the 
process of consultation that goes on in developing this kind of 
professional legislation. 
 
And I want to say, as I said to the SRNA (Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses Association) at their convention, that I believe 
that the professional way with which their association and the 
members of the association in various locations around the 
province approached the development of this legislation could 
only be called excellent, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to say that 
to them, but I think also to the House and to all members of the 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2113 
 

House, that they handled that in an extremely professional 
manner, and it’s appropriate to mention that in a circumstance 
where we’re dealing with their professional legislation. 
 
And I want to say to their past president Jean Mahoney, who is 
here in the gallery today, to their present president Barb Ellemers, 
and I’m not sure if Barb is here, but if she isn’t . . . but certainly 
Jean Mahoney and their executive director Jane Knox, who 
worked very hard on the development of this legislation — Jane 
is in the gallery today — that I have, and I know my colleagues 
have, appreciated their professional approach to the development 
of this. And I believe, as I believe they do, that this legislation 
will augur well for the practice of nursing in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with that I would ask all 
members of the Assembly and all sides of the House to support 
these progressive amendments to The Registered Nurses Act, and 
I am very pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 86 at this 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave to make 
a brief introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to thank the members of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to make a brief 
introduction of students that are here today, and especially the 
member for Lakeview who is following in debate. 
 
The group of students today, Mr. Speaker, are from St. Mary’s 
School in Saskatoon. They’re located in the Speaker’s gallery. 
There are nine of them, and I understand they’re grade 7 students. 
I’ll be meeting with them later for pictures and answer any 
questions they may have with regard to the function of the 
Assembly here. 
 
They are from the constituency of Riversdale, and the member 
for Riversdale is unfortunately not able to be with us today and 
he asked me to make the introduction on his behalf to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to members of the Assembly, and to ask you to join 
me in welcoming these students from St. Mary’s School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my colleague 
from Westmount to pay special tribute to Mr. Rutten and Mr. 
Jelinski, who are former colleagues of mine, particularly Mr. 
Jelinski and I work together in our church pretty well every 
Sunday, and I want to extend a hearty welcome here.

I hope you people enjoy your stay here in Regina, and my 
understanding is you will be here tomorrow. I hope you also 
enjoy the ceremonies here tomorrow, and I ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming, not only Mr. Rutten and Mr. Jelinski, 
but also the students from St. Mary’s School. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86 (continued) 
 

Ms. Simard: — The New Democratic Party opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is very pleased to give the government leave to deal 
with this legislation today because of the fact that the legislation 
is very important for nurses, because of its mandatory retirement 
provisions, the fact it protects the name “nurse,” for example, and 
we know that it’s important to the nursing profession. 
 
I, however, would like to make a comment that ordinarily what 
is done on Tuesday is private members’ business, and the 
business that was arranged for today was also private members’ 
business. I am aware that the SRNA was advised that this 
legislation would be coming forward; however, there was 
arrangement for private members’ business today, Mr. Speaker, 
and the SRNA of course was not advised that the Bill would not 
be coming forward. 
 
And I think that’s another example, along with the fact that the 
Bill that we’re dealing with is still not in printed form, Mr. 
Speaker — it’s still not in printed form — and that’s an example 
of the way this House is being run during this session. 
 
The Minister of health suggests, Mr. Speaker, that I should be 
nice just once. But if these little administrative things, or rather 
they’re not that little, were looked after by the government, we 
wouldn’t be in this situation on such a constant basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — But nevertheless, notwithstanding these 
problems, we are very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to give leave to deal 
with this Bill now, not only because it’s important to nurses but 
because out of deep respect for the hard work that nurses have 
been doing in this province of Saskatchewan over the last few 
decades, and particularly in the last two or three years since 
they’ve been working under very difficult conditions due to 
government cut-backs. 
 
I too would like to say that I was most impressed by the way that 
the nursing profession was handling these amendments. I’ve had 
a lot of discussions with the SRNA, with the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, as well with certified nursing assistants, and 
I’ve been very impressed by the forthright and thorough way in 
which the nurses have been dealing with putting this legislation 
together, so I join the minister in his comments in that regard. 
 
I want to also say that most of yesterday and some of today I have 
been speaking with these groups that I referred to in my earlier 
comments, Mr. Speaker, and there are some 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2114 
 

concerns that were raised to me by the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses that were not carried over into this legislation, and I wish 
to just point out some of those concerns now, as many as I can 
before 5 o’clock. And I believe that there is also a possibility that 
some of these could be corrected through House amendments. 
 
I will put some of these concerns on record and ask the minister 
to consult with the SRNA to see whether or not it’s possible for 
some of these things could be corrected in House amendments, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first one that I have on the list is with regard to Section 
15(1)(a) . . . no, pardon me, 15(2)(a) on page 7 of this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, and 15 . . . it deals with the reference to moral character, 
and there may be other places where this occurs, but it talks about 
prescribing the qualification standard and tests of competency in 
moral character for the registration of nurses. 
 
Now I have checked with The Medical Profession Act and some 
other professional Acts, and the word that we ordinarily use is 
“good” character as opposed to “moral” character. And the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses have pointed this out, and 
indicated that “moral” tends to mean concerned with rules of 
morality, virtuousness and not . . . we’re getting into the religious 
area, as opposed to good character, which means having the right 
qualities, satisfactory and adequate. 
 
And my discussions with the SRNA indicated that they would 
not be opposed to such an amendment. They did preface all my 
discussions with the fact that they would want to get together 
with other officials with the SRNA to confirm that. But I think if 
the minister spoke to the SRNA, he would determine that that 
House amendment would probably be in order. And I believe it 
makes it a little more fair because the word “moral” is not 
ordinarily used in profession legislation, or it certainly wasn’t in 
the legislation I looked at. 
 
Another concern that we talked about today was section 30(4) of 
the . . . 30 sub 4, of the new . . . of the proposed Act, and that has 
to do with evidence that is tendered at a discipline committee 
hearing. And the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. It sounds very much to me like the hon. 
member is in fact studying the Bill clause by clause, which is 
more appropriate in Committee of the Whole. And while she 
certainly has every right to make general comments regarding the 
Bill, I don’t think it is acceptable to refer to clauses and go 
through the Bill in that manner. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just referring to 
the section so the minister would know exactly what section I 
was talking about, but I will speak in general terms then. 
 
The general concern in this regard is that the rules of . . . when a 
discipline committee is holding an inquiry, they are not bound by 
the rules of evidence. And we suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when 
you’re talking about taking somebody’s licence away to practise 
their profession, to deny them the right to earn a living, that the 
discipline committee should be bound by the rules of evidence 
that ordinarily apply to a court of law. In a case like this the

rules of evidence are very important. It’s important that the 
principles of natural justice are not encroached upon. 
 
Now I believe that that House amendment should be brought 
forward to make that perfectly clear, and I hope that the minister 
will consult with the SRNA to determine whether it’s possible to 
present that House amendment. 
 
Another point that was brought to my attention is the fact that the 
legislation allows for fines to be imposed on nurses — fines to 
be imposed on nurses, Mr. Speaker. And the suggestion that was 
made to me was that this was not appropriate in the nursing 
profession that fines be levied. The provision with respect to 
fines goes on and talks about assessing costs against a nurse, and 
that if the nurse doesn’t pay the fine or the cost, the suspension, 
for example, continues. 
 
Nurses are not in the same financial position that chartered 
accountants may be, or that doctors may be, for example, Mr. 
Speaker, or that lawyers may be. It is very difficult for a nurse to 
come up with the money to pay a fine, for example, or even to 
pay the costs. And if their suspension continues until this fine is 
indeed paid, it just compiles one problem upon another, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we would like the government to take a look at that provision 
and reconsider deleting the fine portion as SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses) has expressed concern to me, about the cost 
portion as well. I understand that there are reasons for leaving 
that in from the point of view of the SRNA, but I think if the 
minister speaks to them before this Bill goes into Committee of 
the Whole, we may be able to come forward with a House 
amendment to eliminate the fine aspect of that section because it 
really serves very little purpose, and certainly is not viewed 
favourably by the nursing profession. 
 
Those were three of the areas where I felt that there was some 
consensus as a result of my discussions, Mr. Speaker. There were 
other concerns brought to my attention which I will deal with 
when it gets to Committee of the Whole, and I see no reason why 
this Bill couldn’t go into Committee of the Whole this afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, being near 5 o’clock I move 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no. From five until seven. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whether the 
member opposite is correct. This is a day in which we sit in the 
afternoon and 7 o’clock till 10 o’clock in the evening. I think he 
has moved adjournment. I don’t think that was the intent. 
Certainly that was not the intent of the arrangements between the 
House Leader and I. If that is now, then that is a complete change, 
at a time when we should be sitting extended hours, and I would 
like the member to correct it, whether he’s adjourning or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ll allow the hon. member to respond to that. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

 

2115 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was not 
fully aware of some of the arrangements that had been made 
between our Minister of Health and the House Leader of the 
opposition, and I will retract my motion. I will call it 5 o’clock 
and wish everyone a happy supper. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


