


















































May 26, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 26, 1988 
 

1571 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 of this 
Assembly to present a petition signed by more than 500 students 
from Kelsey Institute. They’re expressing their concern about 
underfunding of the university, about elimination of the student 
positions at Kelsey and Wascana, about elimination of a student 
bursary program, and the need for at least 12,000 jobs in the 
student summer program. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to 
all members of the Assembly, a group of 22 grade 8 students 
from the Turtleford School in the Turtleford constituency. 
They’re seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
accompanied by teacher Bill Kresowaty, chaperons, Don and 
Kristine Sylvester, and Lorna Chambers. 
 
Welcome to Regina. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. I 
trust you’ll enjoy the proceedings today. I look forward to 
discussion with you, refreshments and photographs immediately 
following question period. Have a safe trip home. 
 
Please join me in welcoming the students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you, 
and through you to the members of the legislature, a group of 8 
students from the Regina Christian School who are seated in the 
east gallery. 
 
They’re with us today to observe question period and to join with 
us after question period for some photos and meet us in the 
members’ dining room afterwards. 
 
So I would want all members to join with me, welcome the group 
here, and look forward to seeing you after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you, a group of 
students from Vanscoy School — this is on behalf of my 
colleague, the member for Biggar. We have a group of grade 5, 
6, 7 students, 84 in number in your gallery, visiting Regina today. 
 
Certainly we want to wish them a very warm welcome and I look 
forward to meeting with the group. They are accompanied by 
Rick Gosslin, Gene Chovin and Barry Radcliffe. I’ll be meeting 
with them at 3 o’clock. I would ask all members to give this 
group of students a very warm welcome today.

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure, a 
great deal of pleasure today, to welcome a group of students from 
St. Philip’s Centre here in Regina. They’re a native life skills 
group. I had the pleasure of having coffee and drinks with this 
group earlier this morning. We had a rather extensive meeting. 
They had some very good questions. 
 
They’re accompanied by Dan Danforth, Luwayne Missens and 
Angie Rush. The group is seated in the east gallery. Please join 
me in welcoming this group. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleague, the Minister of Justice and the hon. member from 
Kindersley, I have the privilege today of introducing to you, and 
through you to the members of this House, 22 grade 5 students 
from Eston, Saskatchewan. 
 
For some of the members across the way, if they don’t know 
where Eston is, it’s just a little north of the South Saskatchewan 
River in the great south-west. And you must take the time to go 
to the great gopher derby in Eston, Saskatchewan. I assure you 
the hospitality is great and the races are interesting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students with them today have their teacher 
Janet Ringheim, and they have adult companions in Trudy 
Sinclair, Janet Irvine, Don Jackson and Glenn Hartsook. And 
last, but not least, probably most important, Mr. Speaker, is the 
bus driver, Laurie Thompson. I will be meeting with this group 
for a question period, and I would ask all members to welcome 
on behalf of the member from Kindersley. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

 Free Trade Agreement and Provincial Rights 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Deputy Premier. It concerns the legislation tabled in 
parliament this week, approving the provisions of the 
Mulroney-Reagan trade deal. And I want to question the minister 
about section 6 of that legislation which says: 
 

For greater certainty, nothing in this Act, by specific 
mention or omission, limits in any manner the right of 
Parliament to enact legislation to implement any provision 
of the Agreement or fulfil any of the obligations of the 
Government of Canada under the Agreement. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, at least six provincial leaders, including such 
boosters of the deal as Premier Bourassa and Premier Getty, have 
expressed strong reservations about this clause. But as of the 
moment, Saskatchewan has not been heard from.  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1572 
 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: where does Saskatchewan, 
which is a long-time champion of provincial rights, stand today 
on this issue? Have you expressed your concerns to the Prime 
Minister or to Mr. Crosbie? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan of course 
has been and continues to be a very strong supporter of provincial 
rights, and our minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He 
doesn’t want to hear the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Minister of Trade in fact at this very moment is in Ottawa 
and Quebec city — not both at the same time, obviously — but 
down there at a ministerial conference talking about this 
legislation and Justice matters, and I don’t know which one is 
which today. But that’s where he is, and I’m sure that he will deal 
with this in some detail when he returns. 
 
Suffice it to say at this point, Mr. Speaker, that our view is that 
section 6 of the Bill does not give the federal government any 
residual power to interfere with provincial control of resources. 
Provincial control of resources is protected by the constitution, 
Mr. Speaker, and no federal legislation can unilaterally take away 
that protection. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I did not 
understand the answer, Minister. Where does Saskatchewan 
stand? Are you going to express concern about section 6 to the 
federal government and ask that it be changed, or are you saying 
that that legislation is all right as far as you’re concerned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we have always stood for 
Saskatchewan, four-square for Saskatchewan, and that has been 
the case. That will continue to be the case, and, Mr. Speaker, 
there can be no doubt about that. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, if members opposite think that section 6 can do 
something to Saskatchewan that we have guaranteed to us under 
the constitution, they are simply wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well I interpret the minister’s answer to be that 
Saskatchewan is not the least bit concerned about the provisions 
of section 6. A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. 
 
In the 1970's, Saskatchewan went to court against an uncaring 
federal government to get control of our resources, and here we 
have another uncaring federal government that seems to want to 
take away those hard-won rights. Now giving control of things 
like our natural resources to the federal government would mean 
that decisions about their future would be based upon the political 
necessities of the central government, and more times than not, 
those political necessities would be those 

of Ontario and Quebec. 
 
My question is this: isn’t that what we’re getting out of this deal, 
control of our natural resources being dictated by the political 
needs of central Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, coming from that party, 
the party that kept that uncaring government in office, the party 
that supported the national energy program that caused us to lose 
millions and millions and billions in western Canada in revenues 
to the benefit of central Canada, coming from that party — I 
don’t need to be preached at by those people, Mr. Speaker, as it 
relates to protecting the rights of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan Mr. Speaker, will be protected by this government 
through thick and thin. There is nothing in section 6 that can take 
away from us what is constitutionally ours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister is obviously quoting from 
some sort of a legal document where he gets some reference. I 
wonder whether he would mind, after question period, tabling the 
document so all members could share in it. 
 
I wonder if the minister would table the document that he refers 
to when he says that section 6 would cause no problem to the 
people of Saskatchewan in terms of rights and powers over their 
resources. Will you table that document? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, no, for two reasons. One, 
you can’t table documents in question period, and that’s the rule. 
Two, it’s been long-standing practice that a briefing note that I 
just happened to get earlier today from the Minister of Trade who 
was in central Canada today, and it’s not a legal document, it’s a 
note — and I don’t intend to table it, Mr. Speaker. I don’t intend 
to table it, but I will say this, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll say it again 
just for members opposite, to them. There is nothing in section 6 
that can take away from us what is ours under the constitution. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question to the minister. Since 1930 
when the natural resources were transferred to the provinces from 
the federal government, the powers that that has given to the 
development of the province here in Saskatchewan has been 
phenomenal. I say to you, Mr. Minister, that article 20(10) of the 
agreement that deals with monopoly clearly, clearly would not 
allow Crown corporations, SaskPower and SaskTel, to be 
established in the day of Tommy Douglas. 
 
I say to you, why are you so insistent on giving away that kind of 
rights that the province has worked for the last 50 years in order 
to be a lap dog of the federal government, your buddy Brian 
Mulroney? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1573 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the member 
doesn’t understand what’s in the agreement. We are getting 
rights, Mr. Speaker. We are getting rights in this agreement. We 
are getting the right to a very large market, access to the largest 
market, the largest market any place in the world — rights, Mr. 
Speaker, that Ontario has enjoyed for a very long time. Members 
opposite would deny us what Ontario has enjoyed for a very long 
time, and what is causing Ontario this very day to have a very 
significant economic boom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
you will well know that it’s been through the development of 
such agencies as SaskPower and SaskTel that we’ve developed a 
province here that has been unique and special throughout North 
America and throughout the world. 
 
What could be more important, what could you possibly get out 
of a free trade agreement that would be more important than the 
development in the future of our province as designed by 
Saskatchewan people? What could you possibly get in the free 
trade deal that could be more important than that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the member is right. 
SaskTel and SaskPower have been very, very important to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And in recent years, SaskTel put in a 
single line service that people in rural Saskatchewan have been 
wanting for a very, very long time. 
 
Well as late as yesterday, SaskPower announced a $100 million 
contract, Mr. Speaker, that will bring a brand-new manufacturing 
plant to Saskatchewan, Babcock and Wilcox. Mr. Speaker, they 
will be manufacturing in Saskatchewan for the international 
market, and under this free trade agreement, they will have 
absolute access to that giant market south of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this agreement, Mr. Speaker, in this . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well then let’s talk a little bit more about SaskPower since 
the member queries me on it. 
 
We’ve brought other manufacturing plants to Saskatchewan that 
in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m answering his question, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Phillips Cable in Moose Jaw, Du Pont, SK Turbines. All of those 
people, Mr. Speaker, in our more diversified economy, will have 
access to that very large market south of the border because of 
this agreement. That, Mr. Speaker, in addition to access to those 
markets for our pork, for our potash, for our uranium, and the list 
goes on and on. Mr. Speaker, those people either don’t 
understand the agreement, or they don’t care about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Shortcomings of Farm Land Security Act 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

absence of the Minister of Agriculture, I will ask the acting 
minister a question that refers to the Saskatchewan Farm (Land) 
Security Act. Now I don’t want to be talking about what’s in the 
Bill, but I will want to talk about what’s not in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is missing in this Bill is anything to do with 
the debt crisis that’s facing Saskatchewan. In your own report on 
equity financing, you state that 11 per cent of Saskatchewan 
farmers are insolvent, another 28 per cent are having serious cash 
flow problems. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, again you have built up the expectations of 
the farmers, and again you have brought them down to their 
knees in disappointment. Mr. Minister, let’s talk about the 
problem — debt. What are you going to do about this number 
one issue, debt restructuring? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Had the member, Mr. Speaker, had the 
member done his research thoroughly he would have gone to the 
next paragraph . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. The member is 
trying to answer, and I’m sure hon. members will allow him to 
do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He would have gone, Mr. Speaker, to 
the next . . . I believe it was the next paragraph, Mr. Speaker, in 
the Leader-Post article, which I heard about. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it says there, I believe quoting the Minister of Justice, that phase 
2 of his strategy relative to the debt question in rural 
Saskatchewan in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, will be dealt with over 
the next six months. And that strategy will be set out at that time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, our 
farmers can’t wait any longer while your government flounders 
in its incompetence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — You build up their hopes about talking about 
legislation that’ll support farmers and then you come down with 
a piece of junk. Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you this: you said the 
recommendations come about as a result of your government 
talking to farmers. I ask you: is this really what those farmers 
asked for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be taking 
that member’s comments to the agricultural community of this 
province. He called this, Mr. Speaker, a piece of junk — a piece 
of junk, Mr. Speaker. That shows you how close in touch those 
people are with the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The farmers have asked for home quarter protection, Mr. 
Speaker. The farmers have asked for mediation. The farmers 
have asked for the things that are in this Bill that we can’t talk 
about under the rule of anticipation because the legislation has 
been put on the Table, Mr. Speaker. These are the kinds of things 
that the farmers asked for and   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1574 
 

he calls it a piece of junk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t have a clue about what the farmers want, 
need, or even what would fix the problem, Mr. Speaker. He 
doesn’t even have a clue about what the requirements are in rural 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the reason he said the farmers can’t 
wait that long, the very reason this Bill is on the Table, is because 
the farmers can’t wait that long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister . . . a new 
question, Mr. Speaker. The farmers of Saskatchewan here are 
asking for a solution to the debt problem, and this doesn’t address 
that. In 1986 you announced a study on farm input prices as 
farmers went broke. In September ’87 you announced a 
symposium on an MLA task force and more farmers were forced 
off the land. December ’87 you announced changes to the 
production loan and more farmers were in trouble. In your throne 
speech you talked about programs to aid farmers and more 
farmers had to leave the land. In April ’88 you reported an equity 
financing and still more left. And yesterday . . . you say you are 
going to have some program in the fall. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I tell you pretty soon we’re going to have 
more program announcements than farmers. My question is this: 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — My question to you is this, Mr. Minister: why 
are you and your government unwilling to put forward sound 
solutions to solve the debt crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, let me try to describe to 
you what junk is. Junk is, Mr. Speaker, the land bank and total 
debt moratorium as proposed by members opposite. Mr. Speaker, 
they were talking about that prior to ’82; I never heard them talk 
about anything else. In 1982 they were thrown out of office 
because the only solution they had was land bank and total debt 
moratorium. 
 
A more recent indication as to how western Canadian agriculture 
appreciates their agricultural policies is . . . the New Democratic 
agricultural policy was judged in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, and it 
turfed those guys right out of office. They will be decades getting 
their heads up in that province again, Mr. Speaker, and Heaven 
forbid that they should ever get their head up any place in western 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, a simple question, and I ask the 
same one. You’ve had all your announcements. You have not put 
forward a solution to solving the farm debt crisis, a solution . . . 
half the $6 billion is in your hands and the federal government’s 
hands. It needs no legislation. You can just go ahead and 
restructure it. 
 
 I ask you: why are you willing to do that?

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — if the member is suggesting that we 
should spend $6 billion to restructure debt from the provincial 
treasury, I don’t accept that as a solution, but that would fall into 
the same category of land bank and total debt moratorium. It’s 
another wingy idea from the New Democratic Party, and I think 
one that wouldn’t be accepted, Mr. Speaker, by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Waiting Period for Cancer Treatment 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Health, I’ll direct my question to the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, my question has to do with a woman by the 
name of Isabel Couch from Lucky Lake, Saskatchewan, who has 
contacted me by correspondence. And her letter begins like this, 
Mr. Deputy Premier: 
 

Help, I need help. I need help right now. I am on a medicare 
waiting list in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mrs. Crouch found a lump on her breast, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
and her family got her an appointment with a cancer specialist on 
March 3. On March 17 the lump was removed and a biopsy 
showed it to be cancerous. The cancer has spread to the lymph 
gland and her specialist has told her that treatment is needed 
immediately. 
 
On May 17 she was told that she would have to wait for treatment 
for approximately a month or two because all equipment and 
personnel are being used to capacity. 
 
She was told to get in touch with her MLA. She did. I understand 
that it’s the Minister of the Environment. And he advised her that 
the government would do whatever it could for her. But as of 
yesterday, she has heard nothing, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
And I want to know, on her behalf, what you are intending to do 
to expedite Mrs. Couch receiving the very needed and urgent 
treatment that she requires. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points. Number 
one, if the member will give me the detail that she has, I’d be 
happy to look at it this afternoon. That’s number one. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker, the suggestion that all of the 
equipment and personnel are being used to capacity simply is not 
true. The problem that we have — and it’s an unfortunate 
situation — in a collective bargaining situation where there’s an 
offer on the table; the people who worked in these particular 
facilities, Mr. Speaker, have chosen not to work overtime. 
They’ve chosen to work to rule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that’s a very unfortunate situation, and I would urge, Mr. 
Speaker, I would urge those people to get back to work, to cover 
the backlog, so that people like this lady can get the treatment as 
quickly as possible, Mr. Speaker. I feel very strongly about this. 
I think it’s terribly unfortunate to use people, Mr. Speaker, who 
are afflicted   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1575 
 

in this way as a collective bargaining tool, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 
response is just totally inadequate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — You know very well that the staff at the cancer 
clinic were working overtime and were over-extended because of 
a lack of funding on the part of your government to adequately 
staff the cancer clinic in Saskatoon. And you know that. The 
problem is not the problem of the workers; it’s your problem, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mrs. Couch advises in this correspondence that there’s no reason 
why thousands of Canadian women should die of breast cancer. 
Early diagnosis and treatment results in a high percentage of 
breast cancer cures. She asks: “How can I get early treatment? 
Surely my case is an emergency.” No emergency case should be 
put on a waiting list, Mr. Premier. No emergency should be put 
on a waiting list. Now we want to know, Mr. Premier, today, . . . 
Mr. Deputy Premier, what you’re going to do for this emergency? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I’d be 
very happy to take the detail of this particular situation and look 
into it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that the situation as it 
relates to cancer treatment in this province is not a question of 
funding. If it were, if it were a question of funding, Mr. Speaker, 
do those people think that overtime doesn’t cost money? 
 
The reason, Mr. Speaker, for the overtime is the shortage, I’m 
told, of the qualified people to fill that particular category of 
health professional, and I don’t know what that category is. And 
so we, you know, we are working to try and get more of them, 
Mr. Speaker, into the province and into these clinics, but funding 
is not the question. The real question though here, Mr. Speaker, 
is — and I feel very strongly about this — is it right that people 
who are so afflicted are used as a bargaining tool at the 
bargaining table in a collective agreement. 
 
Ms. Simard: — People are used as a tool for collective 
bargaining by government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker, rather. Mr. Deputy Premier, Mrs. Couch indicates that 
the specialist told her that there is nothing they can do. The 
personnel and equipment are being used to capacity. There are 
just too few technicians. Get in touch with your MLA. I would 
suggest, Mr. Deputy Premier, that that shows that the 
responsibility lies on your government. 
 
Now I want to know, Mr. Deputy Premier, when we are going to 
hear back from you. I don’t want you simply saying give us her 
name and address and we may hear from you a month from now. 
I want an answer tomorrow 

or Monday, at the latest, as to what is going to be done with 
respect to Mrs. Couch’s situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, let me say once again. 
There is a national shortage of technicians — a national shortage 
of technicians. We are . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Would the members please . . . 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There is a national shortage of 
technicians; there’s a shortage of technicians in Saskatchewan. 
We are quite prepared, Mr. Speaker, to pay overtime for these 
technicians that take care of the backlogs, Mr. Speaker, quite 
prepared. We can’t get them. We can’t persuade them to work 
that overtime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As it relates, Mr. Speaker, to how quickly I will get the 
information back to the member, Mr. Speaker, just as quick as I 
can get the information. 
 

Cuts to Welfare Recipients’ Travel Allowance 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is the Minister of 
Social Services. Mr. Minister, a group of professionals in 
Saskatoon is criticizing your government’s cuts to welfare 
recipients because it’s meant that these people are not able to 
properly access health care services. Specifically the group 
charges that the loss of the transportation subsidy has meant 
people have missed visits to doctors, to specialists and, in some 
cases, have even missed surgery, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I know that your regulations do make provision in special 
cases for people to get travel money to the doctor. But the 
practical consequence, Mr. Minister, is that these people don’t 
have the money up front, that many social assistance recipients 
aren’t being told that they’re eligible for the special travel funds, 
and that it would create a bureaucratic nightmare if in fact people 
phoned a social worker every time they had to get special 
permission to get 75 cents for bus fare to go to the doctor. 
 
So my question to you simply, Mr. Minister, is this: will you not 
acknowledge that you’ve designed the cuts to the travel 
allowance in such a way that the poor, in effect, will not be able 
to properly access medicare services, and will you now restore 
the travel allowance fully, so that people are properly able to 
access medicare, Mr. Minister? Will you do that and give the 
House that commitment today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I have said on numerous 
occasions that we have special need travel, and we have medical 
travel, and we have travel for the disabled. And medical travel 
means that if you have to go to the doctor and you have to take a 
taxi to get to the doctor you should get a receipt, and then you 
take it into Social Services and you get reimbursed . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, I’m sure hon.   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1576 
 

members have difficulty hearing the minister, and many would, 
I’m sure, like to hear what his answer is, so please allow him to 
give his answer without interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me 
that the members opposite do not wish to hear the truth. So 
therefore they don’t want me to answer. 
 
The answer is: if anyone who is on social services need 
transportation to a doctor by taxi in the city of Saskatoon or 
Regina or any other city, and it’s all they have to do is take that 
taxi down there and get a receipt, take the receipt to social 
services and they will be reimburse. We reimburse them when 
their amount of fares are over a certain amount, I believe it’s $20. 
So that we don’t reimburse every 75 cents or every $2. We ask 
them to collect them, and when they’ve got the prescribed 
amount, they bring them in and they get reimbursement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have read the article . . . Mr. Speaker, I don’t wish 
to shout but there’s no other way I could be heard here if the 
members opposite will not be quiet. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Go ahead, shout. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And the members opposite say, go ahead 
shout. Would the members opposite be quiet enough for me to 
answer the question. If anyone . . . No, they will not be quiet 
enough, Mr. Speaker, so therefore I cannot answer the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So what’s new? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Before orders of the day, I would 
like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the 19th annual 
report, 1987, of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, 
Saskatchewan branch. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
want to ask some more questions about the Esterhazy shoe repair 
program. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to begin, first of all, by saying that 
yesterday the Minister of Education confirmed, number one, that 
the course is being offered again in Esterhazy, the shoe repair 
course. Secondly, he confirmed that, I believe, there are eight 
students in the course at this time. And thirdly, he confirmed, Mr. 
Minister, that the instructor is once again, Mr. Harry Flander.

My first question to the minister relates to the number of students 
who took the course in the previous year. Mr. Minister, can you 
tell us how many people in 1987 completed the Esterhazy show 
repair course, and whether it’s correct that at one point while the 
course was being taken, the only student who was in attendance 
was the daughter of Mr. Flander? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My officials don’t have the exact 
number, but they believe it’s somewhere in the range of 14 or 15 
two years ago. 
 
The question about one person being enrolled in the course, and 
somehow that there’s something unusual or flagrantly abusive 
about the fact that it was the instructor’s daughter, one could 
interpret that as being somewhat persecutionist. 
 
I wonder if the hon. member would ask the same question if there 
was one student left in a competency-based program at Parkland 
campus, or are you merely trying to persecute this daughter of 
this individual? 
 
There are lots of competency-based programs where one person, 
because of the nature of a competency-based program, may end 
up in the final week, or their final week, to be the only student in 
that program. Is that so unusual, or do you want to continue on a 
witch-hunt, (a) against the town of Esterhazy and (b) against 
certain individuals? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, Mr. Minister, 
I’m not interested in persecuting the instructor’s daughter at all. 
She’s welcome to take the course, that’s not the point. The point 
is whether there is sufficient demand for the course. 
 
I note you didn’t accurately answer my question about what the 
demand was last year. You gave me the figures for two years ago. 
I want to know how many students were enrolled in that course 
and completed that course last year, Mr. Minister. Will you give 
us that figure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My officials . . . (inaudible) . . . to me 
that it was 14 to 15. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I wonder if you could provide me with 
confirmation of that in writing, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question now about this 
course, and that is: can you confirm that the Parkland community 
college in the Esterhazy area decided not to offer this course after 
offering it, I believe, in 1984, because there was not sufficient 
demand and because there was some dissatisfaction within the 
community of Estevan about the offering of the course and the 
way the course was being run. Can you confirm, Mr. Minister, 
that the Parkland community college was not prepared to offer 
the course again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The program offered last year was a 
pilot project. Upon completion Wascana institute conducted a 
program review, including labour market   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1577 
 

aid and student demand and decided, based on the review, that 
the program was needed and should continue on a year-to-year 
basis with an annual labour market review. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, that’s not what I asked you. And 
you’re again intentionally avoiding the question, which makes 
me think that we have something here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you again: is it correct that the 
Parkland community college decided not to offer the course 
again because there wasn’t sufficient interest and because there 
was dissatisfaction in the community of Esterhazy about how the 
course was being put on and handled? Can you confirm that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member asks about how 
Parkland community college, or some individuals there, may 
have felt about the program. They, I think, and some others had 
some questions about the program. Indeed, Mr. Chairman, I 
would suggest that, at least in part, if not in large measure, was 
why there was a program review. 
 
We are satisfied that this is a good program, and I might add that 
others are satisfied. They must see merit in the program as well. 
And I say that because the Canada Employment and Immigration 
Commission and the worker’s compensation in Winnipeg, 
Manitoba have both asked to be contacted if the course is offered 
again. So they, too, must see some merit in it and as a possible 
place for placing some students from western Canada and/or the 
province of Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, you’ve admitted now that the 
Parkland community college didn’t think that the program has 
sufficient merit to continue it. Can you confirm, Mr. Minister, 
that the Esterhazy local council also recommended that the 
course not be offered again? Will you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t know as I’m familiar with the 
position of the Esterhazy town council. What I can say is their 
economic development officer has been a big booster, that 
committee has been a big booster of this program because they 
see it as important to their town. I, on occasion, and I know my 
staff on several occasions have met relative to this program. 
They’re big boosters of it. 
 
In fact, I recall now a year or two ago, if there’s some questions 
as to where the Main Street, Esterhazy, if you like, sits relative to 
this program, I think a couple of years ago in one of the local 
papers in Esterhazy, there was a two-page ad taken out by 
numerous merchants in Esterhazy in support of the program. So 
that tells me how important it is to . . . and I doubt that their 
support has diminished because of what it means to them in an 
economic sense. 
 
So maybe you and I will have to agree to disagree on the 
importance of educational programming in rural Saskatchewan.

I’m telling you that this is no more than a witch-hunt. That’s all 
his is by members opposite. Nothing less, nothing more. If it is 
not a witch-hunt, then the only other conclusion you could draw, 
is if they’re not on a personal attack, Mr. Chairman, the only 
other conclusion you could draw is they are against educational 
programming in rural Saskatchewan. If they say this is not a 
witch-hunt, which we hear them denying, then that’s the only 
other conclusion you can draw. 
 
Why would they be against educational programming in 
Esterhazy or Filmore or Creelman or Nipawin or Pangman or 
Payton or Meadow Lake, or any other place in this province? 
That is a goal of this government and of this PC administration 
and under this Premier, and we will continue that goal, Mr. 
Chairman, because it is one that the people of Saskatchewan want 
to see more of. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, you don’t need to get excited 
because we’re not on a witch-hunt with respect anybody other 
than your own activities, Mr. Minister, and those of your 
department. 
 
Mr. Minister, we on this side of the House fully support 
educational programming in rural Saskatchewan, and we want to 
see it decentralized. But what we don’t want, Mr. Minister, is to 
see the putting on of courses for the particular benefit of 
individuals who have political connections to you. And what we 
don’t want to see is the putting on of courses in a particular 
location where the demand simply isn’t there for the course, 
where it would be better located somewhere else, Mr. Minister, 
and that may be somewhere else in rural Saskatchewan, but better 
located somewhere else so the taxpayers’ money is spent wisely, 
Mr. Minister. That’s the issue here and not the question of a 
personal witch-hunt. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we’re going to come back to this question once 
again, because I note that you were well informed about the 
position of the economic development committee in the town of 
Esterhazy, and you’re correct about that. That’s not the question 
I asked you. 
 
I asked you about the position of the town council in Esterhazy, 
and my question to you once again, Mr. Minister, is: will you 
confirm that the council of Esterhazy asked for the course not to 
be put on again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well what I’m advised by the local 
MLA is the town council is 100 per cent in support of this training 
program in their town and I, frankly, would be surprised if it was 
otherwise. In fact, what I get most often is intense lobbying by 
communities across the entire province who want more of this 
kind of educational programming, not less. 
 
You have a . . . I can say no more than that. I would add this one 
fact. It may not be relevant, but I will offer it up anyways, 
because one of your colleagues, someone who I think has gained 
the mutual respect of all in this legislature for some 25 or 30 years 
of service, your former leader, the Hon. Allan Blakeney, 
apparently, as I understand it — and I’ll admit that this is on a   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1578 
 

second-hand report — toured this facility in October of ’86, and 
the report I have is he was favourably impressed and apparently 
said that he would do everything he could to keep that in 
operation in Esterhazy, Saskatchewan. 
 
So one who’s view, I suspect — unless you differ with his 
conclusions, and if you’ve in fact toured it yourself, then maybe 
we should hear your view — but he was favourably impressed, 
I’m told. I’d like to hear your view, if you’ve taken the time to 
be there. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, once again you didn’t answer the 
question. Let me phrase it another way: do you deny that the 
council of Esterhazy has asked in the past for the course not to be 
offered again? Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I am not familiar at all with the issue 
the member raises, or else it’s the mayor. What I do know, my 
best understanding and my most complete understanding, is that 
Esterhazy — the community, the town — see this as positive for 
them. Main Street Esterhazy likes it. Rural Saskatchewan likes 
the notion of more and more educational programming 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t know why you’re against it. I mean, what conclusion 
would you draw if you had a newspaper hit your desk that said: 
“Welcome to our community, shoe service students?” and it’s a 
two-page spread with how many business listed on that. Now 
what kind of conclusion would you draw if you were in my chair, 
about whether Esterhazy supports . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask the minister not to use 
displays. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your point is well taken, Mr. 
Chairman. What kind of conclusion would you draw if you had 
that kind of newspaper hit your desk and . . . well who are some 
of the merchants that saw fit, because of the pride and what this 
meant to their community? We got Hypower Systems Inc., Len’s 
IGA, Bank of Montreal, Welco Expediting Ltd., Esterhazy 
Medical Clinic, Town & Country Decorating, Tom-Boy Foods, 
Esterhazy Bakery, Metal Fabricating — I haven’t even read 
one-tenth of them yet. And the hon. member opposite would try 
and lead us to believe that somehow the town of Esterhazy is 
against this program. This is unfathomable, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, the minister still has not 
answered the question. The question was not about whether 
merchants in the town of Esterhazy aren’t happy to have students. 
Of course they are, Mr. Minister. 
 
The question is with respect to this particular program. It’s highly 
unusual that a council, who is obviously anxious to get new 
business into the community and new educational programs into 
the community, would be so upset about the way a program was 
being run and about the potential patronage involved in the 
program, that they would suggest that the program not be offered 
again. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have still not answered the question. I don’t 
believe, Mr. Minister, that you’re familiar with the 

position of the economic development committee, and that 
you’re familiar with the position of the merchants in the 
community, but you’re not familiar with the position of the 
council, and I ask you once again, do you deny that the council 
of Esterhazy asked for the course not to be put on again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I have no knowledge of any such thing, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, you’re just not being forthright 
with this Assembly. And for you to say you have no knowledge 
of the position of the council, when you know what the position 
of the development committee is, is ridiculous, Mr. Minister. 
You know full well and you’re just not being forthright with this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll move on then to another item related to this that 
perhaps you’ll be a little more familiar with, and that is the report 
of the evaluation committee as reported in the December 18, 
1987 Leader-Post. Two of the three members of the evaluation 
committee, Mr. Minister, agree that the program should continue, 
but question whether it should continue in Esterhazy. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to quote one of the members of the 
community in the December 18, 1987 Leader-Post. And he says, 
quote: 
 

“There’s no question in my mind that it was a decision based 
on politics,” said Neil Clark of Clark’s Luggage and Shoe 
Repair in Regina. 

 
And I go on to quote: 
 

“The question is, is the program being established to turn 
out several qualified people or is it being run to simply 
satisfy the Saskatchewan market for shoe specialists?” 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to make reference again to this article, 
the article states that Mr. Clark believes the program should be 
in a larger centre where demand would be higher and student 
services more accessible. 
 
And then, Mr. Minister, the article goes on to quote a second 
member of the evaluation committee: 
 

“I’m surprised it has managed to stay there (i.e., in 
Esterhazy),” said Gordon Naduriak, another committee 
member and a former graduate (of the course). “It would be 
nice to know how the department arrived at its decision (i.e., 
its decision to keep the course at Esterhazy).” 

 
And, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: in light of the fact that 
two of the three members on the evaluation committee clearly 
believe that the course should not continue to operate in 
Esterhazy but should be located to a centre where there would be 
more demand from students, can you explain, Mr. Minister, why 
the course continued in Esterhazy? Could it be, Mr. Minister, that 
you wanted to continue to be able to assure the employment of 
the former business manager for your member of the legislature 
in Esterhazy, Mr. Flander? Could that be the reason why the 
course continued?  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1579 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the arguments get even 
more intriguing. The hon. member, I think, now has given ground 
and said that yes, maybe we need to have a shoe repair program; 
CEIC (Canada Employment and Immigration Commission) 
wants to know about it; workers’ compensation wants to know 
about it. So maybe now he’s conceded that much, that we ought 
to have a program. 
 
So now he shifts his attack back on to the town of Esterhazy, and 
he’s saying somehow that the town of Esterhazy, this small rural 
community, doesn’t deserve to have an educational training 
facility. He’s shifted his attack from saying, yes, we don’t need 
the program — he’s conceded that we do need it — but now he’s 
shifted his attack to saying, no, you ought not have rural training 
. . . you ought not have training programs in rural Saskatchewan; 
you ought not have them in Esterhazy. Somehow Esterhazy 
should be black marked, okay, and not be allowed to have 
programming. 
 
He says it’s probably just political. Well if we were to buy that 
logic, then I suppose every location where we have regional 
college programs, every location where we have technical 
institute programs, every location where we have university 
programs, somehow that must be political too. 
 
What he is really arguing for here, Mr. Chairman, is: don’t give 
Esterhazy anything; that’s part of rural Saskatchewan. For the 
NDP, rural Saskatchewan counts for nothing. Don’t allow 
Esterhazy to have this. Whatever you do, the NDP philosophy 
would be, forget rural Saskatchewan, centralize training 
institutions in urban Saskatchewan and big urban Saskatchewan. 
That’s the narrow, philosophical view of socialists. That’s a 
classic socialist mentality, the centralization of power, Mr. 
Chairman. That’s what that is. 
 
(1500) 
 
And it also flies in the face of the report he referred to. And the 
report’s first recommendations were: number one, offer the 
program, beginning in early 1988. Industry advice and student 
demand indicate sufficient need to operate the program. The 
second recommendation was: locate the program in an area 
where there is no conflict with existing industry; that is, large 
urban centres or rural areas with no shoe service. And the third 
recommendation was, operate the program continuously. 
 
Now everything he says flies in the face of what the 
recommendations are, and this is simply an attack on rural 
Saskatchewan. He is saying rural Saskatchewan doesn’t deserve 
to have training opportunities, and I find that despicable and 
deplorable, Mr. Chairman, but not surprising, given who it’s 
coming from. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Oh, Mr. Minister, you’re going to great lengths 
to divert the issue, but we’re not going to let you do that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, members on this side of the House 
are committed to every person in Saskatchewan, in rural or urban 
Saskatchewan, to make sure that they obtain equal access to 
educational services. We want to see programs delivered in rural 
Saskatchewan. That’s not the issue. 
 
You’re welcome any day of the week, Mr. Minister, to put 
another course into Esterhazy, where there is demand. But the 
issue has got nothing to do with what you’ve suggested, Mr. 
Minister. The issue is whether patronage is involved here, and 
the issue is whether you’re not simply continuing this course to 
fulfil your patronage commitments, Mr. Minister. That’s the 
issue. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, my question comes back to you. Do you deny 
that two of the three members of the evaluation committee have 
state categorically that the course ought not to be offered in 
Esterhazy? Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think it’s time to call a spade a 
spade, Mr. Chairman, because while we were sitting here and this 
hon. member opposite was essentially attacking the credibility of 
the town council of Esterhazy and the town of Esterhazy and the 
community and the people and the merchants of Esterhazy, my 
colleague, the MLA for Esterhazy, made a quick phone call. 
 
And what does he find out when he talks to the town councillors? 
What does he find out? He finds out this — the Mayor Scott 
Boreen and the town administration says there was no such 
request, no such request to terminate this program. 
 
So I would suggest to the hon. member to do the honourable thing 
and apologize to the town of Esterhazy, the mayor and 
councillors of that town. Do the honourable thing right now. I 
think this legislature deserves an apology on this one, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, first of all I want to be very clear 
about what it is I said. I asked you whether or not that request had 
been made. You refused to answer my question. Admittedly, 
implied in the question was the fact that the town council may 
very well have made that request, and on that account, Mr. 
Minister, I do apologize. But I don’t apologize for the basic issue 
here, which is the question of whether or not patronage is 
involved in your decision to keep this program in Esterhazy. And 
we’re going to continue on with the questions, Mr. Minister. 
 
You still have not asked my question about whether or not you 
deny that two of the three members of the evaluation committee 
have stated that the program ought not to be offered in Esterhazy, 
that that’s not the appropriate location for it. Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 
flip-flopping in his arguments because he knows they are straw 
men, and he knows that really what he is doing is attacking rural 
Saskatchewan and Esterhazy.  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1580 
 

A minute ago, I thought that he had decided that, based on what 
the report said, that he was satisfied there was good rationale to 
continue the course. And I will read again into the record what 
the report said. Recommendation number one was, “Offer the 
program beginning in early 1988.” The second sentence was, 
“Industry advice and student demand indicates sufficient need to 
operate the program.” 
 
So if you’re asking, is there rationale and justification for 
operating a program, the answer is yes. So let’s put that one to 
bed for all time. We had done that once already. There is demand. 
 
Now the issue is, do you want to put it in Regina, or are you 
prepared to put some training programs available in rural 
Saskatchewan. That becomes the question. If he’s saying this is 
politics that it goes to Esterhazy or into rural Saskatchewan, well 
I’ll say it’s politics in that the publicly stated policy of this 
Progressive Conservative government, based on the blueprint 
that we set out last year, is to provide more programming to more 
people in more areas of this province. 
 
And I’ll tell you what. We stand by that, Mr. Chairman, and that 
means Esterhazy has the shoe program, and it will stay there as 
long as there is demand, Mr. Chairman. I want that on the record, 
and I challenge the member opposite to put it on the record that 
he wants to see the program in Esterhazy closed down. I want 
him to put that on the record for all to hear. It’s been a scurrilous 
attack on the town. 
 
That fizzled, Mr. Chairman, and when we put that one to bed, 
then he said, well there’s no demand. The report clearly says 
there is demand, so I say he should apologize to this House, put 
it on the record that he wants this program closed down and not 
offered in rural Saskatchewan, specifically in Esterhazy, Mr. 
Chairman, one of two places in western Canada that offers it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, what I’m asking you to do is 
justify the continuation of the program there, and we’re going to 
keep asking questions about the justification until we get some 
complete answers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to next explain a comment, again from 
this December 18, 1987 article quoting Mr. Brendon Balon, who 
was formerly the instructor before he suddenly found he’d lost 
his job and Mr. Flander had replaced him. Mr. Balon comments, 
and I quote from that Leader-Post article, “He (i.e. Mr. Flander) 
was awarded the job purely on a patronage basis.” 
 
Mr. Minister, will you comment on that quotation by Mr. Balon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to the credentials of the 
individual who’s the instructor, my department and the officials 
are satisfied that this instructor is well qualified. I don’t have his 
curriculum vitae or his resume here, but we’re well satisfied that 
he is an instructor, and in fact, for that matter, all other instructors 
that teach courses throughout this province are satisfactory, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
But I’m not going to let this member off the hook. I want 

him to go on record as saying that he recommends that the 
program in Esterhazy be closed, not because there isn’t demand, 
because there is demand; not because the town council is against 
it, because they are not. I want him to recommend that that 
program be discontinued and shut down in Esterhazy because 
that is indeed his position. 
 
And I challenge him to be forthright with this Legislative 
Assembly and the people of Esterhazy, because the demand is 
there. Industry says it’s there, the report says it’s there, CEIC 
(Canada Employment and Immigration Commission) wants to 
know about the program, workers’ compensation want to know 
about the program. So the demand is there, so get your view on 
the record and put it forthrightly. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, we’re going to keep asking about 
these programs . . . about the continuation of this program for a 
number of very good reasons. First of all, because the Parkland 
community college, as you acknowledged, recommended that the 
course not be offered again. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, because the evaluation committee, 
whose reports you’ve acknowledged, two of the three members 
of the evaluation committee say that the course not be offered 
again in Esterhazy. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Minister, because there’s some suspicion that’s been 
created over this in light of the fact that the former instructor who 
had been hired, Mr. Balon, was suddenly laid off by your 
department and replaced by someone else, Mr. Minister, a Mr. 
Flander, who happened to be the former business manager or 
your MLA from that area, Mr. Minister. 
 
Those are the reasons why we will continue to ask questions 
about the offering of this course, because the continuation of 
funding for this course, Mr. Minister, comes at a time when 
you’ve cut dozens of other courses across this province, when 
there’ve been massive lay-offs in the technical institutes and 
cut-backs to the community college program, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so we’re going to use this, this particular course offering, 
Mr. Minister, not to attack the town of Esterhazy and not to go 
on a witch hunt against anybody other than the policies of your 
government, because I want to justify the continuation of this 
program in the context of the questions that I’ve asked. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question, and that is: this 
shoe repair course is being offered in a facility . . . in a Quonset 
facility, as I understand it, and I wonder if you can tell us who 
owns the building where the shoe repair course is being offered 
and what the leasing arrangement is, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’m advised that the arrangements 
for the lease would be those that Wascana would normally 
arrange for, and that the building is leased from Larry Chelle. 
And I have no more details over and above that, but if you wish, 
I can get them for you. I’d have to provide them at some later 
date, but I’m prepared to give you that undertaking.  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1581 
 

We have nothing to hide here, so I’m quite prepared to get 
whatever information you want. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could then 
provide us in writing with information on the group of people 
who own the building, the group of people who own the 
equipment, the shoe repair equipment in the building, and the 
details on the leasing arrangement. Could you give us a 
commitment that you will provide all of that in writing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can give you a quick answer to one of 
them. The equipment’s owned by Wascana. And any other 
questions that you raised there, we’ll get the answers for you. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the 
instructor’s salary is, and what the cost of the lease on an annual 
basis is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll have to provide that for you. We 
don’t have it with us. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Could you give us a commitment that you’ll 
provide that in writing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well we’ve already 
had a discussion of some of the patronage that the Minister of 
Education has been involved with in the Department of 
Education, and I want to take this opportunity again to underline 
my concern about the fact that the PC Party convention was being 
run out of the Wheatland Regional Library. We’ve had a 
discussion on this already in estimates. 
 
I want to go back on it again, Mr. Minister, because The Public 
Libraries Act clearly holds you accountable for what goes on in 
the regional library systems. You’re the minister in charge of the 
regional library systems, and you’re the minister whose duty it is 
to see that the regional library systems provide library service. 
Running the PC Party convention out of the regional library 
system is not a public library service. 
 
I want to give you one more opportunity to explain to this House 
what you, as the Minister of Education responsible for the 
Department of Education and for the library grants, intend to do 
about the fact that The Public Libraries Act has been 
contravened, and that your party has been running a party 
convention, using taxpayers’ money on staff and on materials. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you please address this issue again, in the light 
of this patronage issue in terms of courses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think we’ve covered 
this in some detail, but I will restate my position. I do not condone 
the behaviour of the individual, at least as it was reported. And 
having said all of that, I have every confidence in the local board, 
locally elected board, elected and appointed board, to discharge 
the affairs and the management of that regional library board, and 
see no reason to interfere with their local autonomy.

(1515) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, this issue was not just reported. You 
saw the evidence. There was very clear evidence, for more than 
just a report. It’s not a rumour; it’s a fact. The evidence was there. 
The building on 806 Duchess Street, run by the Wheatland 
Regional Library, was used for the PC Party convention 
committee headquarters and a lot of staff time was used. 
 
Now you are using the Department of Education, you, as Minister 
of Education, are using the public libraries and the Department 
of Education as a way to have patronage and as a way to have 
privilege for the PC Party. And that is not the role of the Minister 
of Education. It is not in The Public Libraries Act that you have 
the permission to do this. And I want to know what you intend to 
do about it — when the Wheatland Regional Library is not 
providing library services, they are allowing the PC Party 
convention committee to run out of the Wheatland Regional 
Library. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s got to answer the question. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well obviously he doesn’t want to reply to this 
issue because he’s fairly sensitive about it, Mr. Chairman. It is a 
very serious issue. It’s an issue that I think is really quite immoral 
in terms of what’s been happening. To run a political party out of 
a regional library building, and to say, as Minister of Education 
responsible for The Public Libraries Act, that you had nothing to 
do with it, it’s just to totally deny the reality of the organization 
of government. 
 
And it doesn’t surprise me — because you believe in government 
by chaos — it doesn’t surprise me a bit that you won’t take 
responsibility for this, that you’re quite prepared to sit back and 
let the PC Party run its party convention out of a regional library 
system, and that you won’t take any action against it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’m going on record as expressing my deep 
concern about this, and the deep concern of all of my colleagues 
about this issue. Particularly in the area of education and public 
libraries field — the area of information — the fact that you 
would let this happen, you as the Minister of Education, you as 
the minister responsible for libraries, become a joke. You’re just 
a joke. It’s absolutely ridiculous that you won’t take this issue 
more seriously. 
 
And when you become ridiculous, when you become a joke like 
this, it reflects very badly on the political process in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just sits there reading the paper, not 
evening following his estimates. 
 
Ms. Smart: — That’s right. He’s reading a list of his friends from 
Esterhazy that support patronage in the Department of Education. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ask him how much money the PC Party 
raised out of that library.  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1582 
 

Ms. Smart: — Well there was a cheque for $30,000. I’m sure 
there was a lot more money as well. Perhaps the PC Party was 
paying rent for the regional library building. Maybe I haven’t 
asked that question. Did they pay rent? Did the PC Party pay the 
regional library system some money to allow them to run the 
party convention out of that building? Is that what happened, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Any actions that the board saw as 
appropriate, or any actions that the board saw as inappropriate, 
as I understand it, they’ve dealt with them. The member . . . the 
person in question has apologized for his injudicious . . . or his 
indiscretions, I suppose, if you like. 
 
I’m satisfied that the board is satisfied, and I don’t know as I can 
say much more on this. And I guess you can ask every possible 
question that you want and probe this from every angle you want, 
but all . . . and I would defend your right to do that, absolutely 
because that’s what this place is all about. 
 
If you’re asking me if I know of any scurrilous behaviour other 
than what we’ve all read and heard and know; if you’re asking 
me if I’m of the view that the board is satisfied that proper 
management is going on there, the answer is yes. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well the fact that you admit that something like 
running the PC Party convention committee out of the Wheatland 
Regional Library is proper management of the library, really 
confirms to me how low you’re prepared to go in terms of 
assessing what’s going on in the library and prepared to look at 
The Public Libraries Act and hold the library board accountable. 
 
I’m not surprised to hear you say that you approve of the way the 
library board has handled the issue, because obviously you don’t 
want to deal with it. The PC Party convention can run out of the 
Wheatland Regional Library and you basically wash your hands 
of it. You wash your hands of administering The Public Libraries 
Act and seeing that the library board is focused on library 
services. 
 
And you accused me in the House the other day, Mr. Minister, of 
not supporting the autonomy of the regional library board. I want 
to go on record as saying I completely support the autonomy of 
the regional library board working within The Public Library 
Act. It is the duty of the regional library board to be left alone to 
administer library services, to rent space, and to organize the 
funding. It is not the mandate of the regional library to run the 
PC Party convention committee out of that space. That is 
contravening The Public Libraries Act; that is going beyond their 
mandate; it’s a waste of public funds; the taxpayers’ money’s 
been used in that. 
 
Those are the questions that you should be concerned about if 
you were a Minister of Education really concerned about 
maintaining the integrity of both the public library system and 
the Department of Education. You should be asking how much 
of that director’s time was spent in running that PC Party 
convention, how much staff time, what materials were used, 
whether stamps were used to mail out those cheques, and all the 
other dimensions of running a PC Party convention 

committee out of a Wheatland Regional Library. The issue is 
very clear. I stand completely committed to the autonomy of the 
public library system, far more than you do because you 
disestablished the Saskatchewan Library last year, and it’s lost 
its autonomy, Mr. Minister. 
 
I stand committed to the autonomy of the libraries as it’s defined 
in The Public Libraries Act. I support government legislation. I 
don’t support turning your back when that legislation is broken. 
And nothing can be more blatant in terms of breaking the 
commitment of The Public Libraries Act than to run a partisan 
political party out of a regional library building. That’s immoral, 
it’s unacceptable, and it’s a total waste of the taxpayers’ money 
that you think that you can not only provide patronage with the 
Department of Education budget but that you can also use it to 
support your particular political party. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I see you making notes. I will give you an 
opportunity to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think the 
hon. member has made a relatively serious charge here. She has 
accused the board of wrongdoing. If she has evidence of 
wrongdoing by the board, then I would ask her to bring it forward 
to me because that indeed is a serious accusation and one that I 
would be prepared to act on. 
 
But relative to an employee of the board, that’s quite another 
matter. The employees report to the board, not to me. I respect 
the board’s autonomy and, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I have no 
reason at all to suspect wrongdoing by the board. Your 
accusation is a fairly serious one, and I think if you have some 
hard evidence to support it, then I would be very happy to receive 
it and I would be prepared to act on it if such was the case. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, first of all, let’s be clear. We’re not 
talking just about an employee of the Wheatland Regional 
Library. We are talking about the executive director of the 
Wheatland Regional Library. That person is in charge; that 
person is responsible to the board. There’s a direct relationship 
between the director of the libraries and the library board. You 
have said that you have seen the evidence. You initially denied 
that it had anything to do with your responsibility. Now you’re 
saying that perhaps it’s a serious charge and perhaps you should 
look at it. 
 
So we’re beginning to agree. It is a serious charge. The evidence 
is there: “PC Party Political Convention Committee, 806 
Duchess Street,” the same address as the Wheatland Regional 
Library — a letter from the director of the Wheatland Regional 
Library to the president of the PC Party, talking about the money 
involved, talking about the organization of the committee, and 
talking about the need to try to put some pressure on the firms 
that have been supporting you to pay for this — free — and the 
cheque was for $30,000. 
 
Now my concern to you in the estimates here has been the use of 
the regional library system for the PC Party convention. There is 
absolutely no way that an employee, an ordinary employee, 
would be allowed to do anything like that. This employee is the 
director of the library and   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1583 
 

has had, obviously, in terms of the library board saying they see 
nothing wrong with it, has the support of the library board in 
doing this, and that’s where I see the really serious issue that you, 
as the Minister of Education, should take some responsibility for. 
 
It’s very clear, Mr. Minister. Now you’ve admitted that it serious; 
I’m saying that it’s serious. I’m saying, what are you going to do 
about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member here is raising 
quite a serious point. My clear observation, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, earlier was that she has now gone from accusing an 
individual of wrongdoing to now accusing the board. Now that’s 
quite a different matter, because if in fact there was some 
wrongdoing, then I would clearly want to know about it, and I 
would clearly want to act on it. 
 
But having said all that, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I have absolutely 
no reason to suspect any wrongdoing by the board. The hon. 
member must be clear on this because this is quite a serious point, 
albeit that you have a certain amount of immunity in this 
Chamber. 
 
Are you accusing the board of not just — a publicly-appointed 
board — are you accusing them of being negligent in performing 
their duties? And if you are, then come forth with whatever 
evidence you would have to support that and I will investigate it. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I will be absolutely clear with you, 
I am accusing you, as the Minister of Education, for not looking 
at The Public Libraries Act, for not holding the regional library 
board accountable for activities going on in the Wheatland 
Regional Library that had nothing to do with library services. 
 
The Public Libraries Act is very clear that the regional library has 
autonomy in promoting library services. The fact that the PC 
Party convention committee was running out of the Wheatland 
Regional Library, using taxpayers’ money — that fact has been 
established — that has nothing to do with library services. 
 
The Public Libraries Act has been bypassed or contravened, and 
it’s your responsibility to hold the library board accountable for 
that kind of activity going on in a regional library. 
 
That’s my position, as clearly as I can put it. I hold you 
accountable, Mr. Minister. I hold you accountable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your interpretation and my 
interpretation of the Act, indeed my officials’ interpretation of 
the Act, are quite different. I’m accountable for the actions of the 
board. The actions of that individual, he is accountable to the 
board. And the board has dealt with the matter. I’m satisfied that 
the board has dealt with the matter, and I have no knowledge of 
any wrongdoing by the board itself. 
 
 Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, that just demonstrates, I say, 
you’re lack of integrity and your lack of willingness to deal with 
what is a very serious issue. And it also demonstrates your lack 
of concern about how the 

taxpayers’ money is being spent. And it’s a very serious charge 
when a partisan political party is running out of a public 
institution. 
 
Now you say you want more evidence than I’ve already given 
you. The cheques, the letters, you’ve got that material. You just 
are not recognizing the seriousness of the issue. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I was going to make a comment on this, Mr. 
Chairman, but I’ll defer it to my colleague from Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 
one other issue that I wanted to raise with you this afternoon. I 
want to raise with you, Mr. Minister, I want to raise with you the 
issue of the status of the Saskatchewan Library. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He can’t listen and talk at the same time. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, when you’re finished talking to me, 
I will take the opportunity to question you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, in detail, the status of the 
Saskatchewan Library. It’s an issue that I raised last year when 
you disestablished the Saskatchewan Library, and I realized, in 
re-reading Hansard, that I’m still not clear from you about the 
status of the Saskatchewan Library. 
 
(1530) 
 
Last year you told me that the administrator of the Saskatchewan 
Library, the Provincial Librarian, was paid for out of the 
administration budget of the Department of Education in the very 
first subvote, that that was the . . . the money was under 
administration services in 1987-88. This year you told me in 
estimates that the money for the administration of the 
Saskatchewan Library is not coming out of vote 16. It’s under the 
Saskatchewan Library. 
 
Now I asked you in estimates last year what the status was of the 
Provincial Librarian. The Provincial Librarian used to be, when 
we had the autonomy of the provincial library, when we had 
autonomy of the Saskatchewan Library, the Provincial Librarian 
was a deputy minister status, reported directly to the minister in 
charge of libraries, and had the recognition and the respect at a 
deputy minister level. 
 
Last year I asked you what the status was not that you’ve 
disestablished the Saskatchewan Library, and you said to me, she 
has the same status as she had previously, and that’s on the 
estimates of August 7, ’88. I asked you where the money for 
funding was for funding that administrative position, and you 
told me it was under the administrative services of the 
Department of Education, subvote 1. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this year you told me that that money had 
been transferred under subvote 16. I would just like you to 
describe to me then, what the status of the Provincial Librarian 
is. Obviously the Provincial Librarian has lost deputy minister 
status; you have one deputy minister for the Department of 
Education. Now   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1584 
 

the Provincial Librarian has been removed from the 
administrative services of the Department of Education and put 
under Saskatchewan Library, vote 16. 
 
So what is the status of the Provincial Librarian in terms of the 
organizational chart of the Department of Education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, her status is 
unchanged from last year. 
 
Ms. Smart: — It’s unchanged from last year. What is it then, 
please? It’s changed from before; she’s not a deputy minister any 
more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Her status is as it was before. She is 
still the Provincial Librarian. I don’t know if she was ever 
referred to as a deputy minister of public libraries. She is the 
Provincial Librarian and, I might add, a very good one. 
 
That’s been a very busy, busy, busy group over there. We talked 
the other day about the initiatives in northern Saskatchewan, 
which I’m particularly pleased about. They’re very excited. I’ve 
just toured at the facility here in Regina. There seems to be very 
good chemistry. I like the integration. 
 
I think it’s good for Saskatchewan people to have the kind of 
integration that we have now with that person being part of a 
larger decision making process, relative to libraries and how it 
fits in with distance education and those kinds of things. So I 
think, (a) not only from a Provincial Librarian’s standpoint is that 
people are being well served, but as well that person playing a 
larger role in even larger public decision making because of the 
new structure. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Who then does the Provincial Librarian report to? 
Obviously she’s not at a deputy minister’s status. She was before. 
Does she report directly to you, or does she report to Mr. 
McFarlane? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think to 
answer that question, nominally, certainly — and as part of the 
department structure — nominally the Provincial Librarian 
reports to the deputy minister. 
 
But having said all of that, if I was to suggest in saying that 
somehow there is an erosion of the Provincial Librarian’s 
autonomy, I would be wrong, because the reality is, virtually on 
all issues, and certainly on all substantive issues, which virtually 
all are if they come to the minister’s attention, the Provincial 
Librarian reports to me, almost in a direct-line relationship, if you 
like. 
 
So we get the best of all worlds, nominal reporting through the 
deputy minister, because we have other initiatives going on 
laterally, if you like, where this person’s knowledge and 
expertise has even greater value to us over and above her role as 
Provincial Librarian, if you like. And that’s been extremely 
useful and valuable. And I referred earlier to things like distance 
education. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well I know the Provincial Librarian is a valuable 
resource for you, but the money that you have 

for distance education, for literacy, is not within the public library 
funding; it’s not within the grants to libraries; it’s not within the 
amount of money that the Provincial Librarian has decision 
making over. 
 
It’s obvious, by removing her from a deputy minister status, that 
you’ve removed that job from a direct line to the minister. That’s 
a lack of autonomy; that is a putting of the library within the 
Department of Education in a way that the Provincial Librarian 
is used in many other directions other than establishing and 
maintaining the Saskatchewan Library. That’s a policy decision 
that you’ve made. 
 
Librarians all around this province are interested in hearing more 
development of policy from you in terms of what your plans are 
for the Saskatchewan Library, now that the Provincial Librarian 
has lost the status that she had when we were government, and 
before you changed and disestablished the library last year. 
 
You’ve mentioned already the services to the North. And I really 
. . . I’m very pleased to hear that northern library services will be 
developed, but it’s coming out of the grants to the libraries which 
has not increased one bit to accommodate those other activities. 
What you’re doing is you’re talking about other activities, like 
the distance education and literacy, as if it was part of the funding 
of the public library system. 
 
The public library system is a very important system to many 
people in this province. They would like to know the policies that 
you intend to implement in terms of developing it further. You 
talk a lot about the information age, and yet you cut back on the 
status of the Provincial Librarian, you run PC Party convention 
committees out of regional libraries and you cut back on their 
budget tremendously. Altogether, you’ve been quite destructive 
in terms of the library, I would say, and I know that many people 
support me in expressing this concern. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, last August I spoke 
to you in estimates, Education estimates, about the plight of 
dental therapists and their retraining, I would ask you to bring us 
up to date as to how many dental therapists have gone through 
the dental hygienist course in the last year, and whether or not 
this course will be available in the following year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In response to the library critic’s 
question about our lack of commitment to libraries, it might be 
worth having on the record, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that on a per 
capita basis Saskatchewan spends $5.14 on libraries per capita 
per person, ahead of Alberta at $4.79, and nearly double 
Manitoba’s commitment at $2.63. And that doesn’t count things 
like the educational development fund. It doesn’t count things 
like the millions of dollars that we spend on library upgrading 
and library acquisitions. 
 
And to be really honest with you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, when 
the NDP were in government, their commitment to 
post-secondary education, specifically universities and technical 
institutes and libraries, was nothing more than lip-service. And I 
say that absolutely, sincerely, and   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1585 
 

without fear of contradiction. 
 
Now relative to the dental hygiene program at Wascana Campus, 
and as a result of changes last year, a retraining program has been 
provided for dental therapists. We have expanded the existing 
seven-month dental hygiene program at Wascana Campus from 
12 to 30 seats to retrain therapists as hygienists, and as I 
understand that, that program will go on again next year at the 
increased level. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I asked you how many dental 
therapists, who were fired by your government last June, who 
have been trained by the people of this province to be dental 
therapists but who can no longer be dental therapists in this 
province because of your decision to eliminate the school-based 
children’s dental program — I’ve asked you very clearly, how 
many of those fired dental therapists have been retrained in the 
dental hygienists program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The answer is 28. And then now the 
hon. member, I think, based on that answer . . . And the 
commitment is to increase the expanded number again this next 
year, which was essentially our commitment, as I recall it, a year 
ago. 
 
Now the hon. member, I have no doubt, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
will say, here it is, here it is in black and white, 28 out of however 
many that were fired, to use her term, which is a wrong term, Mr. 
Chairman . . . Would you use the correct term? The positions 
were abolished. Because to suggest they were fired, to suggest 
they were fired is a black mark on their records, and I think 
you’re doing them a disservice because they were not . . . You 
and the CBC continue to use the words “fired,” and you use them 
incorrectly. 
 
And the hon. member, the lawyer from Regina wherever, 
suggests I’m being semantic. Well you, as a lawyer, ought to 
know even better than that, because there is a significant 
difference in one’s employment record as to whether they were 
fired or their position is abolished. 
 
And if you think that is wrong, then you get up and say so in this 
legislature because I’ve had enough with simplistic rhetoric 
coming from the NDP. We’ve already had one member apologize 
in this legislature today, and I’m going to continue to keep people 
to the facts because this literary licence that people opposite take, 
the public deserve better, and I’m going to check you and call it 
on it every time. 
 
And you can say I’m being obstructionist and all the rest of it. I’ll 
tell you, I’ve had it with simplistic rhetoric and a twisting and 
warping of facts, not the least of which is referring to people as 
fired when they were not fired. And if I am wrong there, then I 
challenge the lawyer in that caucus to stand up and say I am 
wrong. 
 
Having said all of that — and I apologize for that diversion, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman — the hon. member no doubt will try and make 
the case then, out of however many dental therapists that were 
laid off, we have infinitesimally trained only this small number.

Well how many dental therapists indicated a desire to retrain as 
dental hygienists? And the answer is 70. To date we’ve 
accomplished 28, and we’re well on our way to accomplishing a 
similar commitment this next year, Mr. Chairman. Not perfect, 
not ideal, nobody necessarily happy that we have this situation 
where we have anybody laid off in this province, but, Mr. 
Chairman, we’re doing everything we can to deal with the issue 
as best we can through retraining. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. Mr. Minister, you say that 28 people have 
been retrained. I would like to know whether or not you are 
paying for their living accommodations in the city of Regina, 
whether they are receiving a training allowance for retraining, 
and whether in fact you’re paying for their courses. 
 
Can you give me the details as to the kind of commitment your 
government has made to these people who have applied for 
entrance into your dental hygienist program, people who you 
fired, Mr. Minister? I will use “fired,” not “laid off,” not 
“abolished,” — none of that stuff. They were fired; they were 
summarily dismissed, Mr. Minister. 
 
Those workers have very, very narrow ability to get work in their 
field in this province. Dental therapy was a two-year course 
designed by the people of this province specifically in order that 
the school-based children’s dental program could be delivered in 
this province. Those people were dismissed by your government. 
 
(1545) 
 
There is no opportunity, or very few opportunities, for them to 
work in this province. Less than 50 of them, Mr. Minister, have 
received employment. There are women working part-time in 
stores; there are women who have no jobs, and your government 
is responsible for that. Your government fired them. 
 
And I’m asking you: what kind of a commitment do you have to 
these people who spent two years of their lives getting trained, 
whose training is still a need in this province? We still have 
children who need their training. We have people who want the 
school-based children’s dental program. Even some of the 
members in your own Conservative Party want a school-based 
children’s dental program. And I’m simply asking you: what 
commitment have you made to these fired workers, most of 
whom are women, in order that they can be retrained, not 
necessarily in the field of dental hygienistry, but in other fields 
as well. What commitment have you made to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In terms of what has gone on and what 
we will attempt to do in the future . . . and I gave you an incorrect 
number as it relates to those therapists that were employed with 
the dental plan before, the ones who became the hygienists; it’s 
18. The other number I used was the global number. It’s the 18 
extra seats. And they’re funded for by Health. 
 
And as well, in terms of how we’re trying to help them, we’re 
also — or at least the Health department picked up the costs 
relative to books and equipment. As well there was the 
unemployment insurance benefits, and my officials advise me 
that they are negotiating to have the   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1586 
 

unemployment insurance benefits extended for another year. 
 
Now as I said before, not perfect, not ideal, not necessarily even 
desirable. And for that individual who is without employment or 
even maybe without immediate training prospects, not a 
desirable situation. 
 
But it’s not as though we’ve wanted to just drop them off the 
edge of the world, if you like. We’re putting in place additional 
spaces for training. We’re extending UI benefits, or attempting 
to negotiate that, and as well picking up some of their educational 
costs that might not normally be picked up did we not face this 
particular situation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, for many of those women their 
UI benefits run out in August. Only 18 of those women have had 
an opportunity to be retrained by your government. You have not 
picked up their living expenses. You have not done that. You’ve 
picked up their books and equipment. You have not said you’ve 
picked up their tuition fees. 
 
Now many of those women are single parents with children. 
They do not have the resources to go to school and retrain 
themselves. They do not have the resources to get themselves 
into a program and pay for all of the costs associated with that 
program, particularly when they’ve already gone through that. 
They’ve already paid for their course; they’ve already spent two 
years being trained. 
 
And I’m simply asking you: your government fired over 400 
people. Over 200 of those people were dental therapists who have 
two years training which they bought and paid for. As a result of 
your government policies, they will have to be retrained in some 
other field of endeavour. And I’m simply asking you, their UI 
(unemployment insurance) runs out at the end of August, you 
can’t possibly retrain them all in the field of dental hygiene. 
 
So I’m asking you: are you going to give them the opportunity to 
be retrained in other fields and will you pick up their living costs, 
their tuition, their books and all of those other things that are 
necessary in order for students to get training in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The point that I think I can add over 
and above what I have said earlier about extending UI benefits 
for those in training, etc., is that in addition to books and 
instruments, as well, the Department of Health paid for their 
tuitions. And I apologize for not having all that right at my 
fingertips — but because it’s not out of our budget but from the 
Department of Health. So all I can say is we’re trying to be a 
helpful as we can. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t pay for their living 
allowance and that is one of the most expensive parts of 
education. In fact, that is the expensive part of education . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Disagree. Disagree. What I am saying 
is this: in August their UI benefits run out and you’re trying to 
negotiate an extension — an extension for 18 people, but there 
are over 200 people who lost their jobs. Your government has not 
offered them retraining in any field other than becoming a dental 
hygienist.

And I’m asking you this as a result of the tremendous toll that 
has been taken on those women’s lives, because a vast majority 
are not employed and the ones that are employed at not working 
in the field that they have been trained for. Many of them who 
are working are working in substantially reduced jobs in terms of 
level of pay and, Mr. Minister, they cannot afford to come to 
Regina and be retrained in a dental hygienist course and they 
can’t get in. And you say that there are 70 people who’ve applied 
and 18 have been trained thus far, there are another 18 people 
who will be retrained next year, and you say you’re trying to get 
extended UI benefits for those people for next year. 
 
But what about the other people? What about the other 32 people 
who’ve applied? And what about all of those people who haven’t 
applied because they don’t have a hope of getting into the course? 
Because the people who are getting into the course are doing so 
on the basis of seniority and on the basis of their ability to move 
to Regina and be retrained. 
 
Now there are many people — and you said last year that they 
can’t all possibly be retrained in the field of dental hygienistry, 
and that is true, they can’t. The market doesn’t need 70 or 200 
dental hygienists. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think we’re getting somewhere, but I 
don’t know where. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, I understand that point, Mr. Minister. 
But there are lots of areas in those province that do need people 
— physiotherapy, for instance, occupational therapy. There are a 
whole host of fields in this province where we have a shortage. 
We need radio-therapists to do work at the cancer clinic in the 
city of Saskatoon. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is that if your government has the 
will, if you had the will and if you were prepared to put some 
money along with your commitment to health care in this 
province, there are lots of fields where these women could be 
retrained. 
 
And I’m simply asking you: you’ve made a commitment to 18 
people next year; you say that you’re trying to get their U.I. 
benefits extended, but you may not. In the meantime there are 
over 200 people that don’t have work. And I’m asking you: is 
your government prepared to make the same kind of commitment 
to them in other fields where we need people highly trained in 
this province in order that we can deliver a whole host of other 
services that are important? Are you prepared to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, is that these young people, these adults certainly could 
undertake training in a whole host of areas, some of which the 
hon. member mentioned. 
 
I have every reason to believe that some of them entertained that. 
I suspect probably some did look at other training programs 
outside the dental health sciences. I don’t know. I don’t have a 
complete breakdown on an individual-by-individual basis.  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1587 
 

Certainly the hon. member has no trouble in generalizing about 
who’s doing what. I don’t know; maybe she has a breakdown, 
individual by individual. If she does, I, quite frankly, would be 
interested to see it. 
 
And of course that’s why we have the wide variety of training 
programs that we do throughout technical institutes and as well 
other post-secondary institutions in this province, so that they 
themselves, who probably do have a sense of the market-place as 
well . . . And I have no doubt that some of them did avail 
themselves of other training opportunities. 
 
I suspect as well, although I don’t know, unemployment 
insurance maybe helped some of them. You and I might differ on 
what unemployment insurance benefits are. I thought that was to 
pick up living costs. I’m not saying it’s a wonderful or a 
delightful situation, because it is not. Are people doing the best 
they can, whether it be institutes or others, to accommodate, 
including licensing bodies, to increase our space allocation, sort 
of thing, without jeopardizing accreditation? I’m saying yes, we 
did have quite good co-operation. 
 
If you’re asking me if I have all the details, I do not in some areas, 
and I apologize for that, because it’s a Health initiative by large 
measure. But certainly, where the post-secondary system could 
help, they have tried to help. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not good enough. You 
have not done a good enough job. Your government fired 411 
people in this province, highly skilled people who delivered a 
program that was considered to be the best in North America, if 
not the best in the world. People from all over the world came to 
Saskatchewan to see how we delivered and trained people — 
how we delivered a program in the field of children’s dentistry, 
and how we trained people. 
 
We were able to develop a model of dental health in this province 
that has become known the world over. With the stroke of a pen, 
you summarily fired 411 people. Of those people, and I think 
government should be aware of this, there were over 200 dental 
therapists who had taken a two-year course. They took that 
two-year course because the government of Saskatchewan in the 
early 1970s set up a school-based children’s dental program. 
They had every reason to believe, Mr. Minister, because of the 
popularity of the program, because of the quality of the program, 
that that program was entrenched in Saskatchewan and would be 
here for a good long time to come, until your government came 
along. Your government, last June, rounded up all of these 
women around Saskatchewan, into hotel rooms or whatever, and 
summarily fired them. They were fired. Their jobs were taken 
over by dentists. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we have over 200 dental therapists who were 
fired. You say you’ve retrained 18; you say there’ll be a further 
18 retrained next year — that’s 38. The dental therapists tell us 
that less than 50 people have obtained full-time employment in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, as the minister responsible for advanced education 
and training in this province, as a minister of 

the Crown who fired 411 people, wrecked and ruined their 
careers, I’m asking you: what are you prepared to do to ensure 
that these people, most of whom are women, many of whom are 
single parents, will be retrained in other areas of endeavour, areas 
that are important to the overall well-being of Saskatchewan? 
 
There are lots of opportunities. I’m asking you: are you prepared 
to retrain those women in nursing at the University of 
Saskatchewan or at Kelsey Institute? Are you prepared to fund 
their tuition and books and fund a training allowance — because 
UI runs out in August — are you prepared to do that? 
 
If they wish to go into physiotherapy, are you prepared to fund 
the tuition, the books and a training allowance? Because they’ve 
already paid to be trained in the field of dental therapy. They 
shouldn’t have to pay again, because they had every reason to 
believe that they would have a job for a good long time. Are you 
prepared to fund them in physiotherapy, occupational therapy, 
gerontology? There are all kinds of fields in Saskatchewan. 
 
We had an example here where the Deputy Premier this 
afternoon said we don’t have enough radio-therapists in 
Saskatchewan, radio-therapy technicians, and that’s why we’ve 
got a waiting list at the cancer clinic. Are you prepared to train 
them in that area if we need . . . if there’s a shortage in that area? 
 
The minister responsible at the federal level has done a 
manpower survey of the kinds of jobs that we in this country, in 
this province, are going to need in the future. There are lots of 
areas of opportunity for people. I’m simply asking you: you fired 
them; you were a member of the cabinet that fired them, and I’m 
asking you, are you prepared to retrain them in other areas 
besides becoming a dental hygienist. 
 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t know as 
I can say any more than I’ve said on this issue without being 
unnecessarily repetitive. We try to be as helpful as we can; we’ve 
had co-operation of licensing bodies, etc. The Health Department 
has picked up some additional costs, etc., etc., and I can’t . . . I’m 
sorry to repeat myself, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’m not afraid to repeat myself. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government has done a great deal of damage 
to the lives of some women in this province — 411 people were 
fired by your government. Over 200 of those people were dental 
therapists who had a two-year training course that they bought 
and paid for. Your government fired them. 
 
A vast majority of those women have not got alternate 
employment, and that is a fact. Their unemployment insurance 
runs out at the end of August. That is a fact. You say you’ve 
retrained 18 — big deal. You say you’re going to retrain another 
18 — big deal. There are still over 100 people who have no jobs 
and no hopes of being retrained.  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1588 
 

(1600) 
 
You have no compassion, Mr. Minister. You are quite prepared, 
with the stroke of a pen, to devastate people, to harm their future, 
to harm their family’s future. Many of those people live in rural 
Saskatchewan, and with the economic crisis facing our province 
in rural Saskatchewan those jobs were needed. 
 
Mr. Minister, the answer to my question is no, the Conservative 
government will not retrain those people, the people they 
rounded up and put in hotel rooms and told them they were fired. 
That’s the answer, Mr. Minister, but you don’t have the gumption 
to say it. You talk about honesty and integrity; you have none. 
You have no ability to stand in this legislature and say, no, 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, we will not retrain those 411 
fired workers. We will not retrain those dental therapists. You 
don’t have the jam to do it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you were elected by the people of this province to 
provide some leadership. You were appointed as the advanced 
education minister. We have people who need retraining, but 
your government’s not prepared to do a single solitary thing. 
That’s how you feel about people. It’s evident to the people of 
this province, that’s how you feel about them. 
 
You have no compassion. Your policies are hurtful; they’re 
harmful. And, Mr. Minister, I say to you that the dental therapists 
that you fired and that you’re now refusing to retrain in other 
fields of endeavour will become the symbol of everything that’s 
wrong with your government. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question 
for the minister is: does he still have a Mr. Rene Archambault in 
his employ? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Oui. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can the minister advise the House and 
the people of Saskatchewan what Mr. Archambault’s job is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — M. Archambault is the director of 
French minority education. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Could you tell the House approximately 
what Mr. Archambault’s salary is for this job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Archambault is classified at the 
professional 7 level with the management and professional plan. 
He currently draws a monthly salary of $4,533. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Could the minister tell us, is Rene 
Archambault, is this the same Rene Archambault that is the 
Premier’s brother-in-law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well Mr. Archambault, the one we’re 
referring to, is the one who has been the principal of Gravelbourg 
High School and director general of College Mathieu.

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wonder if this is the same Mr. 
Archambault who is also the Premier’s brother-in-law. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I believe it is. But to me that matters 
not, it is his teaching and administrative experience that is 
important. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can the minister tell the House when Mr. 
Archambault was first hired by his department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Archambault was seconded from 
College Mathieu from October ’82 to June 30, ’84, and since that 
time he assumed the responsibilities of director of French 
minority education, July 1, ’84. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What you’re saying then that Mr. 
Archambault, in effect, was first employed by the government, 
whether it’s under secondment or directly, in October of 1982. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — This would be some six months or so 
following the 1982 general election where your government was 
first elected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can the minister tell the House where Mr. 
Archambault’s office is located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — He works in Gravelbourg, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can the minister advise us of any other 
offices that his department has that ostensibly fulfils some central 
function, in this case, French minority language education, that 
are located in centres such as that throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, we have a French programming 
office in Saskatoon as well. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Saskatoon hardly relates as one of the 
minor centres in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. At least one could 
say for Saskatoon, not only is there a high resident population, 
but it’s also central for many people in the province. And I’m 
wondering how it is that for a job that’s as vital as this for the 
department, how it is that Mr. Archambault’s office comes to be 
located in that particular town as opposed to being located out of 
your central offices here in Regina. How did that come to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — You know, Mr. Deputy Chairman, if 
you look at the line of questioning that we’ve had this afternoon, 
it’s a systematic attack on rural Saskatchewan essentially is what 
it is. 
 
First of all we had one opposition member, one NDP member, 
berating the fact that Esterhazy had a training program. Now 
we’ve got a member from Regina Victoria who has called now, 
referred to Gravelbourg as a minor centre, and that somehow 
Gravelbourg ought not have any government services. And yet 
everyone in this Chamber, I’m sure, except obviously the 
opposite member, has viewed Gravelbourg as certainly being a   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1589 
 

French, a francophone cultural and educational centre in this 
entire province. And in fact the entire citizenry of this province 
shared in their grief as a result of the tragic fire in that community 
just a couple of weeks ago. 
 
Now he wants to write Gravelbourg off as a minority centre 
simply because he has difficulty with the fact that a person, yes, 
related to the Premier, the Premier . . . I mean, I guess . . . I don’t 
know what one does about, you know, the fact that if you get 
married, yes, you have certain relatives that come with that fact. 
 
The fact that the man has been a director general of College 
Mathieu, whom all members in this legislature supported the fact 
that we ought to do something to help rebuild College Mathieu 
— and we will — he’s on a witch-hunt against College Mathieu, 
against Gravelbourg and specifically against Rene Archambault. 
 
I find it incredible and deplorable, and I think that hon. member 
ought to apologize to the town of Gravelbourg as well, just as his 
colleague this afternoon had to apologize to the town council of 
Esterhazy. These personal attacks, Mr. Chairman, have 
absolutely no place in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don’t think 
that I’ve really offered my opinions; I’ve simple asked some 
questions. But it seem to me that if we asked the wrong questions, 
we have a case of touchy-touchy here. We ask the wrong 
questions, it seems like, and you’ve given to rhetorical flights of 
fancy, the likes we don’t see unless it’s a dandelion after a spring 
rain blossoming forth. It’s just simply incredible that we would 
ask a question and you stand up and accuse us of saying things. 
I’m just simply asking you why you wouldn’t have a person 
who’s important as this located to Regina? 
 
Was this request to be located in Gravelbourg, was this a 
departmental decision based on advice from your employees and 
from your staff, or was this at the request of Mr. Archambault? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Departmental decision. This side of the 
legislature, the Progressive Conservative Party, the Progressive 
Conservative Party government of this province are interested in 
decentralizing, in providing more government services outside 
the major urban centres. That strategy has been clear. That’s why 
we’ve moved crop insurance to Melville; that’s why the Minister 
of Energy and Mines has agricultural credit corporation in Swift 
Current; that’s why, just like . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and 
I hear the hon. member talking about perhaps northern 
Saskatchewan. I would suspect that’s the same theory that the 
Northern Lights board is operating on when they’re going to 
move their board out of P.A. into northern Saskatchewan, closer 
to the people. That’s our view: have services closer to the people. 
 
And in this case . . . and the hon. member suggested, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, that he’d only ask questions and not rendered an 
opinion, and yet I heard him distinctly say that why would we 
have a person like . . . that Rene Archambault is placed in a minor 
centre. Now that’s certainly an opinion, in my books.

And if he wants to write Gravelbourg off as a minor centre, we 
will not. It’s a major centre when it comes to francophone 
education and francophone culture in this province. It’s 
important to have the services close to the people, and that is 
where he is. And as I’m concerned, if that makes good sense for 
francophone education, that’s where he shall stay. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — We shall have to talk sometime, Mr. 
Minister, about decentralization. I’m a very strong believer that 
people in local communities should be given the assistance that 
they can to run their own affairs to the extent that is possible. 
 
When I look at you and we talk about decentralization, I see a 
minister that has done away with local boards when it comes to 
technical institutes and post-secondary education in this 
province, and has set up one large, central board to administer 
those affairs in Saskatchewan. That to me is a highly centralizing 
move, and that is something that I cannot support because I think 
there is a great deal of scope to involve the people in 
Saskatchewan in their own education. That’s something that you 
don’t seem to believe. 
 
When you talk about decentralization, as I listened to the 
questions and answers earlier about Esterhazy and now about 
Gravelbourg, it seems to me that you equate decentralization with 
serving your own narrow, partisan political interests. And I draw 
a distinction between doing that and true decentralization. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a little bit about the funding of 
this particular office as it’s evolved over the years. Now I note 
that in the 1986-87 budget some $1.3 million was budgeted for 
something called the Official Minority Language Office, and I’m 
assuming that this is the same office that Mr. Archambault works 
out of. Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — In the 1986-87 budget, unless it escaped 
people’s notice, this was the year that a provincial election was 
held; in 1986, the budget was $1.3 million. The actual 
expenditure that year for that particular office was $2 million. 
 
Now this is an increase of $700,000 in the course of one year, 
something that was not budgeted for, but was spent. In 1987-88 
the estimated expenditure is $1.2 million, and I note this year that 
you’re proposing to spend again $1.3 million. 
 
Can you explain to this House and to the people of Saskatchewan 
how it came to be that, notwithstanding a provision of $1.3 
million, which would seem to be reasonable given your 
expenditures last year, your proposed expenditures in this 
coming year, that your actual expenditures in an election year 
jumped from $1.3 million to over $2 million. Can you explain 
that to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, we as a government are 
criticized very often for government cut-backs, or so-called 
cut-backs, decreasing budgets or   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1590 
 

not increasing budgets enough. Now we’re being criticized for a 
budget increase, and he says it’s too big. The reality is on this one 
. . . and he says it’s too big when it comes to the question of 
francophone education in this province, which is an incredible 
statement by itself. 
 
(1615) 
 
The truth of the matter is, on this, and quite frankly I suppose I 
wish I personally could take credit for his budget increase, but I 
cannot. I must defer to my officials and the francophone 
community in this province, the Official Minority Languages 
Office for their judicious and very productive and fruitful 
negotiation with the federal government, because this is what this 
additional money represents. It is as a result of negotiations with 
the federal government. It come from them to us and it flows 
through our budget out into the francophone community. And it’s 
100 per cent recoverable from the federal government, albeit that 
the accounting has to show it through our accounts or our 
estimates, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well is the minister refusing to answer 
the question, or what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well all the increase is a result of 
federal negotiations. It’s federal money that flows from them to 
us and out from our office. It’s not provincial money per se. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — So you’re saying, miraculously in 1986, 
an election year, there was an increase in funding from the federal 
government to the extent of $700,000. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m saying that as a result of some very 
good negotiations with the federal government. If it happened to 
be an election year, so be it, but I’m also led to believe that it’s 
happened before. And I’ve also come to know that the officials 
do a very good job of negotiating, and if they can get more money 
from the federal government as opposed to us having to go to our 
taxpayers, then I think that’s welcome news. We ought to be 
congratulating these people for their negotiating skills because 
it’s good news for the francophone community. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, could you give us some 
inkling, at least, under what particular program you were able to 
obtain $700,000, an additional $700,000 from the federal 
government, and to what particular purposes that $700,000 was 
put? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There’s an agreement and a protocol as 
a result of the Canada-Saskatchewan agreement — I don’t have 
the official title for it — and in that protocol it states what these 
moneys can be used for, and it ranges everything from grants to 
school boards to teacher training to bursaries for students, and all 
of those kinds of things and more. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can you . . . I just want to back up here 
now, Mr. Minister; I’m getting a lot of non-answers. 
 
You budgeted $1.3 million; that’s what you put in the 

budget because you believed that you would be spending $1.3 
million during the course of that particular year. Yet your actual 
expenditures come out to be $2 million, and these are rough 
figures. There’s a difference of $700,000 million. 
 
Are you trying to tell me that at the point that you prepared the 
budget and brought it to this House that you did not know, were 
not aware of an extra $700,000 in expenditures that would be 
undertaken during the course of that particular year? Is that what 
you’re trying to tell us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well every year we do have to put in a 
budget estimation, which we do. Over the course of the year 
negotiations go on, in this case some very successful 
negotiations. It hasn’t happened before. We could document it 
and detail it for you in years previous, if you so wish, if you think 
this is some kind of clandestine activity. 
 
As I understand it, if you end up with a windfall in some years, 
it’s because, for example, that some other provinces might not 
use all of the money that’s allocated in that budget. And so if 
you’re making a good case, then you might get some of that extra 
money, if I could use that term. 
 
I find it incredible that you’re somehow having difficulty with 
the fact that officials did a very good job of negotiating extra 
money from the federal government. Most often you criticize us: 
(a) for not spending enough, or (b) for not negotiating well with 
the federal government. And in this case we are 180 degrees at 
the opposite end of those arguments. And I, quite frankly, am 
inclined to congratulate the officials for this kind of performance. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I didn’t undertake to 
ask you about these expenditures because I thought that there was 
something clandestine about, you know, those particular 
expenditures; I’m trying to understand your estimates. I’m trying 
to gain an appreciation, as a member of the legislature, as to 
whether or not there is sufficient moneys in the budget for 
education. Certainly we have concerns about areas where we 
think you need to spend more. 
 
I note that in the same year that we’re talking about, 1986-87, 
you budgeted $333 million in grants to schools, but spent $1 
million less. And certainly we have concerns about those kinds 
of things, about whether or not schools are being adequately 
funded in Saskatchewan. And therefore we would have great 
concerns about your estimating an expenditure of a certain level, 
but not spending enough on where we think the money needs to 
be spent. 
 
Now I’m trying to gain an appreciation of the funding that you 
have for the Official Minority Language Office, and other aspects 
of your budget, and especially with respect to official minorities, 
because this is a subject of great interest lately to the people of 
Saskatchewan because of the Bill that our government put 
forward. 
 
This is a matter of great interest to us, and we want to ensure that 
there’s adequate funding at all levels. Yet we   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1591 
 

see here a history of funding that, to say the least, is erratic. And 
I saw nothing clandestine in the figures that we were able to pull 
out, but I’m beginning to suspect something clandestine when I 
listen to your very erratic answers. 
 
Are you trying to tell this House, and are you trying to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan, that you are so incompetent, sir, and so 
ill-informed that when you put forward a budget of $1.3 million 
in this case, you don’t know whether you’re going to spend $1.3 
million or whether you’re going to spend $2 million? Are you so 
incompetent as that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That number is . . . over and above the 
700,000 that you questioned, is a result of negotiations. We don’t 
. . . We have no way of knowing how successful those 
negotiations will be. They’ve been very successful. 
 
In fact, what I’m prepared to do, because the hon. member says 
that he has a deep desire to have a full understanding of this, is 
I’m prepared to make my hon. officials available to you for a full 
briefing on this, how the money is negotiated, what the protocol 
looks like, what the agreement looks like, the terms of the 
agreements that we’ve had — I think they are one or two or 
three-year agreements, something like that — how the money 
flows through from the feds to ourselves, out to school boards, 
francophone groups, etc., etc., on behalf of francophone 
education in this province. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I appreciate that offer, Mr. Minister, but 
now I’m even more curious. You talk about one, two, three-year 
agreements with the federal government, about a flow of funds 
from the federal government to the province, yet in making up 
your own budget you say we’re going to spend $1.3 million, and 
it turns out to be a $2 million expenditure, and you say it’s 
entirely coincidental that it’s an election year. 
 
I’m asking you again: didn’t you know . . . did you not know 
when you drew up the budget for 1986-87 that you would in fact 
be spending $2 million? And I’d also like an answer to the other 
question that I asked you, and that is: for what particular purposes 
was this money spent? What did you spend it on during the 
course of that year, that additional money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Methinks the hon. member protests so 
much we ought to send it back, Mr. Chairman. That’s the only 
conclusion I can come to. 
 
What was the money spent on? The major portion — B.Ed. 
degree program at the University of Regina, actually which is 
quite a unique program. In fact, I’m happy to say even that I have 
one of the students in that program working as a summer student 
in my office. 
 
Teacher training program, U of S; resource centre, College 
Mathieu; adult education centre, College Mathieu; joint school 
board department projects for developing instructional materials 
for designated schools, extra funds for learning resource centres 
in designated French schools.

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Are you saying that all those particular 
expenditures were not budgeted for in that particular year; you 
found money and therefore you were able to put money into those 
specific items, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Many were budgeted for. What we 
were able to do was get extra money through the negotiations, 
almost a windfall I suppose one might argue. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — There certainly were a lot of windfalls in 
1986, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m trying to gain some appreciation as to whether or not your 
budget is adequate for the coming year and I’m wondering if 
you’re undertaking any negotiations at this point that would lead 
us to conclude that the budget item that you have is adequate, or 
whether it should be increased to reflect negotiations and other 
potential windfalls. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member, I 
think, is trying to prove or show that 1986 was a “peculiar” year 
— something like that, I think, was the word he used. It was not. 
It was a good year in terms of negotiations, but I’m advised that 
we’ve had other fruitful years. And I am prepared to provide him 
with the evidence to show that there was nothing particularly 
unusual about 1986. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, despite all the hon. 
member’s protestations to the opposite, that he is simply probing 
that to try and make the case that somehow this was a 
politically-motivated cheque for 700,000, and the opposite is 
true, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that 
there’s one way to dispatch with that particular notion, and that 
is for you to table any and all documents that you have which 
would substantiate your claim: one, that you did not know prior 
to the estimates being approved in the House that particular year 
that that $700,000 was coming; secondly, which shows clearly 
that it was $700,000 in new, additional money from the federal 
government. 
 
If you can provide those kinds of documents . . . I would ask you, 
Mr. Minister: are you prepared to table those documents for this 
House to settle that particular argument? Are you prepared to do 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ve already given the commitment to 
you, and if you want it to the entire House, I suppose I would take 
that into consideration. At a minimum, I will provide you with a 
full accounting. We have nothing to hide. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well you use the words “consideration” 
and then “nothing to hide.” Now I just want to get it clear: that 
you are prepared to table in this House all the documentation in 
this instance, including correspondence with the federal 
government, which would clearly show, clearly show, that prior 
to the estimates being settled that particular year, you had no 
knowledge of any additional funds, and which will clearly show 
the $700,000 was forthcoming to your   



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1592 
 

particular department for certain uses dealing with official 
minority languages, that those funds were coming to you after 
the estimates and the budgets were set for that particular year. I 
want to make it clear, Mr. Minister, that is the information that 
you will be providing to this House. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I have already given a 
commitment to the hon. member. I will provide it to him, and if 
he wishes that all members should have it, then he can table it for 
the House. But I’ll provide it to him and he can do as he wishes 
from that point. 
 
Normally, if I thought the issue was substantive enough and of a 
report nature, I suppose, I would table it for the entire legislature. 
But given that not all members may all want to go into it in this 
detail, I’ll make it available to the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 
and then if he wishes, he can table it with the legislature. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well it is a substantive issue, Mr. 
Minister, when the people of Saskatchewan see a budgeting 
process that more resembles a yo-yo than anything else, where 
you budget one thing, you end up with actual expenditures up 
here. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan are anxious and curious to 
know how these things happen and want to get some answers to 
that. And they want to know these things so that they can better 
appreciate the estimates that we have before you. 
 
Let me just ask one other question with respect to the minority 
language office. Given the Premier’s announcements, and other 
ministers’ announcements, during the time that the French 
language Bill was discussed, about the need for further funds and 
so on for language education, could you tell us where this is 
reflected in your budget to deal with those additional challenges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There are no numbers in this budget 
estimates relative to that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to say that this 
has been a period of frustration for me to ask you questions, to 
be rewarded by rhetoric, to have you talk grandly about 
decentralization, yet the experience, at least while you’re in 
office, shows something else. 
 
I want to ask you one or two more questions about Mr. 
Archambault. Is Mr. Archambault the same one that was reported 
to be active in the Prince Albert-Duck Lake area in the French 
language communities in that particular constituency in the 1983 
by-election? Was Mr. Archambault active up there, and could 
you briefly tell us what kinds of job activities he was undertaking 
in that area at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To be honest with you, I don’t have a 
clue. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, it’s hard for me to believe 
some of the remarks that I heard from the minister 

this afternoon. And I want to summarize them for you, Mr. 
Chairman, and after that I intend to move a motion. 
 
In the course of the afternoon, what happened is the minister was 
asked, was asked very pointed and very specific questions, about 
one Bruce Cameron and why he refused to act and to discipline 
and to look into the situation of blatant patronage of a blatant 
political use of an office, of a public office. And I suggest he’s 
not doing it because it’s a case of patronage. It’s a person who 
belongs to the PC Party, and if it had happened from any other 
party, he would have acted on it. He didn’t do it. He refused even 
to apologize for it. He said he doesn’t condone it, but he refuses 
to exercise any discipline on it. 
 
Then he was asked about one Harry Flander and asked to explain 
how he could carry on in this one particular instance — one 
instructor. One PC instructor with PC connections, one student. 
Nowhere else in Saskatchewan have we ever had one instructor, 
one student run by our institutions, even against the 
recommendation of the community college. Why? I suggest to 
you once again, patronage. This place, this department, is 
becoming politicized, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Then he was asked about one Rene Archambault who, again a 
PC and a relative of the Premier, appointed politically, doing 
political work during the time of his employment, doing political 
work in Prince Albert-Duck Lake in the by-election. And again 
the minister refused to acknowledge it. 
 
Now what I see happening here this year, Mr. Chairman, what I 
see happening here is a continuation of something that we saw 
previously. Last year this minister appointed one Gordon Dirks 
to run a survey — Gordon Dirks, a former member of this 
government. Once again, I would be able to name a hundred or 
300 other people who were capable of doing the job. But why did 
he get it? Because it was a PC connection. 
 
Why was Bruce Cameron allowed without discipline to operate 
PC stuff or of a library headquarters? Because he was a PC 
connection. Why is Harry Flander allowed to take one course 
with one person? Because he is a PC connection. 
 
Now we’ve had patronage of other kinds. We’ve heard about 
George Hill and about Peter Pocklington, and Paul Schoenhals 
and Tim Embury, but now we’ve got it entering the Department 
of Education. And I think that’s despicable, Mr. Chairman, — I 
think that’s despicable. 
 
Gordon Dirks, Bruce Cameron, Harry Flander, and now Rene 
Archambault. Now I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that we on 
this side do not stand for that. We do not condone that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And I say that the minister has not lived up 
to the requirements of his office in this respect, and I believe, Mr. 
Chairman, that the minister should be disciplined for it. And I 
therefore move, seconded by the member from Regina Victoria:  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1593 
 

That this committee condemns the Minister of Education for 
having politicized the education system in Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I find the motion not in order. 
On page 64 of the handbook, “Committees of the Whole House:” 
 

That the practice of permitting substantive motions in 
Committee of the Whole or Committee of Finance be 
discontinued. (Adopted December 10, 1980) 

 
Mr. Goulet: — My first question to the minister will relate, first 
of all, to the issue of parents and parental involvement in 
education. I specifically refer to the document, Partners at 
School, a handbook on how to involve Indian and Metis parents 
in school activities, and it’s done by Saskatchewan Education in 
collaboration with the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
and the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). 
 
The issue of parental involvement in education, of course, has a 
long history, and I think that the development of the handbook 
points to that. 
 
When I was raised in my home area, I always knew that there 
was a very strong feeling from the parents in regards to the issue 
of having a successful education for their children. And from 
time to time, the parents would come to school and discuss issues 
with the teachers and the principals in many of the schools in the 
North, to discuss the various issues that their children were 
concerned with at the school level. 
 
And as I’ve travelled around through the years, there have been 
many issues that have been talked about by Indian and Metis 
parents. I specifically refer to the handbook which deals with the 
involvement of Indian and Metis parents, although I recognize 
that there is also non-Indian and Metis parents who are involved 
in educational process as well. And I well recognize the 
development of the PTA (Parent Teacher Association) system, 
you know, not only in the province but also in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The issues that parents raise, of course, are in, on the most part, 
those that concern the high drop-out rate, you know, the over 90 
per cent drop-out rate in general throughout the province. And 
also the fact that although, to a certain extent, that they’ve gotten 
control of their own school system in northern Saskatchewan, 
that the high drop-out rate is still there. A lot of the parents will 
raise issues in relation to the curriculum, that in fact although a 
bit of improvement has been made, it still has a long ways to go 
in regards to the cultural heritage and also the language at the 
community level. 
 
Parents have also raised the issue of the need for the improved 
aspect of instructional methods in the way where people . . . the 
children would be excited to go to school. And the other issue 
that parents always relate back to me is the issue of discipline 
procedures and the importance of, you know, their involvement 
in discipline 

aspect of the school. 
 
But I want to focus in on the issue of parental involvement, 
because it’s been raised also by the Speaker in his report, referred 
to as the Tusa report, which looked at the very strong importance 
of getting parents involved, not only in discipline areas but also 
in areas of curriculum as well. 
 
And when we looked at the ministers’ committee, the Indian and 
Metis curriculum advisory committee, much the same 
recommendations were also made there. 
 
When I look at the minister’s special request for a report, the 
government report that came out last year, one of the main 
concerns in the government’s report was the degree of parental 
involvement in the school system. 
 
(1645) 
 
So when I look at a handbook by the department called partners 
in education, I would like therefore to find clarification directly 
from the minister on what his position is in regards to parental 
involvement. 
 
So maybe I will start out by asking him to state whether or not 
the handbook on Partners at School is indeed the policy of the 
department in regards to parental involvement. And could the 
minister let us know that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Could you, Mr. Minister, summarize for us your 
understanding then, of the handbook. I mean, could you tell us 
what it entails in regards to the involvement of parents? What do 
you see as very important? Why do you need parental 
involvement? What is the summary position of this policy that 
you are recommending and approving? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, and I 
think the point that we should put on the record first of all, again, 
so clearly, as I understand, this was developed in conjunction 
with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, and it was that it was 
intended to be, at least my understanding of it was that it was 
intended to be a helpful compendium, if you like, or a helpful 
resource book, relative to native education. 
 
What has worked in some schools, it was designed to provide 
perhaps directions and suggestions in terms of having larger 
parent involvement in this area in their children’s education. I 
think it’s a worthwhile exercise and one that I was happy to see 
all the players in education participating in. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — While you did mention the different people who 
were involved in the process, the question that I asked was: what 
is the general policy position of the minister in regards to this 
handbook? What aspects do you see as key in regards to the issue 
of the parental involvement? What issues would you see as very 
important in that whole issue of parental involvement? What 
would you cover in it?  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1594 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — You and I, I think, would both agree 
the drop-out rate relative to native children is higher than we 
would like. And of course as part of addressing that question, we 
have a northern education task force established now. 
 
The research as well has shown, when it comes to addressing the 
question of drop-outs, that the greater the parental involvement 
with the school system and with their children in the school 
system, the more likely you are to see that drop-out rate decrease. 
And so anything that we can do in conjunction with the teachers 
and in conjunction with the trustees in that regard, we would like 
to do, or we would like to encourage, and that is part and parcel 
of that approach. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — There are various issues relating to the drop-out 
rate and parental involvement that parents do bring up from time 
to time. And there are issues such as improved levels of 
counselling, and I mentioned before the issue of curriculum 
materials, the issue of language development — Cree language 
and Dene language development — and also the issue of 
instructional methods, and also in discipline, discipline 
procedures. 
 
Would you agree, Mr. Minister, that these are some of the major 
issues that would help in resolving some of the main issues of 
drop-out rates that you mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The book that you referred to addresses 
one area that’s important to us — that’s parental involvement 
relative to native education. In terms of what is being done 
relative to some of the other issues as well, particularly around 
curriculum, curriculum development, the committee is 
established and has published two annual reports detailing its 
work. 
 
A curriculum development team has been established in the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . education branch. Work is proceeding in social 
studies, arts education, science, and teacher in-service. We have, 
in fact, increased numbers of developers working on Indian and 
Metis curriculum development, work has begun on Indian 
languages development booklet. We’ve already talked about the 
booklet on increased parental participation. So in the area of 
curriculum as well, I think you can see that it’s a very busy 
agenda with more resources dedicated to that area as well. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Could I get it clear from you, Mr. Minister, as to 
whether or not you agree that parental involvement also includes 
curriculum development and also includes language 
development and also includes counselling. Do you believe, Mr. 
Minister, that it’s important for the parents to be involved in the 
direction that each one of these issues has to take into the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, yes. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So I take it from your comment, Mr. Minister, 
that you are very committed to the idea of parental involvement 
to deal with the language issue, with the counselling issue, with 
the curriculum issue, and also the discipline systems and the 
drop-out system with the parents. Mr. Minister, could I say very 
clearly then that 

you are committed to these goals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I, in fact, I might even go further than 
what the hon. member is suggesting. In terms of parental 
involvement, yes, very important relative to native education, but 
I would say it’s important . . . I view that as important across the 
entire province and not just a geographical issue, if you like. 
 
In fact I think the trustees have expressed the same views, some 
concern on their part as to why are so many of the positions that 
are filled at the local board levels are filled by acclamation and 
there are no elections, you know. Is this a sign or a symptoms of 
disinterest? I don’t think they’re uninterested. So I’m concerned 
about that issue across the entire piece, and certainly as it relates 
to native education. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So I take it, Mr. Minister, that you mean that you 
are more committed, therefore, to parental involvement, not only 
on the issues that I raise but also on the other issues as well that 
parents bring to the minister’s attention from time to time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Very much so. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In regards then to the question of parental 
involvement and your commitment. Right now you’ve 
mentioned, basically, one staff person in the area of languages, 
you know, that you will be hiring in the area of Indian language 
development in the province; there will be one staff person for 
that to cover the whole province. 
 
Mr. Minister, the resources seem to be, you know, very limited 
in regards to just that one issue that parents will deal with. Do 
you foresee any commitment in the future for staff time from 
your department to deal with that issue of parental involvement; 
do you foresee that commitment, you know, from your staff to be 
able to, let’s say, deploy your commitment on parental 
involvement. Could we see that in the future then, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, yes we do. And I guess the most 
immediate and visible example is the fact that we have set extra 
money aside for the northern education task force. We have 
established a task force that has a mandate, and there’s the money 
there for them to carry out their investigation. 
 
And as I said when I announced this, and certainly in some of the 
media interviews I did — I did in Prince Albert and perhaps 
elsewhere in the province, but certainly in Prince Albert, I recall 
— I didn’t view this as another exercise in paralysis by analysis, 
but was sincerely intentioned. 
 
And I would repeat again that I appreciate the co-operation we’ve 
had from you as an MLA who has obviously a good 
understanding and a keen desire to help in this area, and as well 
your colleague from Athabasca. And I appreciate the help that 
you’ve given us over the years, over this past year relative to the 
Northern Lights governance question and some of those, and I 
look forward to your continued co-operation, advice and input, 
as we work through these issues in a non-partisan sense over the 
next year.  



 
May 26, 1988 

 

1595 
 

Mr. Goulet: — In regards, Mr. Minister . . . you mentioned the 
task force. Could you outline for me the names of those people 
that are in the task force. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, my officials just don’t 
have that list at this very moment, but I can certainly provide that 
to you within the next couple hours if that suits. 
 
Just in response to your earlier question about, you know, 
resources dollars-wise and people-wise to native and northern 
education, I should advise you, and other members of this 
Assembly, that we have about six people now in the community 
schools branch and in the northern division. I think that’s a 
substantive commitment, if you like, not only in terms of dollars 
but as well in terms of human resources. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Could we get . . . you should be able to get those 
lists of names fairly quick. Could you get them for me by seven 
this evening? Is that possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


