


















































May 30, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 30, 1988 
 

1643 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to 
all members of the Assembly, 46 grade 12 students from 
Peacock High School in Moose Jaw. They are accompanied 
today, Mr. Speaker, by their social studies instructor Gary 
Loutzenhiser, and the school principal Ray Boughen. 
 
Following question period today, Mr. Speaker we’ll be 
meeting for pictures and drinks and discussion of the 
proceedings of the Assembly, and then at 3 o’clock they’ll be 
taking a tour of the building. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming these students and wishing them well in achieving 
their endeavours when they graduate this spring. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure on 
behalf of my colleague, the member from Mayfair, to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
House, 45 students sitting in the west gallery, from the 
Christian Centre Academy in Saskatoon. They are grade 6 and 
grade 7. Their teacher is Joan Terekoff; the chaperons are 
Faith Neudorf, Mrs. Colleen Fair, and the bus driver is Duff 
Friesson. 
 
I’ll have the pleasure to meet with them at 3 o’clock on behalf 
of the member from Mayfair, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all 
members of the House to join me in welcoming these students 
from the Christian Academy in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to this Assembly, and through you today in your 
gallery, 19 grade 4 students from Miller School in Melville, 
Saskatchewan, with their principal Ted Starchuck, and their 
teacher aide Brenda Molnar, and their bus driver Don 
Hanishewsky. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them at 2:30, and it says here that we’ll be 
meeting outside on the front lawn. I only ask that we pick the 
shady side today; it is rather hot out. But I will be meeting 
with them for pictures at 2:30. 
 
I know they’ve already have had a tour of the building. I hope 
they have had an educational trip to Regina, and I wish them a 
safe return. I ask all members to welcome these students from 
Melville. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lay-off Notices for PCS Workers 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the Minister of Energy and it pertains to the 
question of The Potash Resources Act, and in particular the 
lay-off of 200 workers from Cory and the detrimental impact 
that that lay-off has on the families and the workers of those 
people concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in September of 1987 — I have the quotation in 
front of me — the Minister of Energy said, in discussing The 
Potash Resources Act, the following quote: 
 

I would also remind the House, (Mr. Chairman,) that this 
Bill indeed is designed to minimize those job lay-offs 
because of the market-place. Without the Bill, we would 
see some possible permanent mine closures, or at least 
near to permanent. 

 
I just want to repeat those words: 
 

Without the Bill we would see some possible permanent 
mine closures, or at least near to permanent. (And, Mr. 
Chairman,) that means massive job lay-offs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was the rationale and the justification and 
the assurance given by this Minister of Energy on behalf of the 
Premier and that government of the day that The Potash 
Resources Act and its consequences would not be felt in this 
way that it has been. 
 
Madam Minister, my question to you is this: what went wrong 
with those assurances. Were those statements merely made in 
order to get the legislation through at the time, knowing full 
well that in fact there would be massive job lay-offs, or is this 
government demonstrated total and complete incompetence in 
handling this very important resource? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Leader of 
the Opposition question, perhaps one should go back and look 
at the debate that took place in this House at the time the 
legislation was introduced. I want to say here and now, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have been proceeding, in what I believe is a 
reasonable and responsible fashion, with the preparation of 
regulations that are necessary under the Act, and the leader 
will know that. 
 
And of course, secondly to that Act has been the very careful 
selection of board members. I use the word “careful” because 
of the very strict conflict of interest guide-lines that are within 
that Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time that the legislation was brought into 
this House, it was stated that it was, number one, because of 
the supply situation that not only Saskatchewan was facing, 
but the world. Obviously secondary to that question, Mr. 
Speaker, was the issue of anti-dumping charges on the 
Saskatchewan potash industry. We believe that with the 
legislation being brought in at that time, Mr. Speaker, that in 
fact it did generate enough confidence that Saskatchewan 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1644 
 

 producers, all producers, were able to negotiate with the 
United States government a suspension of the anti-dumping 
action. 
Mr. Speaker, we will be proceeding most likely before the end 
of the year for the legislation and the board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary 
question to the Minister of Energy. The Minister of Energy 
invited the members of the legislature to look at the entire 
debate last fall on The Potash Resources Act, and that’s what 
I’ve done — at least not for the entire debate for a good 
portion of it — and thus the quotation that I gave to you. 
 
My supplementary question, Madam Minister, is this: if the 
world situation is a situation of over-supply, as this 
government would have the people of this province believe — 
the potash workers, the families who are laid off believe — 
can the minister tell the House why it is that two old, 
inefficient New Mexico American potash mines are starting up 
production just at the time that 200 families and workers are 
being laid off here in Saskatchewan? Isn’t it correct that the 
over-supply situation is not as you say, and that the reality is 
that the Saskatchewan government is prepared to play the 
doormat so that the private potash industry in the United States 
can profit and our workers go unemployed? Isn’t that the 
situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, we can’t answer for what 
is happening in New Mexico. Mr. Speaker, we only know that 
when it come to Saskatchewan production in the potash 
industry, that in fact there is an oversupply situation. 
Saskatchewan is a major supplier within the world. We are 
also the largest exporter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In answer to the problems that we are having in this province 
over several years, leading up to the anti-dumping charges 
against the Saskatchewan potash industry, Mr. Speaker, the 
legislation was brought in. I would remind the Leader of the 
Opposition . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Absolute nonsense. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, the member from Saskatoon says 
this is nonsense. I would remind them, Mr. Speaker, that 
without the legislation that took place, in fact there would have 
been massive lay-offs, with the possibility of permanent 
closure of some of those mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will go back to what the legislation in fact did 
for this industry. It allowed them to come to an agreement with 
the United States industry to drop the anti-dumping charges, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. The minister full well knows that the legislation has 
not yet even been proclaimed, at least to the best of my 
knowledge, and yet she seeks to give the legislation credit for 
the question of the anti-dumping suit. 

I wonder if the minister would answer this situation; why is it 
that Saskatchewan potash companies and mines, producing the 
best potash ore, producing it under the most efficient 
circumstances, that we have to cut back; but the New Mexico 
potash mines, fighting with a depleting resource, a very poor 
potash resource revenue base and resources basis, why is it 
that those two can open up? 
 
How in the world can it be said, Madam Minister, how can we 
conclude anything else but that this Government of 
Saskatchewan is serving the handmaidens of New Mexico and 
the United States interests, and our own families suffer? Surely 
you must have a change in policy and not permit that to take 
place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I do in fact believe that the 
legislation provided enough confidence within the world 
industry to allow that agreement to take place between the 
producers and the U.S. government. And I would challenge the 
leader to go out and consult and in fact see if indeed that is 
true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only go back to the issue of supply. While I 
cannot answer specifically for PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan ) Cory division, I do know that in terms of the 
supply, there’s a white division and a red division, and it is the 
red division that has been on the over supply. And I think if 
the leader were to check that out, he would indeed find out that 
that is true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even with the legislation and when it is in place, 
companies will have to make management decisions based on 
their supply situation, their market situation, and their 
day-to-day operations. That won’t change. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have one last new 
question for the minister. The hon. minister tries to argue that 
things are not changing too dramatically, when the hon. 
minister knows full well that at least for 200 Cory potash 
workers, and for others, it has changed not only dramatically 
but tragically, as these people leave the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What other conclusion can we draw except that The Potash 
Resources Act, unproclaimed albeit that it is, has not achieved 
the objectives that you yourself, and your Premier said it 
would achieve. What other conclusion can those workers and 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan conclude? 
 
What other conclusion can we make, other than the fact that 
this government is so mesmerized by the United States and the 
big business entrepreneurs of the United States and the big 
potash companies in the United States, it’s so mesmerized by 
these megaprojects that it’s prepared to sacrifice our key, basic 
potash industry, so that an old, run-down, depleted potash 
business in New Mexico should go. That’s a cause for shame; 
it’s a cause for your resignation, Madam Minister, and the 
Premier’s as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1645 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, this is ironic, considering 
what took place during the debate on the legislation before the 
member from Regina Elphinstone was in this House, and 
considering the fact that the Leader of the Opposition had a 
hard time, wondering if he should go with the debate, go 
against it. I’m not even sure where he was when the vote took 
place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he has taken up the challenge of the 
legislation and the potash industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. I’d like to ask the 
members to allow the minister to answer. She’s been asked the 
question, and she’s answering the question, but it’s difficult if 
she has too much competition. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
remind the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, to take a 
look at the industry as a whole, in fact, to see what happens, 
particularly during the summer months in lay-offs. 
 
Indeed it is of concern if these jobs are going to be lost 
permanently — 200 jobs, 200 families, Mr. Speaker, is a lot to 
any province, but particularly to this industry it’s severe. 
 
I will take you back and remind you when we did the 
legislation the concern, first of all, was with jobs and families 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen many lay-offs and 
job losses over the past several years due to a cycle that was 
taking place. We had to deal with it and, Mr. Speaker, we did 
that. And we will complete the process by the end of this year. 
 
One can only hope, Mr. Speaker, that these jobs in fact are not 
permanent lay-offs and that in fact they will be back when the 
supply situation has turned itself around. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister. 
Is it not correct, Madam Minister, that during the course of the 
introduction of The Potash Resources Act that you or your 
officials, or both, met with the workers and assured them that 
there would not be any permanent closures? In fact the 
rationale that you gave them is the rationale that I gave at my 
very outset of the first question. 
 
And is it also not true that your government, maybe under the 
Premier’s signature, mailed correspondence to those workers 
assuring them that there would not be permanent closures or 
massive shut-downs? Is that not true? And if that is true, what 
in the world is wrong with the government’s capacity to 
forecast if four months later the prediction that it gave in the 
fall of 1987 is proven to be so wildly off base? Are you people 
so totally incompetent that you’re not able to give an accurate 
forecast? And are you so totally heartless that you don’t care 
what family or worker gets damaged by this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that we did in fact 
meet with the workers. We also went to each of the potash 
communities and met with each of the union representatives, 
Mr. Speaker. There was a commitment 

given that in fact this legislation would not cause massive 
permanent job lay-offs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition can do as he wants with that 
statement and twist and turn it, but it doesn’t change the truth. 
 

Legislation for a Common Day of Rest 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. Minister, I think 
it was February you spoke to the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association at the annual convention, and you 
said to them the following, and I quote you your own words: 
“The government will be listening closely to what you have to 
say at this convention.” 
 
And so the delegates at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) took you at your word and they 
told you a number of things that they wanted you to pay 
attention to, and they made their position very clear at this 
convention that they want legislation to provide one common 
day of rest, provincial legislation that would provide it across 
all of the province. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: if you did listen, as 
you told those delegates you would listen, will you assure 
them now here today that you will have legislation in this 
House which will assure a common day of rest for the 
small-business people as well, and in particular for the 
business people of rural Saskatchewan who are deeply 
threatened by any legislation which would do what you have 
been announcing lately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, it’s true what the member 
says, we consult quite a bit and have been and continue to 
consult with SUMA. They clearly understand the legislation 
that will be introduced in this House shortly regarding the 
matter of store hours. I believe that for those communities that 
want to have a common day of rest, if they want to reach that 
position, they’ll be able to reach it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, if only the minister had 
some backbone and would actually listen as well as consult. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And do what’s right. Now my new 
question to the minister, Mr. Speaker, is this: the list, Mr. 
Minister, is long of those people who say that you should have 
a common day of rest provincially. It includes cities like 
Estevan and Weyburn and Prince Albert and others. It includes 
small independent business people. It includes rural business 
people who you are abandoning by your proposals. It includes 
families of working people and employees who are struggling 
out there because they don’t have the protection. It includes 
church groups and organizations, just to name you a short list 
of the numbers of people who have said to you, there should 
be a common day of rest. 
 
Why, I ask you then, do you choose to ignore all of these 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1646 
 

people who are so widely representative of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and instead you support the demands of the 
large national chains throughout this country whose only 
intention and desire is to wipe out the competition of the 
small-business person in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the list of 
consumers, the list of our taxpayers, the list of the people in 
this province that want the privilege and the opportunity to 
shop on Sundays is a whole lot longer than that litany that he 
just went over. 
 
And I simply say this, Mr. Speaker, and the church groups 
understand it, if they want . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister is being 
interrupted almost continuously, and I know you’ll want to 
give him the opportunity to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suppose that it 
begs the question. I’m curious if the member opposite is 
calling all of those people that go shopping in Regina, that I’m 
most familiar with, at Superstore, are you calling them all 
atheists because they shop on Sunday? Are you calling them 
all non-union people? I can tell you that I haven’t been there, 
but I saw one of your members opposite shopping there on a 
Sunday. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So how can you see him if you weren’t 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Because the report came back to me. If 
you want, I’ll name that one. 
 
So in any event, Mr. Speaker, I believe that when the 
legislation is introduced . . . This problem of Sunday shopping 
is not just in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it’s across Canada. 
Ontario still doesn’t know how to deal with it. 
 
I believe that our legislation will be unique in the country, will 
be accepted by everybody in Saskatchewan. It will see it as 
fair. Those people that want to shop on Sundays will be 
allowed to; those that want to stay open on Sundays will be 
allowed to. No longer will we regulate their lives. 
 
And conversely, if the people . . . and if the church groups 
don’t want their people to shop, that’s easy. Tell them from the 
pulpit not to support the stores that may legally stay open. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister’s — my new question to the minister — the 
minister’s powers of vision are only exceeded by his inability 
to tell the truth in this legislature about the input that he’s had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, don’t you agree that this 
legislation really does not provide an option; that if one 
community stays open on a certain day, the 

community that neighbours it doesn’t have a choice but to stay 
open? And the result of that, Mr. Minister, won’t you agree 
that that means that business people in rural Saskatchewan in 
communities within driving distances of the major centres are 
going to be wiped out by your legislation because they won’t 
be able to compete with the change across this country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the members 
opposite simply refuse to listen. Demographic factors affect 
this decision, such as the significant increase in the labour 
force of single parents that don’t have the opportunity to shop, 
the double income families that don’t have time to spend 
together, and yes, even for them a day of shopping is a day out 
with the family. 
 
So as you consider all this, and when he says that I don’t 
consult with anybody, that’s a joke. The people of the city of 
Regina clearly spoke out last year when they indicated that 
they preferred to shop on Sundays. 
 
Having come from the business community prior to this new 
career, I can tell you that it was a contentious issue then when 
I was in the retail trade. And I would have loved to have 
opened, but there was a government of the day that said to me, 
you don’t have that right, and you must stay closed. And yet, 
right across the aisle from me in a major shopping centre was 
located what we call a convenience or a drug store that sold all 
of my product that I couldn’t even begin to compete with, 
either in evenings or on Sundays, and yet my customers told 
me that if I were able to be open, that they would have 
shopped at my store. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, I had staff, and I would have had 
to hire new staff to accommodate that. I would have created 
jobs to allow me the privilege to compete fairly with not a 
large multinational, but certainly with a large independent 
from Regina. And what’s the difference? I believe that I had 
the right, conversely, if I chose not to open. I believe that my 
business was such that I didn’t have to depend on that 
additional day — I provided good service, still did business 
whether I was open or not. 
 
So I just simply say now this government will be deregulating 
people’s lives. And for those consumers, for the large majority 
of taxpayer that wants the opportunity to shop on Sunday, it 
will be there, providing the business community is willing to 
provide them that service. 
 

Proposals to Relieve Drought Situation 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, tomorrow it’s reported that you will 
be meeting in Calgary with the federal Minister of Agriculture 
and your provincial counterparts with respect to the drought. 
 
I wonder if you’ll be able to tell us today, at long last, what 
specific Saskatchewan proposals do you intend to take to that 
meeting about drought relief in western Canada? What are the 
items that are going to be on your list? And specifically, will 
you be seeking a drought payment directly to livestock 
producers in the range of $40 to $90 a 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1647 
 

head as has been suggested by some Saskatchewan farm 
organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we will be meeting in 
Calgary tomorrow, the four western ministers of Agriculture 
and the federal minister. And we outlined three proposals . . . 
three-part proposal to the federal government, and I believe 
that they’re going to respond in a positive fashion. 
 
The first was additional money with respect to drought 
proofing; that is, water mechanisms, drilling, irrigation, so that 
we can have our feed supplies here even if there is sustained 
drought after months and months or indeed years. 
 
Secondly would be cash payments to producers themselves — 
ranchers or farmers that have livestock to the basic beef herd 
and the sheep industry. 
 
And third is anything in addition that we should do with 
respect to crop insurance; that is, include more kinds of 
commodities, topping up the crop insurance, adding to the 
mechanism that we already have in place in terms of the 
national agricultural strategy that allows us to top it up 10 or 
15 per cent after 18 or 24 months of drought. 
 
Finally, with respect to the actual level, I am a little reluctant 
to comment about the level yet until we meet with the four 
western premiers tomorrow. I’d say you’re . . . to be fair, 
you’re in the ball park, but I wouldn’t want to elaborate any 
further on that because I want to hear the views of the other 
ministers in terms of what they think the payments should be 
and what it should look like and how we should allocate it and 
how we should have people apply for it. I at least owe them 
that, in terms of respect, to listen to their side of it before we 
make any final decisions. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier will know that 
farmers and ranchers have been waiting for some details about 
this drought program for a very long period of time, and I 
wonder if the Premier can assure us that tomorrow will not just 
be another talking session, but in fact he and the other 
ministers involved in that discussion will be able to make 
specific announcements tomorrow so that farmers will know 
exactly where they stand without any further delay. 
 
And can he also give us the assurance that any federal dollars 
that are involved in the solution to the drought problem will in 
fact be in addition to provincial programs and not simply a 
means of offsetting or subsidizing provincial treasuries in 
western Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — To address the last question first, the 
proposal that went to, and that is before, the federal 
government is a cost-sharing proposal, so that each of us look 
at what the total problem might be, and they pay their share 
and we pay ours. That’s what’s before them, although I have 
not sat down with the other three western ministers of 
Agriculture in the presence of John Wise to go over that detail, 
but that was what John Wise and I talked about. 
 
With respect to an announcement, it will depend on the 

five players coming to an agreement and then making an 
announcement at the appropriate time. Obviously, I can’t 
speak for the federal government and would not be able, or be 
in a position to say, yes, he will announce something 
tomorrow. What we hope to be able to do tomorrow is agree 
on what it will be, put the package together and announce it as 
quickly as possibly. If it isn’t tomorrow, it would be as soon as 
we can put all the statistical evidence together. 
 
And something to do with how you allocate, where you should 
be making those payments. None of us like drought lines 
because they’re very difficult, but we want to try and target it 
to the area that is deepest hurt. And we want to talk with the 
municipalities and our individual water corporations and our 
environmental people so that we can have a mechanism that is 
as fair as possible so the need goes to the rancher and the 
farmer that needs it, as opposed to people that obviously don’t 
need it or don’t need it 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan 

Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On behalf of the hon. member, I move 
first reading of a Bill to amend the Teachers’ Dental Plan Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No 42 — An Act to amend The Controverted 
Municipal Elections Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On behalf of the hon. member, I move 
first reading of a Bill to amend The Controverted Municipal 
Elections Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance 

Act, 1983 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1648 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Department of Finance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Department of 
Revenue and Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the 
Assembly that His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, recommends it 
to the consideration of the Assembly. And I move that a Bill, 
An Act to amend The Department of Revenue and Financial 
Services Act, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 

Department of Revenue and Financial Services Act, 1988 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I beg to inform the Assembly that His 
Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the 
subject matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration 
of the Assembly, and I move that a Bill, an Act respecting 
Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Department of Revenue and Financial 
Services Act, 1988, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Critical 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Department of Social 

Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Department of Social Services Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend The Residential Services 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill, on behalf of the hon. member, to amend The Residential 
Services Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 50 — An Act respecting the Control of 
Distribution and the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in 

Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, on behalf of the 
hon. member, a Bill respecting the Control of Distribution and 
the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to Amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move on behalf of the 
hon. member, first reading of a Bill to amend The Queen’s 
Bench Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
wonder if I could ask leave to go back for a brief introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to introduce to the members of the Assembly, 
through you, a group of 28 grade 5 and 6 students, facing me 
in the gallery, from St. Edward School in Saskatoon. They are 
accompanied here today by two of the teachers, Kevin 
McLean and Sharon Boechler; and chaperons, Annette 
Yarmovich and Margaret Worobey. 
 
I want all members to join with me in welcoming them to the 
legislature, and I’ll get an opportunity to speak to them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

 COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1649 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At my right, 
Dave Innes, my deputy minister. To his right, the assistant 
deputy minister, Keith Schneider. Behind me directly is Ron 
Davis, the executive director of municipal finance. And to his 
right, Don Harazny, director of administration. And you’ll be 
pleased how I kept everybody to my right. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Not quite, Mr. Chairman. I think we 
have a few questions and they will take some time to ask. And 
depending on the answers, we will determine how long it will 
take. But I want to also join with the minister in welcoming 
the officials to the legislature. I know that they will be, as they 
have in the past been, of a great deal of assistance. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to just take a minute or two and 
give you an outline of some of the major areas which I want to 
cover in your estimates in this Assembly today. And there are 
a number of many other things that we will want to touch on 
as well. But I will give you an idea of the major things that I 
want to pursue. 
 
I want to be raising a number of issues of importance which 
are, I believe, of importance to urban governments; they’re 
important to individual property owners, to business people. 
And we addressed some of that in question period this 
afternoon and, I might say, received very unsatisfactory 
answers. I hope that, given more time in estimates, you will be 
more forthcoming in providing the kind of estimates that the 
people of Saskatchewan expect. Also I think the questions that 
we have to pursue here today are of interest to the province as 
a whole. 
 
One of the things that I want to pursue with you, and I will 
begin with that at the end of my remarks, is the matter of lack 
of government accountability. And I will be focusing more 
directly on you particularly, in your capacity as the Minister of 
Urban Affairs, because there are a number of issues which I 
think need to be raised and I hope that you will be able to 
provide the adequate answers. 
 
What I mean by that, Mr. Minister, is that there were a number 
of questions that were asked from time to time of you to which 
you have committed and promised to give an answer, and 
those answers have not been made available. And I think that’s 
really not a direct criticism of yourself, although it can be, but 
it’s meant to be a general comment of, I think, what is an 
overall problem of this government — lack of accountability. 
 
And that’s a serious matter in a democratic system, in the 
British parliamentary system, where the Executive Council is 
expected to be responsible and accountable to the legislature 
— not to the political party which the Executive Council 
represents but to the legislature, which is the body to which 
people have elected representatives to raise their issues on 
their behalf and have those issues addressed. 
 
I will pursue with you the matter of major cut-backs in 

 provincial government funding of municipal government. And 
that’s a very serious concern because there have been very 
serious financial cut-backs which under your stewardship, as 
the Minister of Urban Affairs, that have taken place since the 
last provincial election when the government thought it had a 
couple of years in which it could weather some criticism. 
 
And even if the price was high at the local level — and I 
notice the member from Kinistino nods his head in agreement 
— but I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that you will find in 
the end that that will be a very mistaken judgement, that you 
cannot deliberately go out and try to fool people and inflict 
unnecessary pain on families and individuals and municipal 
governments and then hope that in the last two years you will 
be able to undo all of that damage. You will maybe undo some 
of the damage, Mr. Minister, but I tell you now that when you 
come out of an election in which you are the government but 
you got 1 per cent less of the popular vote, you don’t have 
very much room in which to operate electorally. 
 
(1445) 
 
Point five: still you are behind, and you’re going to have to do 
some awful great magic — which I don’t think even your 
House Leader is capable of performing — in order to be able 
to recoup the damage that you have cost. One of the problems 
that has been created by your inadequacy of provincial 
contributions to municipal governments in the form of 
adequate revenue sharing, which practically doesn’t exist any 
more, is the devastating effect that it’s had on property taxes 
throughout all of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I bring to your attention, and I know you will have some 
answers to try and camouflage it, that even in your Estimates 
of this year, in this blue book of ’88-89 Estimates, it shows 
that the Department of Urban Affairs’ expenditures for 1989 
are $89.390 million, but in 1982, some six years ago, the 
expenditures of the Department of Urban Affairs were 
$162.138 million. 
 
Now I don’t doubt that you will get up when we get to this 
issue and you will say, oh well, some things have been moved 
around to other departments. The problem is that you won’t be 
able to tell us that after it was moved to the other departments 
that funding has disappeared in many cases for many of the 
projects that the funding was provided. 
 
Now that, Mr. Minister, is a drop of $73 million during a 
period of six years, when inflation has been like it always has 
been, some years higher and some years lower, but always an 
inflation rate of near 5 per cent or more. Is it any wonder then 
that we have communities like Regina, if you take a 1,000 
square foot, three-bedroom bungalow, fairly modest home, 
where 1981 the taxes, the property taxes were $1,102; in this 
year, when you account for the removal of the property 
improvement grant, the cost to that taxpayer is $1,767, an 
increase of $664 in property tax on a home of 1,000 square 
feet. 
 
And if you take the example of the city of Saskatoon, where in 
1981 on a similar home the property tax was $867, it is now 
$1,502 if you account for the removal of the property 
improvement grant — an increase of $695 in 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1650 
 

six years. Now that is a massive increase in the property tax. 
 
If you go to another community — and I give you three 
different sizes — the city of Yorkton, and you take a home and 
do an estimate based on computation of mill rate on a home 
with an assessment of $11,000, in 1981 the property tax was 
$858 on the average. It’s now $1,395, an increase of $535, all 
because of your cut-back in provincial revenue sharing and 
capital funds and other kind of funding that all of a sudden 
after the election you decided you’re going to cut back because 
you’ve got to find some way to repair the deficit that the 
ministers of Finance of your government have brought upon 
the people of Saskatchewan. So you decide you’re going to 
solve this deficit by putting it on the backs of the property 
taxpayers — one of the most unfair taxes that we know of. 
 
I’ll give you one more example, that of Balgonie, which is a 
smaller community. In 1981, that property tax, if you take an 
estimate based on computation of mill rate on a home with an 
assessment of $4,000 prior to reassessment in 1985 and an 
assessment of $8,500 after 1985, in 1981 the tax was $656 — 
it’s now $1,392, an increase of $846 in the property tax. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that is a massive increase 
in property tax and it comes about only because of a deliberate 
and calculated policy of the government to shift the burden of 
taxation to the local level, and the usually results in property. 
 
Now that’s happened because of cut-backs in revenue sharing; 
that’s happened because of cut-backs in the municipal capital 
fund which has been eliminated. In 1982 the municipal capital 
fund provided $18 million to urban municipalities. In 1988-89 
it provides exactly zero. Now there are needed projects which 
have been abandoned or deferred; in either case, its going to 
cost a lot more money in the end. 
 
We have sewage systems that are 25 — in some cases 40 — 
years old and need replacing. We have water systems in 
disrepair at a time that comes to mind, especially during a time 
of drought when, you know, with disrepaired water systems 
there is massive leakage, and communities can therefore lose a 
lot of the water, the scarce water that they have. But yet you 
have destroyed or eliminated the municipal capital fund which 
could be money used to help replace some of this — streets 
and sidewalks which need replacing, and all of this in the end 
will be much more expensive because of the delay, because of 
inflation and because of the stacking up of all of this work that 
is not being done. 
 
And furthermore, you could be creating badly needed jobs in 
the process, and what better way to do it than the building of 
needed community facilities which the community must have 
in order for a modern-day society to exist in the way we expect 
it to exist. 
 
I will also be wanting to ask you some questions, Mr. Minister, 
on revenue sharing, which in 1987-88 had a 1 per cent cut and, 
when you take into consideration inflation this year, had a 
further cut of a large amount. 

Now, Mr. Minister, this year revenue sharing has been frozen, 
after you cut it last year by 1 per cent, now I know you’re 
going to say that in the subvote under revenue sharing it shows 
an increase of $585,000 from the previous year. But you can 
say that if you want; I’m still going to say and I’m going to 
maintain that you have frozen the revenue sharing, because 
this is a separate fund that you have developed and you put it 
into revenue sharing to make it look like you provided an 
increase, which you have not — a neat trick that doesn’t fool 
anybody. 
 
It was simply created so that no municipalities will suffer a 
greater reduction than 3 per cent because of a new method of 
assessing population of communities; that’s why it’s there. 
And I’m going to have a lot of questions to ask about that 
when we get to that subject in these estimates. 
 
The truth is that since the election in 1986 revenue sharing 
funding has had a major cut-back, and you continue that 
process. And you do that while you’re able to say to the oil 
corporations of this country that they can go ahead and have, 
over that period of time, almost a $2 billion tax-free royalty 
holiday. Now that seems to me a very serious negative . . . a 
very serious flaw in the setting of priorities by the government 
when you favour oil corporations, which are making 
multi-millions of dollars in profits, and you say to 
municipalities: raise your property taxes by up to 
$800-and-some, over the period of the six years that this 
government has been in power. 
 
Now I’m not saying this in isolation. I’m not saying this in 
isolation. Even those people — and I’m not sure that you’re 
accurate in this — but even those people you seem to think are 
your friends, politically, and maybe some of their spokesmen 
are — but I submit to you that most of their membership are 
not any more, and that is even the chamber of commerce has 
stated in their news-letter the following, when they refer to 
your budget of last year and this year and they say: it simply 
means the province is transferring some of the deficit from the 
provincial coffers to those of municipal government. However, 
municipal governments have fewer resources from which to 
obtain funds, and it has meant that many of them will have to 
cut some services and still go to the people with a tax increase. 
 
Everybody is telling you that, Mr. Minister, and I only regret 
that, as is the case with the ward system subject and with the 
store hours subject, you and your government in its stubborn 
way have refused to acknowledge that here are people who 
have an opinion out there that ought to be respected and 
listened to. 
 
And I want to also ask you questions about the business tax, 
which I will at some length, because it’s a very important 
issue. And here again the government, through you as the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, has decided they’re going to shirk 
their responsibility and they’re going to shift it on somebody 
else and wash their hands clean and say, I have nothing to do 
with this. That may be nice politics on your part, but I don’t 
think it’s smart government. 
 
And I’m going to be talking to you about the government 
abrogating its responsibility on regulating store hours, 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1651 
 

which is nothing short of a massive attack on the small and 
independent business people of Saskatchewan and, more 
particular, the business people of rural Saskatchewan. You 
may not see it that way but the reality of it is that that’s what 
in fact it is. 
 
And of course you know already that we will be pursuing at 
some length the government’s stubborn attack on the ward 
system that we have in Saskatchewan, or the municipal 
electoral system, in spite of almost unanimous, almost 
unanimous comments throughout Saskatchewan that you 
should not and that you’re going in to the wrong direction. 
I’m going to ask you about your government’s neglect of 
student employment by removing the municipalities and 
non-profit organizations from eligibility from the student 
employment program. 
 
And so these are just some of the things that I will want to talk 
to you about, Mr. Minister. But as I said earlier, I want to 
begin with some routine questions — and I normally don’t 
start with routine questions — because these particular ones 
highlight the fact that the government has not provided 
information it promised to provide; in your case, in your 
estimates last year, you promised that you would provide 
certain information which we still don’t have. 
 
I want to pursue that for a while, and I want to do it at the 
beginning of the estimates for a very specific reason, Mr. 
Minister; that is, if you don’t have those answers when we 
begin. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We sent them to Harry; he threw them 
away. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — No you didn’t send them to . . . I’ll read 
to you what you sent to him, but I’m going to ask them at the 
beginning so that because if you don’t have the answers, it will 
give your officials an opportunity to put the answers together 
and you can give them to us before we complete your 
estimates. 
 
Now you’re going to have choice in your estimates; either you 
get those answers to us, or we could take a long time to 
complete. I simply say that to you because I don’t want to 
mislead in the end, but these are very routine questions to 
which you ought to have the answers available. 
 
Now my colleague, the member from Regina Victoria, asked 
you some questions last year, and he provided, in fact to assist 
you, those questions in writing. We are now into a new fiscal 
year, we’re some eight months later, and we still don’t have 
those answers. 
 
And I’ll give you one example, Mr. Minister. My colleague 
asked you if you would provide the details of all the 
in-province air travel by yourself and your personal staff in 
1986-1987. Seems like a simple routine question. At that time 
you said you would provide it after the estimates were 
complete. Today is May 30, 1988, and we still don’t have 
them. In fact you wrote to the former Urban Affairs critic and 
you simply said, all of this information will be provided in the 
orders and motions of returns numbers 60 and 103, none of 
which have been tabled. 

So although you gave an undertaking to give an answer to that 
question in this House, you tried to find some excuse in order 
not to provide it, which obviously has to lead us to believe that 
there is something shady going on. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you at least today able to 
provide an answer to that question which was asked eight 
months ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, while my officials are 
checking as to just why that question hasn’t been responded to, 
I suppose by way of explanation I can say that I felt it was 
covered in the motions for return. There’s certainly nothing 
shady or anything to hide. I wasn’t even the minister for that 
year, so I’m sure that my colleague had no problems, and 
we’re looking that up. 
 
But just in response to the opening remarks by the member 
from Regina North East, I suppose that I will be looking 
forward, Mr. Chairman, with a great deal of interest to discuss 
store hours and business tax. Small rural stores are competing 
now with the people that are open, and they have been for 
some years, so that it’s nothing new to them. 
 
(1500) 
 
And the business tax will be an interesting discussion. I’ve 
said this on many occasions publicly, both within this 
Assembly and without. I say it again, and I repeat it at this 
time: the members opposite simply don’t understand business 
— they never have, they never will; it’s beyond their 
reasoning, beyond their philosophical interest to understand 
business. Everybody in the business community recognizes 
that. 
 
They had opportunity after opportunity for years and years to 
do something to assist the business community. They never 
did, and I think that it was probably because they really don’t 
know how to deal with the issues of the private sector, and 
perhaps that’s their biggest problem. They don’t understand 
business. 
 
They don’t understand urban parks. We had an interesting 
scenario here last week with the questions from the member 
opposite. They just simply don’t understand how the urban 
park financing and operations work. So that’s interesting. 
 
So now when we get into this situation of urban financing, Mr. 
Chairman, I don’t believe they understand urban financing as 
well. Some of the comments and observations that were made 
by the member from Regina North East — again he is either 
trying to fool the general public, or he does that either 
unwittingly or by choice. You know, he’s simply not saying 
the right thing, and I think it’s because they don’t understand. 
 
They keep talking about the property tax structure and the 
various comparisons and the increases that have occurred, and 
I’m sure that the figures that they use and quote include not 
only municipal taxes but the education portion of them as well. 
And if that’s the case, then I have to deal purely with the 
municipal side of the financing, and there’s a vast difference. 
If they want to talk about the 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1652 
 

education tax side of it on property tax, that rightfully belongs 
to my Minister of Education. I can only deal with the 
municipal side; I can only deal with my budget. 
 
I was pleased to hear him admit that our finding level went 
down $73 million dollars, because 80 million of it alone was 
with regard to the property improvement grant. So that as a 
result, in fact we’re already higher because that one program 
alone was $80 million. He says we’ve gone down 73, so we’ve 
simply added to the funding to municipal governments as a 
result of our funding. 
 
Also the seniors’ grant that’s still in place has been moved to 
another area, and that would be about 35 million. So I suppose 
it might be fair to say then that over the years our funding has 
indeed increased some 35 or $45 million. So they admit that. 
 
They have to understand something else about municipal 
financing that they clearly don’t understand, and that is that 
the revenue of the municipality is much more stable than the 
revenue of a government. They don’t deal with the prices of 
world potash, the world prices of oil, the world prices of grain 
that affect our revenues so dramatically. And as a result, they 
don’t have the variances that we do in revenue, as a provincial 
government, so we have to take all those things into 
consideration. 
 
I think that the true form of comparison, Mr. Chairman, the 
true form of comparison is not so much the dollars and cents, 
and how much goes in or how much comes out or all the rest 
of it, but the true percentage of change between revenue 
sharing — the money that the provincial government gives — 
and the actual mill rate charged by a municipality at the 
municipal level. That, indeed, is the true comparison because 
the municipalities, Mr. Chairman, their revenues automatically 
increase every year as a result of their assessment base going 
up every year — new construction, new homes, new offices 
and the like. So that as that assessment base climbs, certainly 
their revenue climb with it. 
 
In 1982, for instance, the municipal mill rates rose 9 per cent, 
but in 1982 our revenue sharing increased 11.5 per cent. So 
our revenue sharing exceeded the mill rate increase. In 1983, 7 
per cent was the revenue-sharing increase while mill rate only 
went up 6 per cent; 1984, again we see the same scenario, and 
on and on. So that we have kept up with the mill rate on the 
revenue-sharing side, clearly. 
 
It’s interesting to note, too, that as you compare across the 
country, grant per capita of revenue-sharing operating 
expenses, that our grant per capita this year is $90. 
Interestingly enough, Manitoba, $39 — $39. So they’ll say, 
well let’s compare last year. Well fine, I’ll compare last year. 
Last year we were $89, and Manitoba under an NDP 
administration, $38. And they say that we’re not doing our 
share. Even our neighbours to the west — Alberta, $56; B.C., 
$40. So clearly in western Canada, Saskatchewan’s revenue 
sharing is much higher than our neighbouring provinces. 
 
So having responded somewhat to his original question 

or whatever, I’ll sit down now and I’ll check with my officials 
concerning the exact thing regarding the question that was 
asked. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — While the minister’s doing that, Mr. 
Chairman, let me respond very briefly, and much more briefly 
than my initial remarks, to some of the things that the minister 
said. 
 
And I simply want to say that when he talks about some 
people not understanding the private sector, I simply say to 
him, he doesn’t understand the nature of Saskatchewan. He 
seems to reflect the attitude of this government that because 
they’ve been flying the world and they take an airplane, they 
spend too much time in New York and Los Angeles and 
wherever else they go, and they think, oh, isn’t this great; I’ve 
been here for a weekend, I wish it was . . . it would be nice if it 
was that way in Regina. And then they bring some of these 
concocted ideas and somehow think that that’s Saskatchewan 
and you have to bring in legislation in that model. It’s a bunch 
of nonsense. 
 
That model, that model, Mr. Chairman, would have resulted in 
Saskatchewan being a province like North Dakota with a 
population of $500,000. Who do you think built this province? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five hundred thousand people. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Five hundred thousand people. Who do 
you think built this province? The people who live here, not 
the multinational chain store operations who want to come in 
here and want to close down our small, independent business 
people. It was those independent business people who built 
this province as part of the larger component of Saskatchewan. 
 
If the minister knows so much about the private sector, I 
simply would ask him, then why doesn’t he listen to what they 
advise him? The private sector is saying to the minister — and 
that is the Saskatchewan private sector — is saying to the 
minister — and I won’t pursue that at length because I have a 
lot of time in my agenda for that — but they’re saying to him, 
the province should have a common pause day. Small 
businesses are saying that; independent businesses are saying 
that; municipalities are saying that. 
 
Now this is the minister who suggests he understand the 
private sector so well, and yet says to them, say what you 
want; I’m not paying any attention. 
 
It’s true that one of the reasons why there is a reduction in 
Urban Affairs, urban spending, is because of the $80 million 
removal of the property improvement grant, which essentially 
was an $80 million increase on Saskatchewan property. To the 
taxpayer, it increased the taxes by $80 million, and it took out 
of those small-business people in Balgonie and in Yorkton and 
in Hudson Bay and in Tisdale, proportionally, $80 million of 
consumer dollars which used to be spent in those communities. 
 
And I say also that for a home owner whose income has not 
kept up with inflation, the minister’s explanation of 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1653 
 

increases in mill rate and increases in taxation because of 
inflation or assessment is hardly going to be of great comfort. 
When your income has stayed at whatever it is, and you’re 
living in a 1,000 square foot home, and your taxes have 
increased by $800 a year, saying that, oh, your assessment has 
changed, is not going to help that family who’s barely making 
a living and can barely afford to provide the necessary clothes 
for their kids to go to school. And I say to the minister, think 
of a better argument than that one. 
 
And don’t give us this nonsense about comparison to other 
provinces. Manitoba maybe is $39 per capita if you use 
selective funding, which you have so done — selected 
funding. And if you ignore the fact that in Manitoba there is a 
major tax rebate program to home owners which you don’t 
have in Saskatchewan because you eliminated, why don’t you 
include that in there? Then you would find out that 
Saskatchewan does not compare very well. 
 
I won’t respond to all of the comments that the minister made, 
Mr. Chairman, because I don’t want to do it all at the 
beginning; I want to do it in an organized way under each of 
the subjects. I simply want to go back to the question I asked 
him and ask if he’s prepared to provide it, the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again he 
covered a little bit of territory and emits these numbers, and he 
keeps getting himself into a little bit of a jackpot. He talks 
about $80 million that is gone from the property improvement 
grant just as though it was gone off the face of the earth. Later 
on today we’ll be getting into the home program which this 
government brought in to supplement that very thing that he’s 
talking about. And it’s not a direct payment on the tax. 
 
But he mentioned small businesses in the various communities 
throughout the province. Let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, what 
those small businesses have garnered already from the home 
program — fast approaching three-quarters of a billion dollars 
— three quarters of a billion dollars — $750 million in 
economic activity. And he talks a tenth of that. Obviously he 
doesn’t understand. I too can bring forward a list of small 
businesses in small communities that would just overwhelm 
him. And he says, no support. 
 
I have a letter here from the Moose Jaw chamber of commerce 
that agree with us. The Moose Jaw chamber has reiterated its 
stand on business operating hours. This is what I’ve been 
saying. The individual operator of any business, no matter the 
type, the size, the product, the services, establish their own 
hours of operation. 
 
And these letters keep coming in. And no, if you want to 
attach a name again like they always do, Mr. Chairman, to the 
employees of these people . . . I don’t know why they 
continually pick on employees. This was not signed by an 
employee. This was signed by the president of the Moose Jaw 
chamber of commerce, a letter endorsing us. And all of these 
come over. 
 
You know, I too will use a little bit of research. Here’s from 
The Globe and Mail, a little bit of research. And if 

you bear with me, it’s kind of comical. But The Globe and 
Mail kind of puts the store hours issue where it belongs. The 
headline is “Who’s minding the store?” 
 

David Peterson reveals his complex new plan to allow 
and ban Sunday shopping simultaneously. Stores within 
102 metres of churches will be closed except those on the 
sunny side of the street or next to fire halls. Big stores 
will be closed unless they sell red underwear or 
leather-bound opera glasses. Little stores may open but 
only if they sell bathtub plugs and whole wheat muffins. 
Medium size stores may open if they sell flea powder but 
not glazed doughnuts in the same aisle. And any store 
with a south-west exposure will be able to open on the 
first and third Sundays of every second month barring 
rain-outs with discount coupons. 

 
That’s exactly what I’ve been saying, Mr. Chairman. There are 
so many regulations across this country that nobody knows 
what’s left to open any more. We’re bringing some reason to 
the entire situation, and I say this: when that legislation is 
finally introduced and brought in and the municipalities see it, 
it would surprise me totally if the municipalities didn’t think 
that that was a real good way to go. 
 
It’s fair to the municipalities as far as they relate to being 
elected officials. It’s fair to their consumers. It’s fair to all of 
the people of this province whether they represent double 
working families, whether they represent, indeed, unions, 
because sometimes this is the only protected little area left. 
And we find our union friends having to work on Sundays in 
the communication business, in the hospitals, and all the rest 
of it. When do they go shopping? So that this is really more 
than fair. 
 
He mentioned assessment. And yes, the reassessment cycle 
started under the NDP administration, and there was a major 
reassessment done throughout the province. 
 
But what did this government do? We took action. We took 
the whole matter of assessment and moved it into a third-party 
agency, the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, 
which is divorced from government. I happen to be the 
minister in charge, by view of its legislation. But on this board 
sits two members from SUMA, two members from SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), one from 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association), and 
two that are appointed by government. And they sit and deal 
with the entire logic and problems and good news that will 
come from this assessment agency. 
 
(1515) 
 
So we did something about it. And the comparison of numbers 
— I’m glad that the member recognized that you can compare 
apples and battleships and you can compare apples with apples 
— and I just simply point that out as he has done, as he 
chooses to leave out true comparisons and try to fool the 
people of this province. I don’t do that. I clearly indicated that 
I was going to talk 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1654 
 

mill rates, and I’d be more than willing to compare one area 
against another so that the people that are out there understand 
how their tax structure works and who indeed assesses and 
who indeed implements and establishes the mill rate structure. 
 
Regarding the questions that were asked earlier in the year, I 
do apologize on behalf of my department. That information 
was available and unfortunately, through an oversight, it was 
sitting in the binder, in the briefing. I will present that to the 
members opposite at this time. There is clearly nothing to hide, 
and all I can do is apologize. It was a little bit of an oversight, 
if you would give that to the member. I’ve been keeping them 
busy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now that we 
have that answer, and I accept your explanation except to the 
extent that I know it’s not the fault of the department, Mr. 
Minister; the department had this information prepared a long 
time ago, and we have had other . . . I happened to have been 
chairman of the Public Accounts Committee over the last 
period of time, and I know that whenever we ask a department 
of government, the officials — this is where the ministers 
don’t attend and so it becomes much more efficient — when 
we ask the officials to provide, much more complicated than 
this, information, we had it within three weeks. So we know 
where the information has been, and I accept the fact that your 
apology and the fact that you must have forgotten it because of 
your very busy schedule or whatever the reason is. 
 
But now that we have that, I draw your attention to further 
question which we asked. My colleague from Victoria, or 
Regina, he said would you provide the details of all the 
in-province air travel for yourself and your personal staff. 
That’s the one you have provided. But now I can ask you: will 
you provide me that information for 1987-1988 fiscal year 
which ended in March? Do you have that available? 
 
I think, sorry, I have checked this. They’ve provided it — very 
thoughtful — ’87-88 and ’86-87. 
 
Now let me go on to the next one then. We also asked the list 
of all out-of-province trips taken by the minister and his 
personal staff in 1986-87. And I ask you: do you have that 
information here? And can you give me that information from 
1987-88 as well as you have with the previous question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been waiting for this 
question. In our government some of our various portfolios 
and our ministers must travel out of province, clearly; our 
Premier travelling as he does to put Saskatchewan on the map; 
our Deputy Premier with Trade; our minister of Trade, and the 
like. So those that have to travel, must travel. I happen to have 
a portfolio, Mr. Chairman, that doesn’t take me away out of 
the province, but rather keeps me very, very busy here at 
home. I can tell you that for the fiscal year of April 1, ’87, to 
March 31, ’88, I have not spent 5 cents on travel out of this 
province as a minister. Not a nickel. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three cents? 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Not even three cents, as the member from 
Regina Victoria asks. But I will, as was asked, supply them 
with an out-of-province travel from ’86 to ’87. And again, in 
that year I didn’t spend not even 1 cent or 3 cents or 5 cents. 
My out-of-province travel in that year was also absolute zero. I 
have not left this province; my portfolio doesn’t require that I 
do. But one of the other ministers prior to my assuming this 
portfolio had occasion to go to a national conference; I will 
supply that information. And also, I will supply a more 
complete list of my current in-province travel because I do 
have occasion to travel around my province. As I mentioned, 
the list that you got was a little bit incomplete; it’s been 
updated. I’ll ask the page to take that over. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Frankly, I’m 
not surprised that with your great statements about 
consultation and then not paying any attention to what they’re 
telling you, that people have stopped inviting you to come and 
speak to them. 
 
But I go back to my first question because I think there’s 
something incomplete here, Mr. Minister. On the in-province 
travel of Minister of Urban Affairs, the last trip that I have is 
Waskesiu, May 31, 1987. It is now added to this other stuff 
that we just got here? This is in-province travel, or did you 
stop travelling around the province after May 31, 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s on the second 
list that I just provided. And as I said, they do ask me to speak 
quite frequently around the province and I do do that, and 
that’s why that first part was incomplete. I sent them a second 
one. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I’m glad that we have that 
now. Now the other question that was asked is, some time in 
October I believe, is: did the Department of Urban Affairs 
charter or lease any aircraft in the year 1986-1987? If yes, 
could you provide me with the dates of each trip, the purpose 
of the trip, who went on the trip, the firm you purchased the 
flight from, and how much each of these trips cost the people 
of Saskatchewan? And once again, that was asked for 
1986-1987, never provided. I ask you, do you have that now, 
and can you do the same for 1987-1988? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps we can get on 
with some questioning. My officials are going to look into 
that. Most of our flights are done on executive air. Every now 
and then it may be necessary to charter an in-flight . . . or 
charter an in-province charter because of executive air being 
booked. If that’s the case, we’ll check our records, and then if 
we have any, we will send them over. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. If you’re going to do that, 
then I remind you and I draw to your attention another 
question that was asked, of which we have not received an 
answer for some eight months: is the Department of Urban 
Affairs, either directly or contract out, any polling during 
1986-87? If so, what did those polling cost, when was it 
conducted, by whom was it done, and for what purpose? Once 
again, no response. Can you provide it for 1986-1987? And I 
ask you to provide it for 1987-1988 as well. And if your 
official needs some time, sometime in the evening when we’re 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1655 
 

back here again, I’m sure they’ll be able to provide it for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ve been advised that we have done no 
polling, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In neither year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That’s correct, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Have you had anybody do some polling 
for you in another department, from which you were then able 
to get information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think in fairness to myself, Mr. 
Chairman, I should be allowed the privilege of that question 
when I’m in my other . . . with my other officials because I’d 
hate to give you a wrong answer. And I can’t determine 
whether or not I have had any done, by memory, at this time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well then it would be quite sufficient if 
you were to instruct your officials who are with you today to 
do some research on that. Department of Finance may do the 
polling and may provide you some information because of 
questions specifically geared for Urban Affairs. Can you 
undertake to ask your officials to search that out and provide it 
for me later? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ll ask my officials to search that out, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, one other 
question and then I will move along. 
 
I noticed that we asked some questions about your personal 
staff — the name, the job title, and the salary level of your 
personal staff, a question we ask every year. You said that this 
would be provided in the order for return. We don’t have it for 
’86-87, and I would ask it for ’87-88. Also I will ask: during 
both of those years, over that period of time, has there been 
any changes in pay, and if so, how much? And can you 
provide that for me now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I have that compiled here for the current 
year, Mr. Chairman, that I’ll provide through the page at this 
point in time. I believe that it’s complete. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — This is for the current year. Can you 
also provide the answer to the question asked for ’86-87, and 
can you also tell us — because this doesn’t give me the 
information of my last question — corollary to the question 
which was: have there been any increases in pay during this 
period of time, and if so, how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, I got a whole bunch 
of paper here. My department is really good at keeping this 
stuff, and they should set a shining example, and they do. So I 
haven’t even, you know, searched it because I have nothing to 
hide. But they have compiled, first of all, the chartered aircraft 
use, and I’ll ask the page to take that over. I would point out 
that although it’s rather lengthy, it does include all of our 
northern offices, and our staff in the North is required to use 
quite a bit of chartered aircraft so that . . . that will provide 
that. 

I have also here the staff from last year. They will notice when 
they compare it that the names are different. That’s because I 
had staff changes in my office with people leaving and the 
like. Any increases are negligible and he will be able to see . . . 
those that stayed in our employ, the small amount of increase, 
if any, that they did in fact receive. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, during your 1987 
estimates you said in the discussion in this legislature that you 
were going have a new Local Government Board Act, or 
something similar to that. Anyway, it was going to be a 
consolidation of The Local Government Board, Provincial 
Planning Appeals Board, Saskatchewan Assessment Appeals 
Board. And you also, at that time, indicated that it would be 
introduced in the fall session of ’87. It so happened we started 
in the summer and extended through the fall. 
 
Can I ask you, then, to report on the status of this legislation 
which you said you were going to introduce last fall, and yet 
has not seen the light of day in this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m glad that my critic 
acknowledged the fact that my staff was reduced. 
 
With regard to the piece of legislation to which he refers, it is a 
lengthy Bill, and it’s going to be called The Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board Act, I believe, and we have been working on 
it for quite some time. It covers a whole multitude of things in 
what we’re trying to combine. 
 
I hope the we’re in a position to introduce that legislation later 
on this week, and I believe that it should be a 
non-controversial Bill. And I offer this to the members 
opposite, that in view of the length of the Bill I would be 
prepared to offer the assistance of my department officials to 
explain the Bill to them, in the event that they would believe 
that it is non-controversial, and just tell them what we’re 
trying to accomplish and why. 
 
And certainly, if they choose to argue it in this legislature, I 
don’t have any problem with that. But it is a rather large Bill. 
It was very, very difficult to draw up. I hope to introduce it 
later in the week. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I appreciate that. Mr. 
Minister, one other question which your government, across 
the piece, has not liked to handle very much because of your 
massive expenditures of public money on political advertising, 
mainly. In ’86-87, we estimate that your government has spent 
well in excess of $25 million, if you consider the Crown 
corporation sector as well as the government proper, $25 
million which could have been well used to provide hospital 
beds, well used to provide additional revenue-sharing money 
to municipalities to reduce the amount of property tax 
increases which has been a great burden on the property 
owners of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
It is because you’re embarrassed with this expenditure of 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1656 
 

money that you did not answer the question asked for ’86-87 
on the cost of advertising during that year, and the dates on 
which it was done, the names of the firms who did the 
advertising, and the purpose that the advertising was for? 
 
Now I noticed you very selectively provided the information 
that you spent with Brown & Associates, and with the office 
services revolving fund, one which was $2,741.96 and the 
other one, $38,896.56. But when it came to the big one, and 
that is the advertising cost by Urban Affairs in ’86-87 to 
Brigdens Photo and Graphics Ltd., Roberts & Poole 
Advertising Corp., and Dome Advertising and Dome Media 
Buying Ltd., we yet don’t have the answer. 
 
Now can I ask you to provide that answer which was asked 
eight months ago for 1986-1987, and will you be so good as to 
provide that information for 1987-1988? And while you’re 
doing that, can you tell us what your advertising budget is for 
the present estimate which we’re considering here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I . . . we don’t spend much 
money on advertising; it’s all pretty regular stuff. And the 
inference of political buying, and everything, is kind of 
unfortunate because this is all stuff that we have to do on our 
normal day-to-day operation. I don’t have any problem sharing 
it and sending this information there. And as a matter of fact, 
our total advertising budget in the first year, ’86-87, was 
$67,000, not a very significant portion. It’s all listed there if he 
wants to see that for the notice of a public hearing we did buy 
from Dome Media Buying Services, $127.30, and another 
notice of public hearing for the same firm that was $428, and 
like that. It’s all here for his scrutiny. 
 
I will point out that in ’87-88 we reduced our advertising 
budget somewhat, and we’re now down to below $55,000. It’s 
all shown in here. It’s Saskatchewan Gazette(s) and Sask 
Government Printing, and the like, and all the various agencies 
that are involved. And I’ll ask the page to take this information 
over to him as well. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for the current year we have estimated our 
advertising budget at $100,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, federal election, eh? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And you know, again I suppose we’ll be 
accused of spending money on the federal election, as the 
member from Saskatoon South points out. But I suppose all I 
can do at this time is repeat what the Minister of Finance said 
in the legislature last week. Even in a budget year, our 
government’s total advertising budget was well below what 
the NDP spent on advertising in their election year. When you 
consider rate increases, and the like, that have occurred in four 
or six years, I think that that’s pretty commendable. 
 
And if they want to accuse us of political spending, I suppose 
that’s within their realm, but I hope that when they see the 
advertising that is done in the department . . . Not everything 
we do in government is bad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mean, sometimes we do good things, and they might not 

realize it. But one day I would like to hear them admit that, by 
golly, you know, they seem to do pretty well in this 
department, or that this program is good and not political. So 
perhaps we might have to wait a long time for that day, but 
one day it might come. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I might just say that 
it’s so hard to find much good that your government does, as is 
reflected by the results of Saskatoon Eastview and Regina 
Elphinstone, that we can only concentrate on the things that 
are bad. 
 
After all, having said that, that seems to be clearly one of the 
functions of the opposition, is to have you accountable for the 
mismanagement and the lack of accountability and all of those 
things which your government has become reputable for in a 
very negative way. 
 
Now I’m glad that this year you have provided information 
that you last year did not provide; that you’re, at least on those 
issues, a little better prepared than were you last year. I hope 
that when I get into what I want to do right away and have a 
discussion with you on the ward system, that you will be able 
to provide us a clear set of answers and tell us today that you 
have decided to listen to what your caucus is telling you and 
what the public is telling you, and not bring in this legislation 
which nobody wants but yourself because of some personal, 
political vendetta that you want to impose on the citizens of 
Saskatchewan because they haven’t, in large numbers, elected 
too many of your personal friends to the city council in the city 
of Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . and I want to address that for a moment and 
ask you some questions. I mean, one of the things that I think 
is highlighted more than anything else by your stubborn 
approach on this matter of municipal electoral legislation, is 
the fact that you have a total and complete disregard for the 
people who are going to be affected by any legislation you 
bring forward on the municipal electoral system. And that can 
be described in no other way than the desire of a government, 
or maybe even the minister, to act in a dictatorial way, highly 
unseemly in our system of government, and do so regardless 
of what the majority thinks. Because from all of the comments 
that you’ve been making up until now, you have certainly not 
in any way indicated that you have listened to the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association which has 
now finally, very clearly, told you what they think of your 
proposals. 
 
You have not listened to all of those municipalities, which I 
have on record in my file before me, who have said to you that 
you’re wrong. You’ve consulted in a serious way with no one. 
You simply went off on a tangent and hired, at great cost, a 
former cabinet minister to do some research for you, to see if 
he could possibly come up with some arguments that you 
could defend your position with. 
 
And I hope that later today you’ll be able to give us the price 
of this individual who you hired. And if you can’t do it now, I 
serve notice to you that later I will be asking you for that, and 
your officials might as well start getting some of that 
information together. 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1657 
 

You’re supported by no one in your blind charge on this, 
except by some close Conservative friends in big business, 
people in high places who think that somehow by doing away 
with the ward system they can then take control of municipal 
government in cities where there is now a ward system, and 
have things their way. 
 
The whole proposal of yours, Mr. Minister, is politically 
motivated. It has got nothing to do with good municipal 
government, it has got nothing to do with providing the kind of 
democratic process, and facilitating of the democratic process 
that dwellers and ratepayers in our cities ought to have a right 
to expect. 
 
And for that, Mr. Minister, I must say no one should be able to 
commend you. I don’t like to say that, but quite frankly, I find 
it rather distasteful when any minister of the Crown uses some 
personal motive, some partisan political motive to try to do 
things that the public in urban centres opposes. And if they had 
remained silent and said nothing, then I guess to some degree 
your position might have some credibility, but they have not. 
These are people who normally don’t come out and storm the 
barricades and say something to government that they disagree 
with in a big way, but they have on this issue. 
 
Your response has been simply to attack, simply to attack 
those men and women who have been elected to municipal 
councils saying that they have been irresponsible. And because 
of the ward system somehow it has caused municipal spending 
and debt to get out of control, which is a bunch of nonsense 
and you know it, and yet you’ve gone ahead and said it, and 
you’ve tried to create some kind of political problem to 
municipal people. 
 
I reject personally, and I reject on behalf of my colleagues in 
this Assembly, those allegations, because these are people who 
are closest to the electorate. These are people who get elected 
to serve their electorate in their cities, and by and large they do 
it well under, I might say, very extreme difficulties imposed by 
your administration — with the cut-backs in funding, with the 
cut-backs in revenue sharing, with the abolition of the 
municipal capital funding, with the abolition of a recreation 
facilities grant funding, with the cut-backs in the transit 
assistance programs. And that is only a partial list; a longer list 
I will get to when we get to municipal funding. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, and I don’t think you will disagree, 
that municipal government is extremely important and we 
should provide the best possible democratic system for the 
election of municipal government. We should not impose on 
those people, those ratepayers in Regina or Saskatoon or 
Prince Albert, a system which does nothing but create 
confusion, reduces the amount of participation by voter 
turn-out — which we know and record is there to show it very 
clearly — and a system that is not as close to the people as this 
present system is. 
 
Most people in this country — and Saskatchewan is no 
exception, in fact Saskatchewan probably more so than most 
parts of this country — believe that a democratic political 
system is the best form of political system. And 

many other systems have been tried throughout the world, and 
none of them have worked, and here you go and threaten to 
take it way from them. 
 
This isn’t an old battle. When the municipalities of Regina and 
Saskatoon were converted to the ward system in 1973, it was 
made very clear at that time, Mr. Minister, that they would be 
able and be given an opportunity to vote on it and if they 
decided that they didn’t want it, they could reject it. Well they 
had that vote. You can call it a plebiscite, you can call it what 
you want, the fact is that the people at that city level made that 
decision. 
 
In the city of Regina, I believe, it was by a margin of 9,000 — 
it certainly was 70 per cent. And in the city of Saskatoon, it 
was also substantial. And the city of Prince Albert, they did it 
on their own and voted to have a ward system. And I’m not 
surprised at that because they learned with the experience of 
the ward system that the different needs of the different parts 
of the city were not any longer being neglected as they used to 
be. It allows the people to get close to their aldermen or 
alderwomen or councillors, whichever their title is, and make 
sure that their concerns are addressed, and that hasn’t caused 
the overall interest of the city to be lost sight of, as you would 
like to suggest. And that, too, is a bunch of nonsense. 
 
The past experience has shown you that without a ward system 
the tendency is for the election of people who are powerful, 
either economically or because they are placed in situations 
where they can have a lot of publicity because of their 
particular jobs, it’s to the disadvantage of everybody else who 
may want to run for municipal office. 
 
You automatically say if you abolish the ward system that you 
cut out anybody without wealth because of the expensive 
running in a city-wide municipal election. But why would you 
want to do that? Why would you want to say to people who 
have a job at Ipsco, or people who work for Canadian Linen 
Supply, or people who may have a small insurance business, 
or people who may have modest incomes: you no longer are 
going to be able to run in municipal politics because I’m going 
to make sure you can’t afford it. 
 
Why would you want to say that in a democratic system unless 
you are motivated to make sure as best you can that only a 
certain elite gets elected to municipal government so that they 
can be — who are the friends of the Progressive Conservative 
Party — so that they can have their way at the expense of the 
general population. That’s the reason why we are hearing the 
kinds of things that we’re hearing from the minister opposite, 
Mr. Chairman. It’s got nothing to do with better municipal 
government. 
 
(1545) 
 
Even the minister, a year ago — he’s had an unusual 
transformation — a year ago he said the following, I quote 
from Hansard of October 1987. He said: 
 

I can tell you that the local government administrations 
over the past four years have done very, very well in 
scrutinizing their budgets, spending their  

  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1658 
 

money efficiently, spending their money effectively, and 
still looking at ways to continue to improve that. 

 
Now I agree. Who wouldn’t agree? Except somehow this 
minister who says, tell me what you think; I’m here to consult; 
I’m here to listen; and then forgets that he said it, went on to 
say different things in 1988, when he said: 
 

Councillors act mostly on behalf of their particular ward 
as the resulting system puts political pressure on 
councillors to do things for their wards, but in the process 
on one speaks for the city as a whole. 

 
What happened to his earlier statement in 1987 in which the 
councillors were doing such a good job? The only thing 
happened is that he got pressure from certain people in the city 
. . . the chamber of commerce in Regina and certain people in 
the Conservative Party saying, you’ve got to make sure that 
only Conservatives get elected to municipal government. And 
so he’s changed his rhetoric. 
 
Then he went on to say . . . And I really should say where he 
said it. The first one he said in the Leader-Post, March 15, 
1988. And then in the Star-Phoenix, March 22, 1988, the 
minister said: 
 
Huge increases in the city’s expenditures coincided with the 
introduction of the ward system. 
 
What happened to the responsible administrators and the 
responsible councillors that he talked about in 1987, other than 
some new political motivation? 
 
And then on March 30, 1988 . . . This is all coming in March, 
when the minister is either testing the water or trying to create 
the political climate to make his process more acceptable, and 
in fact it’s gone the other way and has become less acceptable, 
he said: 
 
I think if we are going to look at the efficiencies of operating, 
there is no question that fewer alderman would be a tax saving 
to the people. You hear criticism that alderman are doing work 
that officials should be doing. If that’s the case, if that’s all 
they do, then maybe we can have fewer aldermen. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we have all agreed to increase 
representation in this legislature come the new electoral 
boundaries Bill, and that’s right, because of the work-load and 
because of population increases. The population of the cities 
could increase quite considerably since the ward system was 
introduced in 1973. And the minister says, oh we need fewer 
alderman. Now he’s talking out of both sides of his mouth. 
 
What makes the people in the cities different? They want good 
government just like people anywhere else. They want good 
government like people anywhere else. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, your comments about in recent months 
that city councillors are not efficient, that they’re motivated by 
all kinds of strange things, which is different than what you 
said in 1987, I submit to you you cannot 

support or substantiate. And if you can, I welcome you to do 
so in these estimates today and give us the evidence. Don’t just 
go out in front of a television camera and a microphone and 
make these wild statements and condemn our municipal 
officials. Back it up. If you can’t back it up, then don’t say it, 
because you’re casting reflections that are not becoming a 
minister of the Crown. 
 
If you have some integrity to do that, then I hope you will do 
so, and when I give you an opportunity throughout this day. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, all of the evidence points to the fact that 
the ward system is working, and working well, whether it’s 
from the point of view of representation, whether it’s from the 
point of view of effective municipal government. And they 
have their bad times just like your government has had its bad 
times. As a matter of fact, if you compare municipal 
governments to the operation of this provincial government, 
they are five-star operations. 
 
I don’t see many of them running up the kind of deficits that 
this provincial government has done, and it’s not proposing to 
do away with provincial constituencies. Because really, the 
follow-up of your arguments, Mr. Minister, simply say if ward 
systems cause mismanagement, then provincial constituencies 
cause bad government provincially. How can you justify it in 
one case and not the other is beyond me. 
 
Now we have tried for weeks, Mr. Minister, to get you to 
clarify your position because municipal elections are soon 
upon us. 
 
Can you, in this House today, finally, once and for all . . . do 
you have your act together? Has your caucus been able to 
convince you the error of your ways? And are you able, in this 
House, to say that you now have changed your mind? And if 
you do, I will commend you for it. I may qualify it, but I’ll 
commend you for it. Are you able to say that you’ve changed 
your mind because you’ve listened to the advice . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You wouldn’t commend me if I gave 
you good dog legislation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Try me. Try me. But you’ve got good 
advice from all of the right people. Are you able to say in this 
House today that you’re not going to proceed with changes to 
the municipal electoral system and destroy a very effective and 
good government system in our municipalities that we’ve 
experienced since 1973? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m trying to be reasonable here today, 
Mr. Chairman, to facilitate a timely debate in this Committee 
of Finance. The ward system has nothing to do with it, so I 
will be brief. And the reason that I’ll be brief is simply 
because there has been no announcement yet. I’m still 
listening; I’m still consulting. Everything is purely 
hypothetical that the member says. 
 
You know, the debate on the ward system has been going on, 
certainly in my city, since 1914; that was even before 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1659 
 

me. But the second one was ’35, and that wasn’t. Since 1959 
— and I’ll tell you what happened, Mr. Chairman — in 1959 
the people of Regina voted “no” to the ward system; 1970, the 
people voted “no” to the ward system. He mentioned the word 
“dictatorial.” After these two votes against the ward system, 
the NDP government put it in dictatorially. 
 
And now they stand there, or sit, like some righteous group 
that says, don’t do this, you have no right to dictatorially do 
that, when they did it. Then they said, and then we’ll give you 
an option; if you don’t like it, we’ll remove it. So in 1976, 
three years following, the city of Saskatoon voted against it. 
And what happened? Nothing. The NDP still left it in. 
 
He referred to a former cabinet minister doing research for me. 
Well I can tell you that he hasn’t done his research. I, too, read 
that that occurred. And if in fact he did, you should consult 
with your business community, because if indeed that was 
done, and I have no privy to it, it was done on behalf of the 
Regina chamber of commerce, from the information that I 
read, from the publication that I receive as a member of the 
Regina chamber of commerce. So you should do some more 
research on it yourself. 
 
And to degrade, to degrade the aldermen that run at large by 
calling them elitists, that tells me that every single, solitary 
alderman in the city of Moose Jaw who runs at large then is 
automatically an elitist. They’re friends of mine, and as much 
as I admire them, I wouldn’t degrade them buy calling them an 
elitist. 
 
If the provincial boundary constituency is beyond that member 
and others that chided in from their seats, if you can’t 
understand the difference between a parliamentary system and 
the ward system, you shouldn’t be here. Constituencies have 
nothing to do with wards. I happened to catch on the tube the 
member from Regina Victoria talking about the ward system 
and, again, full of misinformation. 
 
And if we make an announcement to do something with the 
ward system, Mr. Chairman, I will be glad to debate the 
comments at that particular time in committee with my critic 
and with the member from Regina Victoria. Unfortunately, 
politics have been kept out of it until now — until now. And I 
happened to be one that agreed with the member from 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition, when in 1973 he 
clearly indicated that it had nothing to do with politics and 
there was no room in the NDP for politics at the local level, 
and the like. And I happen to agree with that. 
 
And politics is not the debate in the ward system. He said that 
I don’t have support. Well let’s analyse my non-support. In 
Saskatoon the city council voted six to five — five there 
obviously saw it my way. Moose Jaw, who have had the 
opportunity to go to the ward system and haven’t. That’s 10-0. 
So start counting them up and see about this so-called lack of 
support in the event the government should decide to do 
something. 
 
But my, and our, concern — it extends to the city council to 
appoint — but our concern in all of this matter is for the 

taxpayer. I have never, ever demeaned or taken a personal 
attack on any alderman or mayor in this province, in spite of 
the personal attacks that come my way, and I suppose that’s 
understandable. 
 
And as the member read from Hansard the glowing remarks 
that I had for my municipalities, and I still do, and he says, 
what’s changed? — nothing has changed. I still firmly believe 
that they’re doing a very good job under difficult times. And 
now if we can help them, if we can help them to do a better job 
that transfers into the taxpayers’ laps, then why shouldn’t we 
do that. And its not the aldermen, Mr. Chairman. They’re 
doing the best job that they can. It’s the system; it’s the system 
that hamstrings them, and there is absolutely no question that 
when a ward alderman is elected, his very first obligation is to 
the ward. It has to be. That’s who he represents. That’s who he 
is elected by. 
 
So when you mention that you want to have the best possible 
system, the best possible democratic system, there is nobody 
in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that would like to have the best 
democratic system available to our municipalities. 
 
And when you only have the opportunity to vote for one, for 
one of 10 members on a city council, that’s not democracy to 
me. To only be able to sway the vote, one out of 10, and then 
if your ward alderman — for some reason or another you have 
a problem in your ward — the ward alderman doesn’t see it 
your way, now where do you go? Where do you go? The other 
ward alderman wouldn’t be interested, that’s for sure. 
 
So the observations that he quoted coming along towards the 
end of March were very interesting and there were reasons for 
those remarks, Mr. Chairman, and they related directly to the 
ward system. bout that time our cities were coming in with 
new budgets. And I witnessed, here in my home city of 
Regina, something else that the ward system really, truly 
represented. 
 
And we had a ward alderman that maintained that he could 
build two recreation centres in his ward for the price of one. 
Well, you can’t. And if he gets two recreation centres, that 
means that something else was bumped and next year that 
something else will appear. And who’s going to pay for all of 
these? The taxpayer, the taxpayer of Regina will be obligated 
to then pay for those two, plus whatever else was bumped. 
 
And interestingly enough, as I watched city council develop 
their budget in Regina, they were extremely proud of the fact 
that they were able to hold the line and not have an increase — 
so proud, as a matter of fact, that they had to wait some two or 
three weeks to make it official till the media was present so 
that they could blow their horn. And I commend them for 
being able to do that. 
 
But it begs this question, Mr. Chairman, that last year when 
our government had to deal with the revenue-sharing impact 
the way we did, there were hoot and hollers and cries and the 
fact that the city of Regina would go bankrupt practically, that 
there would be massive tax increases and mill rate increases 
and the like, because they simply couldn’t afford to operate on 
that. 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1660 
 

And we asked them to do what we did — analyse your 
budgets; go through your system; see where you can get some 
tax savings for the people, and like that. 
 
So we saw a moderate tax increase last year from the city of 
Regina. And yet what happened this year? What happened this 
year when they get the same money? Nothing; there was no 
cry; there was no demand for more funds. And yet, maybe 
because it was a election year at the local level, all of these 
ward aldermen decided, well let’s keep the mill rate frozen this 
year so that they can see how effectively we can deal with the 
ward system at the local level. 
 
(1600) 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that if we can help the city 
alderman and the mayor operate more efficiently than they are 
now, more effectively than they are now, have more concern 
for the community as a whole, have more concern for the 
entire tax structure in our city, that we are obligated to do that. 
And as Minister of Urban Affairs, Mr. Chairman, my main 
role in that function is to try to assist the taxpayers of our 
urban municipalities. 
 
I don’t believe at this time, Mr. Chairman, that I will argue the 
ward system debate any longer this afternoon. It’s all 
hypothetical. Until and when and if our government make a 
decision and makes an announcement on that matter, I would 
then of course be more than willing to debate at . . . (inaudible) 
. . . My main role in the function is to try to assist the 
taxpayers of . . . (inaudible) . . . on that matter. I would then of 
course be more than willing to debate at length the changes 
that we may choose to implement. But to argue it further this 
afternoon would serve no purpose. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that’s what the 
minister would like, because he would like to just be the only 
voice saying what he wants to say without giving opportunity 
for anyone else including the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association or municipal councils or anyone 
else to have their say. 
 
But I want to say to the minister that we have some more 
questions that we want to ask of you. Although you’d prefer 
not to be accountable, as you showed in the information you 
didn’t give from 1986-87 estimates, we’re going to ask you 
those questions. And you can choose not to answer them. 
That’s your decision, and you’ll be judged by that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I thought it rather ironical that you began your 
comments by saying, never in you life have you attacked 
municipal government, never have you attacked municipal 
politicians or municipal councillors. And then in the end of 
your remark you went on an attack on municipal councillors. 
 
You’re starting to doublespeak again, just as you’ve done all 
the way through this issue. And whenever somebody questions 
your motivation, or whenever somebody questions your stated 
policy, instead of listening intelligently, you attack them. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you made some comment about the 

city of Regina not having a tax increase this year. Well that’s 
commendable. Tells you that your arguments that the ward 
system creates inefficient government is a bunch of boloney. It 
just blows your argument out of the water. Were it that our 
government last year which hid its budget from April 1 until 
June 17 had paid some attention and followed that example, 
we wouldn’t have had the disaster that we had from the point 
of view of budget making and communities and urban 
municipalities waiting for months for their funding because of 
your mistakes and because of your stupidity in policy making. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how can you say that you’ve never 
attacked a municipality and municipal councillors when you 
are quoted in the Star-Phoenix of March 22, 1988 as follows: 
 

I have been studying it for more than a year now, and it is 
not the most efficient way at all to operate a municipal 
government. The taxpayers now are really looking for the 
best bang for the taxpayers’ dollars. They don’t think they 
can get it when alderman come with a narrow focus, rather 
than what is best for the taxpayer. 

 
How is that, Mr. Minister, not an attack on alderman who are 
elected in our municipal governments? Would you explain that 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I still stand by my 
remarks. I have never attacked, personally, a mayor or 
alderman; I attacked the system. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that when 
you say the alderman come with a narrow focus, that you’re 
not attacking the alderman, no matter what system they got 
elected in? You saying they come with a narrow focus, isn’t 
that an attack on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it’s the system. They have 
to come there with a narrow point of view. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Will you explain why they have to 
come there with a narrow point of view? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — If the member can’t figure that out, I can’t 
help him any more than that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, there you go again. 
You’re saying that the alderman are inefficient; you’re saying 
they’re incompetent; you’re saying that they don’t provide 
efficient government even though municipal government has 
been a lot more efficient than you; you’re saying they come 
with a narrow focus, and yet you’re not prepared, once again, 
to back up your allegations, just like you have not been 
prepared to back up your statement on your intentions with the 
ward system. This is the history of your administration, and 
it’s particularly the history of your tutorship or stewardship of 
this Urban Affairs department. 
 
Now will you finally, Mr. Minister, do what’s honourable. 
And instead of trying to go about the business of destroying, or 
trying to destroy the credibility of people who get honestly 
elected to our municipal governments, people who have the 
respect and the confidence of the 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1661 
 

people who elected them, stand up in this House and tell us 
what is the evidence for the statements which you have made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, again I repeat, it’s the 
system. If we had a cross-country ski team that did very well 
under the circumstances, and you said that they did very well 
under the circumstances, and while the race was on, or after it 
was over, you found out that instead of wearing cross-country 
skis they were wearing snow-shoes, I’m sure that they would 
improve if they took the snow-shoes off and put cross-country 
skis on. It’s the system. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if it’s the system that does 
it, can you . . . will you then say in this House that MLAs on 
that side of the House or this side of the House are elected in 
constituencies and therefore they have a narrow focus; that the 
Premier, who’s elected from Estevan, has got a narrow focus? 
 
Is it his narrow focus that’s making him spend a billion dollars 
on the Rafferty-Alameda project, which no one can justify 
economically, and to which the federal . . . even the federal 
minister has said that the federal government can approve it, 
because there is insufficient information? Is it the narrow 
focus that’s cause to do that? 
 
Are you saying that rural municipal councillors, who get 
elected on the division system, the rural municipal school 
trustees, who get elected on the municipal . . . on a division 
system, are incompetent and narrow focused because it’s not 
an election at large? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve never called them 
incompetent. That’s a word that he’s inventing for my use, and 
if he thinks that they’re incompetent, he can very well analyse 
my remarks as saying they’re incompetent. And I’m sorry to 
hear him say that they are incompetent. I’ve never said that. I 
have simply said that the system is what beats them, as well 
intended as they are. 
 
You know, he still can’t understand the difference between a 
parliamentary system and the ward system, and yet he sits in 
this House and sat in it before, was a cabinet minister. We’re 
elected here as a government, Mr. Chairman. We have the 
government on this side, the opposition on that side. And with 
that kind of an attitude, they’re going to be there for a long, 
long, long, long time. 
 
And there’s a difference with how the system works. But to 
help you out a little bit, to help you out just a little bit, let’s say 
that you had in this Assembly, rather than a government and 
an opposition and the discussions the way they work out, let’s 
say that we had 20 parties of three seats each. Put them in here 
and see where you get to. 
 
It doesn’t work that way in the ward system. You know that. 
You have 10 independent alderman that sit around the table, 
that are not elected as a slate, that come there representing 
their ward. It’s the system. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well let’s talk about the system, Mr. 
Minister. This is a new phase for you, I must say. You must 
have read a political science book over the 

weekend. Somehow it’s now “the system,” not those people 
who come with a narrow focus. 
 
You said that if an individual in the city . . . or a municipality 
has a problem and goes to his ward alderman, and somehow 
the alderman does not handle it, that he’s got nowhere to go. 
 
I don’t agree with you, but wouldn’t you say that if . . . when 
most of the aldermen or alderwomen or councillors are elected 
from one part of the city, as used to be the case in Regina, that 
someone who’s living in the core city of Regina who doesn’t 
have a representation, where’s that individual going to go? 
Where’s that individual going to go? Don’t you think that that 
individual is then disenfranchised with your system that you’re 
proposing to impose instead of letting the people decide, even 
though in 1976 or ’78 they did decide and said that they want 
the ward system? Don’t you think that that individual then has 
got a greater problem, because he certainly doesn’t have 
anywhere to go at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That’s the most ridiculous argument that I 
have ever heard, and the member from Regina North East has 
probably lived too long in Humboldt. I’ve lived in this city all 
my life and I’m very familiar with the operation, and if you 
think that Henry Baker lived in the south, you’re mistaken. If 
you think that Wally Coates lived in the south, you’re 
mistaken. And if you think that the member from Regina 
Victoria lived in the south, you’re mistaken. 
 
And as a result, don’t try to convince the people of this city 
that when we were at large, everybody was elected from south 
of the creek — it’s nonsense. And don’t for one minute try to 
convince everybody in this province that all of the good 
aldermen in the city of Moose Jaw are elected from one 
particular area when they are elected at large. It’s just sheer, 
utter nonsense, and I can’t believe that the member from 
Regina North East would be that gullible to try on that 
ridiculous an argument. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say a few 
words about the ward system since the minister is so interested 
in the subject. I know he’s got a one-man team studying the 
subject. I’m wondering where the minister’s support comes 
from, because I see an editorial that occurred in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix May 17, “(and it’s got the minister’s name, that’s 
the first word) flogging dead horse,” and it goes on: 
 

If Urban Affairs Minister (blank) doesn’t know enough to 
abandon his one-man vendetta against the ward system, 
the Tory caucus should enlighten him. 
 
Opposition to his (Klein’s) obsession with outlawing 
wards is widespread. He doesn’t even have solid support 
among business operators in the cities, the one urban 
sector the governing Conservatives still look to for 
loyalty. 

 
Now this is the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix as recently as May 17, 
has this to say about you. 
 
And why are you not getting support from the chambers 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1662 
 

of commerce, Mr. Minister? Well I’ll tell you why. Because 
you go to the chamber of commerce and you make speech to 
the chamber of commerce, and it reports it here on May 6, just 
before this editorial . . . a little while before this editorial 
occurred, and it mentions your name — “slams ward system.” 
 
And it’s interesting, ironical, that the reporter is Gerry Klein, 
and he has this to say — the minister is speaking to the board 
of trade and he was telling them about the ward system; and 
then he gave an example, the minister gave an example, and I 
want you to hear this example: 
 

If conditions warrant a school be closed, the ward 
alderman will argue to save it for the sake of his 
constituents. 

 
Well what does the ward alderman have to do with a school 
being closed? Little, if anything. Little, if anything, because 
that’s decided by the board of trustees on the board of 
education. It has nothing to do with the ward alderman. And 
that’s why the Star-Phoenix and the board of trade have lost 
faith in the judgement of the minister. 
 
The bottom line in this is that the minister says: “ward system 
is inefficient.” Well, Mr. Minister, check the credit ratings. 
The city of Saskatoon credit rating surpasses your provincial 
government’s credit rating by quite a bit, and the margin is 
getting wider — the margin’s getting wider. And you have the 
nerve to stand up and say that it’s because of the inefficiencies 
in city government. And the city of Saskatoon, all its 
alderman, must be offended by that kind of comment coming 
from the minister in Regina. 
 
Now the city of Saskatoon was so concerned about this that 
they passed a motion. The minister stood here today and he 
said, the city of Saskatoon supports me. Well I just . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And, Mr. Minister, if you check the 
record, you’ll see you said that, because I listened very 
closely. Because any time that the city of Saskatoon supports 
you, I have to look at it very closely. 
 
And what is the motion in the city of Saskatoon in council? 
The motion was on March 28, 1988: 
 

That this city council indicate to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs and to the Premier its support of the ward system 
and its disapproval of any change to the present system of 
voting. Carried. 

 
Carried by Saskatoon city council. 
 
(1615) 
 
The minister says his decision’s coming soon. Today he’s 
being reticent about coming forward with what his decision is. 
We’re all sitting here waiting. What’s the minister’s decision 
about the ward system? 
 
Well back on May 19 in the Leader-Post there’s an article 
reporting, “Government still considering law to eliminate 
wards.” It’s a small article, and the last line is by the 

minister, “A decision is likely by the end of the month, he 
said.” Well today, Mr. Minister, is May 30; you’ve only got 
one more day. This is on May 19. Now the minister begins 
immediately to hedge, to hedge on the day. 
 
Another article on questioning on the ward system, “The 
minister non-committal on wards.” And this is May 27, just a 
few days ago, in the Star-Phoenix: 
 

And it happens that SUMA head, Don Abel, said after the 
meeting that his group expressed ‘quite plainly’ (those 
remarks are in quotation; those words are in quotation) 
it’s belief that the city should be allowed to keep the 
system. However (and the minister’s name appears) said 
he questioned whether SUMA is the appropriate group to 
be lobbying for the system since it only affects two of its 
511 member communities. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, if SUMA has no right to be meddling in 
this question, what are you meddling in it for? The city of 
Saskatoon didn’t request you to meddle in it; the city of 
Regina didn’t. 
 
Now the minister can go back years and years, and he’ll 
peddle something from years ago, but we want to bring the 
minister up to speed, bring him up to today. Regina has said 
they want to maintain the ward system. Saskatoon has said 
they want to maintain the ward system. Other cities have said 
they want to maintain the ward system. SUMA, the 
organization of the urban municipalities, has said, we want to 
maintain the ward system. The board of trade says, you don’t 
know what you’re talking about. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it’s getting shorter and shorter. Here today, 
in the Leader-Post, May 30, today: “Ward system decision 
coming soon.” 
 
Mr. Minister, could you end the suspense, please, end the 
suspense. Everyone’s against you. You’ve run up the flag; 
nobody’s saluted. Why don’t you admit you were wrong? 
Withdraw your comments about the ward system. You can 
bring it up in five or 10 years, if you happen to be the 
government, which I doubt. But you can bring it up again and 
have it considered by this legislature, if there’s some support 
for doing away with the ward system. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it’s now up to the second-last day of the 
month. End the suspense. Tell us what your position is on the 
ward system. What is this government going to do? The end of 
May, by your own prediction, is the deadline. Let us know. 
Tomorrow’s the last day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member of Saskatoon 
Westmount is simply not listening again. He says he listens 
very closely when I mention Saskatoon; I wish he would. 
 
I explained that very resolution that you brought up, and it was 
six to five — six, five is what I said. So I said that five, 
obviously, didn’t go along with that resolution. That indeed 
gives me some support. 
 
You say that we’re meddling. Well you sanctimonious bunch 
over there, who do you suppose meddled in 1973 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1663 
 

when you arbitrarily imposed . . . and if and when necessary to 
get into this debate, I’ve got some interesting quotes from your 
new leader that we will bring up. Let’s see what he said about 
meddling and the like. I’ll get into the SUMA meeting also at 
the same time. 
 
And they recognize that as an association they have no choice 
but to do what they did, in spite of the fact that it involves only 
two of their membership. I recognize that. I’ve explained that I 
respect their position as elected officials, but my concern is for 
the taxpayer. I’ll get into the school closure debate later, if it’s 
necessary. And as far as flogging a dead horse is concerned, I 
watched the Pimlico Stakes the other day and I saw a guy flog 
a horse, that had no chance, that came and won. 
 
We have three decisions, if you wonder why, or three possible 
alternates to choose from, if you wonder why it’s taking a little 
while to determine this. It is indeed, and I will grant you, a 
major decision. Three options are available to us. And if I’m 
wrong and I have to retract, I’d be the first one to do that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you should 
stay away from the race track, because your record’s not too 
good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the minister 
should stick to the analogy of the snow-shoes versus the skis 
because that’s the one he was really trying to break ground 
there and we were beginning to understand his rationalizing 
processes. 
 
The minister stands before us and says the vote was six to five 
in council, which gives him hope. Number one: that’s grasping 
at straws, Mr. Minister. You were defeated in council and 
there was no recorded vote in council. It was a voice vote and 
the motion was carried by council by a voice vote, no recorded 
vote, therefore you have no justification to say the vote was six 
to five. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well all I can do, Mr. Chairman — 
there’s no use in debating this at this time, but I can tell you 
that at a recent meeting with SUMA those were the figures 
that I was supplied with. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you. I want to make a few 
remarks, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the issue at hand. And 
I want to begin by saying that, Mr. Minister, yours must be a 
very lonely job, and I have a kind of admiration for the job that 
you’ve been undertaking with respect to the ward system if for 
no other reason than that you seem to be championing a cause 
that seems to have so little support within the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I remember a year ago, or two years ago, you raising that 
particular issue and raising it up the flag-pole, but no one was 
saluting it. But it doesn’t seem to have stopped you from 
carrying on and persevering. So if I say there’s some 
admiration, it’s certainly not for the cause as such, but some 
admiration for the fact that, in the absence of any support, or 
with such little support you doggedly carry on. 
 
And I would say that what you are doing, that the cause 

that you are promoting, is very much out of step with the 
majority of opinion in the province, and certainly the majority 
of opinion in those cities that now have a ward system. And it 
would appear out of step with the majority of opinion from all 
urban municipalities, and not just the elected representatives in 
those municipalities but, I think, also the people in those 
municipalities. 
 
And, I think, also out of step with the rest of the country. Most 
cities of the size of Regina or Saskatoon in Canada have a 
ward system as opposed to an at-large system. There is some 
exceptions to that, but not very many. Most cities have a ward 
system simply because they’ve found that it’s the best way to 
run urban government, and probably find that it’s the most 
efficient way to run urban government. 
 
I note one exception, of course, of cities that do not have a 
ward system or division system is in British Columbia. But 
again that would seem to be the result of right-wing 
governments, Social Credit governments, not unlike 
right-wing Conservative governments in Saskatchewan that 
seem to take the position that as a provincial government they 
know what’s best for people in urban centres. And, as in B.C., 
the situation seems to be a political response by a provincial 
government as opposed to giving the people in those urban 
centres the opportunity to develop for themselves a system 
that, they’ve found now throughout most of Canada, seems to 
work best for them. 
 
You indicated earlier that you’re still listening and consulting. 
And I’m pleased to hear that and I hope that you mean that 
seriously, and that it means something more than trying to find 
an isolated example of some small group or individual who 
might come to the fore to give you public support, and that it 
means that you’re truly out there listening to the people of 
urban Saskatchewan about the ward system and why they like 
it and why they think it’s effective. 
 
And I hope that you talk to the people on the streets in Regina 
as opposed to coming to us with some comments by some 
business crony of yours or some other right-wing crony of 
yours who echoes your remarks — that you go out there on the 
streets of Regina to talk to the people of Regina or Saskatoon, 
to talk to them about why they support the ward system, and to 
find out from them why they think it’s a good system. 
 
Because whatever else you may think about the ward system, 
whatever else I may think about the ward system, I think it’s 
very important for a government and for this whole Legislative 
Assembly to pay some heed to what it is that the people of the 
province are saying and thinking. 
 
You might find, for example, Mr. Minister, that they clearly 
recognize what you say you’re going to do, although you 
haven’t quite formally announced it, what they see you as 
doing as being nothing more than a political exercise, an 
attempt to exercise raw political powers to suit your own 
partisan purposes. That’s what they’re seeing out there and 
that’s what they’re saying. 
 
But you should talk to them about why they support the 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1664 
 

ward system. I think this is important. 
 
Personally I’m intrigued by the double standard that your 
government has. I’m intrigued by the dichotomy between a 
“ward system,” and if I can put that in quotation marks, in 
rural municipalities as opposed to a ward system in our large 
urban systems. That you think that a ward system or division 
system is appropriate for rural municipalities but is somehow 
not appropriate for our large cities, even though, again, most 
cities in Canada of that size or larger have a ward system. I’m 
intrigued by that dichotomy. 
 
And I asked some questions of the Minister of Rural 
Development when his estimates were up, about what he 
perceived to be the benefits of the division system in our rural 
municipalities. And he said, and rightfully so, that it means 
that a councillor who’s elected from one division, chances are 
that he’s going to be more familiar with the kinds of problems 
that exist within that particular division, and therefore at least 
one of the members of that council would be sensitive to the 
problems and the challenges that a particular area or division 
faces; and also so that that particular councillor could be in the 
position of attending to problems as they crop up. 
 
And I understand, and rightfully so, that because of the 
absence of any bureaucracy to always do the work, that a 
division councillor in rural municipalities might in fact attend 
to problems before any staff resources can be put towards 
dealing with that particular problem. 
 
But I ask you, I ask you, what is so different about our large 
cities, that the system is not an appropriate one there? And you 
know, Mr. Minister, as one that’s lived in Regina for some 
years, as one large city in this province, that various areas of 
the city will have unique problems. I don’t think that’s any 
secret to people. Some areas of the city will have traffic 
problems, traffic problems that are not necessarily shared by 
other sections of the city. 
 
But it’s the cathedral area in Regina, where the council of the 
day seems to have come up with some imaginative and 
innovative — even if not supportable- solutions, or traffic 
problems in the ward that I represented, which were again 
unique to that area, requires, I think, unique responses. And 
it’s not something that is readily understood by people in the 
rest of the city. 
 
But the kind of unique traffic problem, or unique drainage 
problems which exist in parts of this city and really require 
that someone on the council understand fully what it is that’s 
happening to drainage, say in a particular area, so that some 
proper direction can be given to the bureaucracy to begin to 
deal with those issues; or whether it’s certain kinds of curbs in 
Whitmore Park, which are a unique problem; or whether it’s 
the problem of prostitution in a city, which might become a 
unique problem for a certain area of the city; or whether it’s 
certain planning and development issues, which may be 
unique to certain areas of the city, the point that I’m making is 
that there are unique problems for certain areas in our large 
cities. 
 
(1630) 

And how can people in our large cities hope to find a 
sympathetic, understanding ear in a system under which all 
members of council get elected at large and may not 
necessarily understand, or much less care about certain unique 
problems because their relationship with the voters doesn’t 
necessarily depend always on dealing with some of those 
unique problems. 
 
The people of Regina, and I would submit of other large cities 
in Saskatchewan, know that they can’t find a sympathetic or 
understanding ear, or if they do it’s an accident in an at-large 
system. 
 
They know that too with the boards of education. I remember 
from my time on city council that if some issue cropped up 
with respect to education in the area that I represented, that 
more often than not I would receive phone calls from citizens 
to say, we have this problem with schools in our area with 
respect to the board of education, but I really don’t know who 
to talk to; I don’t really know on that board of education who 
is interested in my problem. 
 
And they’d also know from experience, from many years ago 
when we had an at-large system, that more often than not that 
those were elected at large and were simply less than 
interested in local neighbourhood problems, local unique 
concerns, than is the case under ward system. 
 
I would say that this was especially true for many parts of the 
city north of Wascana Creek in Regina, because no matter 
what you say, Mr. Minister, the great majority of those 
councils elected under the at-large system in Regina tended to 
come from south of the creek in Regina. And they had their 
own unique perspectives on what were the problems facing 
Regina, but they didn’t necessarily coincide with the many 
neighbourhood concern and problems that people in Regina 
might have had north of the creek. 
 
And I know that you protest that fact and you throw out the 
odd example of someone being elected under the at-large 
system who wasn’t south of the creek. But I think that if you 
check the facts, and people have done so in the past, that you 
will find that the great majority of those who served on those 
councils elected under the at-large system, tended to be 
narrowly focused and tended to come from a small geographic 
area of the city. They weren’t necessarily representative of the 
city in that fashion. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked about . . . you said, and I hope I got 
your remarks correctly, you said that if a person becomes 
elected under the at-large or under the ward system, their first 
obligation will be to the ward, and that that’s somehow wrong. 
 
You know, I agree that there’s a strong interest if you’re 
elected under the ward system, to pay attention to the 
problems of the people in that particular ward. And I think 
that’s healthy. I think that’s good. It means that at least one 
member of that city council will know what the problems and 
the challenges are in that area of the city, and which was one 
of the reasons that your former colleague, Tim Embury, was 
always so strongly in favour of the ward system. He said that 
it’s very important that at least one 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1665 
 

member of that council know and understand the problems and 
conditions in that particular area of the city that’s served by an 
alderman, because under the at-large systems, some of those 
things might escape the attention of a council. 
 
But I agree with you that there’s a strong interest in wanting to 
understand and know the concerns and problems of our people 
in a ward. And I think that’s right. I think that should be the 
case. But you somehow equate this, you somehow equate this 
that because a member of a council elected under the ward 
system is interested in the problems and concerns of the people 
in that ward, you somehow make this quantum leap in logic to 
saying that because that person’s interested in what’s 
happening in that ward, all of the council will somehow 
miraculously support that person and be able to, or will want 
to pour all kinds of money, and say resources, into dealing 
with those kinds of problems and concerns. Now that’s a 
quantum leap in logic, Mr. Minister. 
 
I tell you, from six years on Regina’s city council, I didn’t see 
very much to support that particular logical conclusion that 
you’ve been able to come to. I saw very many examples of pet 
projects that one particular alderman may have been 
championing for his particular ward being turned down by the 
others because they said, you’re simply promoting it because 
it’s parochial and it’s in your best interests, but it’s not 
necessarily in the best interest on the whole city; it doesn’t 
necessarily meet the development plans that we put forward 
for the whole city; it doesn’t necessarily meet the kind of 
budget that we struck to deal with all of the concerns in the 
city. And you may have that particular concern and you may 
see that as an appropriate response and you may see that as the 
appropriate solution. But I tell you, in terms of the objectives 
that we set for the whole city, we cannot support that. We 
cannot support that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You make this quantum leap in logic 
that because one alderman wants something for his particular 
area or her particular ward, that somehow the whole rest of the 
council is going to support that. And I say the facts don’t back 
you up. That simply isn’t the case. You think that an alderman 
is going to get a park or a recreation centre simply because he 
represents that particular ward? I say not. 
 
I say that a park or a recreation centre or back lane paving or 
any of the services that people in the city come to expect, are 
done on the basis of agreement between all of the alderman as 
to where the priorities are in the city and where those 
particular priorities should first be addressed. It’s not a matter 
of one alderman saying, well I want this for my area and 
therefore I’m going to get it. That’s not how the system works, 
you know. 
 
And I see your ignorance of how councils operate very greatly 
at play today, when I listen to you talk about how cities work, 
because you simply don’t have the experience. Because that’s 
not how things work. It simply is not how things work. 
 
The fact is that you have to be able to convince, you have 

to be able to convince nine other alderman, each who represent 
a ward. You have to be able to convince the mayor. That is to 
say, in the case of Regina or Saskatoon, you have to be able to 
convince 10 other members of council that you should have 
something for your particular ward, no matter what the 
development plans may call for, no matter what the priorities 
of the city might be, that those things should be thrown out the 
window, and no matter what effect it has on them that 
somehow this should all go to a particular ward. 
 
Well I think the situations are rare where that has occurred; 
where the aldermen from nine other areas would say, well, you 
know, I’m not too concerned about priorities from my ward or 
I’m not too concerned about the priorities for the city; you’re 
such a good person, I want to give you all those things. But 
that’s not how the system works. That’s not how it works, my 
friend. And again your ignorance is showing. 
 
The real reason, the real reason, Mr. Minister, that you’re 
proceeding with this rather silly initiative of yours, the real 
reason is because you can’t stand to see any kind of opposition 
in a major media centre in this province. 
 
You know, in the ward system, the ward system — at least in 
Regina, the one that I’m most familiar with — the ward 
system has meant the election of men and women who are 
widely representative of the community, widely representative, 
as opposed to being narrowly focused and narrowly 
representative of aspects of the city. 
 
Widely representative in the case of Regina means — surprise, 
surprise — people who do not necessarily tend to follow your 
provincial government blindly when it comes to anything and 
everything that you want to do. It means people who will 
oppose you when you have backwards-looking urban affairs 
policies. It means people who will oppose you when they see 
you doing things to urban centres that are detrimental to urban 
centres. 
 
That should be no surprise, Mr. Minister, because the very 
great majority of people in this city do not support you, they 
do not support your PC right-wing government as you found 
out in the last election. They will not continue to support you, 
given this kind of stupid move on your part, and taking 
something away from them that obviously they value. 
 
No, I think the real reason, Mr. Minister, that you want to do 
away with the ward system, because your government cannot 
stand to see any group at all that might be representative of a 
large number of people in this province. You can’t stand to see 
any group opposing you when opposition is called for, and 
especially when that opposition occurs in a major media centre 
in this province. That’s the thing you can’t stand. 
 
If there’s any sort of history that comes loud and clear from 
your six years in office is that if there’s opposition to what it is 
that you want to do as a government, your first response is not 
to listen — your first response is to crush that opposition and 
to find ways to get rid of that opposition. That’s your record as 
a government. And it should come as no surprise, I suppose, to 
the people of 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1666 
 

Regina that you would carry this further — do away with their 
ward system to see if you can’t get some system which favours 
the well-to-do, which favours those that have the money to run 
at-large campaigns. 
 
Mr. Minister, I frankly don’t understand why you would take a 
system that has seen the elimination of civic voter parties, has 
seen the elimination of . . . or the doing away with of 
organized political forces in our urban settings, and to go back 
to a system that in the past in Regina has meant the 
development of civic voter parties. I would venture to say that 
if you had the at-large system, that you will again see civic 
voter parties. 
 
You will have, on the one hand, a voter party comprised of 
some of your right-wing friends and some of those in the 
chamber of commerce and the Regina Business Alliance, and 
others, who say: here’s our response for Regina; here’s our 
program for Regina; these are the things that we want to do. 
And finding out that because they’re able to be better financed 
than others just might be able to again hoodwink the people of 
Regina, as your government was able to do in the last 
provincial election. 
 
Mr. Minister, the real reasons for what you want to do, I think, 
are apparent to most people. I would strongly encourage you 
to do as you say, and that is to listen and to still consult with 
people about the ward system. I think that you will find that, 
notwithstanding the echoes that you get from some of your 
right-wing friends, that the great majority of people in Regina, 
in Saskatoon and, I think, in Prince Albert support the ward 
system because they see it as serving their interest, they see it 
as serving their needs. And I hope that you take that to heart 
and, again, listening to the people of those cities, as opposed to 
serving your own political ends and your own political needs. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t get much of 
a question there, and I got a speech on a hypothetical situation 
that they seem to be pretty worked up about. And he used the 
word intrigue, and it seems that it’s pretty easy to intrigue the 
member from Regina Victoria I guess but, you know, part of 
his conversation . . . I guess, if he’s telling me that an 
alderman from a ward system, an ordinary lay person — he 
was talking about drainage — knows more about drainage 
than a professional engineer, well if that’s his argument, then I 
suppose that’s his argument. It’s beyond belief how a layman 
would know more, but in any event . . . then he tells me to stay 
in touch. 
 
(1645) 
 
Well I had lunch the other day at the Hungarian Club here in 
Regina, east side of this city, probably in the seat from the 
member for Regina Victoria, and as I was walking out, I 
bumped into a table that I suppose contained . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’ll correct that. As I was walking out, you 
know, I happened to walk into a group of people that were 
sitting around this table, but to call this group of tradesmen 
that had their work boots and their tool belts and their 
coveralls on that stopped and entered into a conversation with 
me, at their, at their instigation, Mr. Chairman, about the ward 
system — to call them a group of elitists, they would probably 
be tickled pink, but they would probably wonder how they 

got into that category. And then if my former colleague, to 
which he referred, agrees with the ward system, then I respect 
his opinion the same as I do others that hold the ward system 
in high regard, and I’ll share that with them. 
 
Not everything is bad about the ward system. I don’t believe 
I’ve ever said that. There are some good things in the ward 
system, but there are also some very significant, blatant errors 
in it. You can’t, you know, support a contemplated change 
simply because, I suppose, you know . . . and I don’t know, 
you know . . . 
 
Even before, against all arguments at the time — including the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, I might add — the NDP government 
imposed the ward system on the people of Saskatchewan and 
the major cities. They imposed it. Saskatoon Star-Phoenix was 
not in favour of it, neither were the cities; so why now should 
the NDP support a change if this government decided to 
change it? They put in the ward system; it was their baby; they 
would like to have that maintained. 
 
And then for him to make a nonsensical statement just about 
bordering on stupidity amazes me — when he believes in his 
mind that a council elected at large would not oppose the 
government of the day or that, for some reason or other, a 
council elected at large would favour the government of the 
day. Well that’s a ridiculous statement. Moose Jaw’s elected at 
large, and certainly we have our problems with Moose Jaw, as 
we do with all cities. And you know, to say that because 
you’re from a ward system you’re automatically going to 
oppose the government, is just a ridiculous statement. 
 
But in any event, we’re debating something here that is 
fictitious today, and I’ll save further debate until if and when 
it’s required. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Minister, I want to talk to you in a 
moment about “fictitious”, and I think it’ll be of some interest 
to members of this House and the public. 
 
I want to, first of all, make it very clear, as I indicated to you 
before, that it was every intention of mine to complete these 
estimates today, providing that you provided the answers. You 
are saying to the taxpayers of this province and in this 
Assembly, you’re not prepared to provide those answers, as if 
no decision had been made. 
 
And earlier you said no decision had been made in this House 
and so therefore you weren’t going to debate it. And then you 
were saying, if it happens or if it does not happen, you will 
have more to say about it. And I want you to keep in mind, and 
I want the members of this House, and I want you, Mr. 
Chairman, to keep in mind that that’s what the minister said at 
the beginning of the discussion today- that no decision had 
been made. 
 
Mr. Minister, I stand here to accuse you of hiding the facts 
again, of hiding the facts again. And as my colleague from 
Regina Victoria so clearly said, it’s simply a matter of, if 
someone questions your government, your immediate 
approach is to attack and destroy — a very barbarian political 
way to operate. If somebody questions anything you say, or 
any policy of your government, you attack and you destroy. 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1667 
 

This is a case here we have of a government attempting in 
every way possible to preserve itself in power, regardless of 
what anybody thinks or what the electorate may wish to do. 
And you do it, and you do it, I say to the member from Swift 
Current, by not telling the people the truth, and by every time 
there is any potential of people questioning, you try to cause 
fear so that they will not question. You threaten and you try to 
hurt and you try to destroy. 
 
Now we’ve had cases of non-government organizations that 
questioned government policy — a very legitimate thing for 
any non-government organization to do. What’s the purpose of 
having it, except to provide a service? And if there is 
something wrong with the policy of government, who can 
better advise government about what’s wrong with it than the 
people on the front lines, the people who are working with 
those clients? 
 
And you say to them, don’t you dare. Don’t you dare suggest 
that policy of government is wrong and it should be changed. 
And when they did, you either eliminated their funding or you 
cut their funding. You attacked and you tried to destroy, and in 
some cases you destroyed, because you will not accept the 
very fundamental aspect of democratic government which has 
to have within it room for criticism. When you do away with 
that, you no longer have democratic government. 
 
And somehow you either fail to recognize that; or recognizing 
it, you go ahead anyway against all of that, and do what you 
want to try to preserve yourself in power at any cost. Now 
that’s one example. 
 
In the last session of this legislature your government 
introduced a new electoral boundaries Bill which sets you up 
with the opportunity to gerrymander provincial constituencies. 
You’re not going to have anything to do with the majority of 
the people electing the government of this province if you can 
help it, and so you’ve got a Bill that replaces a perfectly 
adequate one that used to exist, and now you set yourself up to 
gerrymander constituencies. 
 
And you will do it. You will do it because the only thing 
matters to you is power. And you will trample on anybody that 
you think is necessary to keep yourself there. And you will 
attack and you will destroy. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you said earlier in this debate, and in these 
estimates, that you hadn’t yet made a decision. Well you 
weren’t very forthright in this House, I must say, on that. And 
that’s why we’re still here. And although I said earlier we were 
prepared to finish these estimates today, I’m not so sure any 
more, because as it . . . It so happens that this afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, you have given notice of first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Local Government Elections Act. 
 
Now why weren’t you able to stand up when we asked the 
questions and say that, instead of trying to mislead this House 
and mislead the public of Saskatchewan and say that you 
hadn’t made up your mind? Will you explain that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if I were going to deal 

with the ward system, I would be amending The Urban 
Municipalities Act, not The Local Government Elections Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Very good, Mr. Minister. Then why 
have you moved first reading of a Bill to amend Urban 
Municipality Act, which is also on the order paper for 
tomorrow and yet at the same time saying you hadn’t made up 
your mind. Now what’s in that Bill, Mr. Minister? Will you 
discuss that now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Because, Mr. Chairman, in The Urban 
Act that we’re amending, it contains provisions for the store 
hour legislation and the dangerous dog legislation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is that all, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, once the Bill is introduced 
we’ll see what’s in it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if all of this . . . there’s 
obviously no other legislation which is necessary to be 
amended for you to introduce changes to the ward system. It’s 
either The Urban Municipality Act or it’s The Local 
Government Election act — either one of those two. 
 
Now are you able, since now it’s on the order . . .going to be 
on the order table — you’ve given notice today — are you 
able to say in this House that you are going to leave the ward 
system intact, or are you proposing amendments to change it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, in The Local Government 
Election Act we’re dealing with such things as mobile polls for 
the handicapped, we’re dealing with such things as student 
votes, dealing with such things as residency. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And you’re not dealing with the ward 
system — is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if we deal with the ward 
system, we will have to amend the urban Act and we will also 
have to amend The Local Government Election Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I agree. I knew that when I started 
my questioning, Mr. Minister, and you obviously have now 
discovered that from your officials now. 
 
Since you have both of those Acts in here, can you tell the 
House whether in that legislation we’re going to see some 
amendments to change the ward system to a different system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I suppose, Mr. Chairman, once the Acts 
are opened up, if we decide to deal with the ward system, 
they’ll be right there and an amendment can be made to them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, since you were 
prepared to say that what is in The Urban Municipality Act — 
changes to the store hours — and since you were prepared to 
say that some of the things in The Local Government Election 
Act is to do with voting, why aren’t you prepared to also say 
whether there’s going to be some 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1668 
 

changes to the ward system? 
 
What makes that different? What makes it different, other than 
some motivation of yours, some secretive approach to this 
issue that you don’t want the public to be able to discuss it 
after they know what your decision has been? What makes that 
different? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, once the government 
makes the decision on the ward system, there will be a lot of 
time, and ample time, for discussion and debate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So can you then say that you have not 
made a decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the government will make 
the announcement when the decisions have been made. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The only thing one can conclude from 
your comment is that a decision has been made. That’s going 
to be on the record. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you are on record as saying that in order to 
make any changes to the electoral system in municipalities, 
which means changes to the ward system, you would have to 
announce that before the end of this month. Does that mean 
you’re going to announce it tomorrow, because that’s the end 
of the month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t say that I had to 
make the announcement. I said that if the government changes 
the boundaries, or changes the ward system, pardon me, I 
would like to be in a position to make the announcement 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I disagree with you, Mr. Minister. 
In the newspaper article that the member from Saskatoon read, 
you said you were going to make that decision and you were 
going to let the public know. And in the speech that the 
Premier made last week, he also said that that decision would 
be made and announced by the end of this month. 
 
Now are you saying that all of those statements, which you 
have made publicly and which your Premier has made 
publicly, mean nothing and that you will not stand up to those 
statements and announce that’s what you’re going to do by 
tomorrow, at the latest, because that’s the end of the month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if indeed we make the 
announcement tomorrow, and if indeed I’m flogging a dead 
horse, why are they pushing for the ward debate today when 
I’m trying to co-operate to finish these estimates. I supplied all 
the information that they were asking for with regard travel, 
with regard staff, with regard all the typical questions. We had 
some discussion concerning mill rates and revenue sharing and 
the like. 
 
For an hour and a half now we have been dealing with a topic 
that has not yet been announced. We will have ample 
opportunity to do that and debate it in this House if indeed the 
announcement is made. 
 
So I stand accused now of delaying the tactics of my 

estimates. I’m fully prepared to discuss my estimates. I’m 
fully prepared to end this Committee of Finance. And I’m 
fully prepared to deal with the ward system, if and when that 
announcement has been made. So if there’s any delay, for the 
last hour and a half they have been on a conversation of 
something that’s hypothetical at this moment. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, if it’s hypothetical 
it’s only because you make it so. You have been making 
announcements since February. You have stated from time to 
time, quite clearly, that it was your intention to change the 
electoral system in municipal government. You can’t deny that 
because it’s on the record. You have made the announcement. 
 
All we’re asking you now . . . now you’ve qualified since then, 
because I think your caucus, from time to time, maybe does 
get after your hide a little bit. And after having made your 
announcement, I think you found out that shooting off your 
mouth before your brain locks in sometimes gets you into 
trouble. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’m not necessarily wanting to debate the 
ward system. If you’re going to have legislation, we’ll debate 
it then. We may ask you some more questions on this. 
 
But all I want you to say is, are you going to change the ward 
system or are you not? If you’re not going to change it, end of 
issue. I will stand up and say what a great fellow you are, on 
this issue only — on this issue only and on the golf course, 
maybe. But I’m telling you that that’s something you ought to 
be prepared to say to the municipal people of Saskatchewan 
and to the ratepayers of urban municipalities so that they 
know. 
 
Because if you’re prepared, if you’re going to play this kind of 
game with urban voters, what’s next? Does this mean, if you 
get away with it, that your next move is going to be abolish the 
division system in rural municipalities? I say that’s the case. 
That’s the case. 
 
(1700) 
 
Because then there is nothing, because that means there is 
nothing you’re not prepared to tear down and destroy. That is 
the record of your government. It has been the record of your 
government. And you’re reinforcing it with your attitude here 
today, and your inability or your refusal to answer the 
questions on the ward system. 
 
And it really simply says to everybody else in Saskatchewan, 
you may be next. You may be next and you better watch out. 
And if you as much as question one single policy of this 
government, you are then being threatened by that minister 
and by the Premier and that whole Executive Council, because 
they care not for the feelings of Saskatchewan people. They 
only care for their high-living life-styles and all of the perks 
that they and their friends can get out of being in government. 
And damn the torpedoes. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it is 5 o’clock, and so I would like to call it 5 
o’clock so we can pursue this some more at 7. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


