


















































May 17, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 17, 1988 
 

1383 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, a group 
of seven individuals who are here from the Cancer Patient Lodge 
in the Elphinstone riding. They are here with us today to observe 
the question period, and we’ll be meeting for coffee and tea 
afterwards. 
 
I would want all members to joint with me in welcoming these 
people here with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce through you and to the Legislative Assembly, 17 
employees from the Department of Rural Development who 
work in the Walter Scott Building. These employees, most of 
them have never seen the Legislative Chambers at work, and 
they’ve been invited here today to hear question period and to be 
part, and see the part they play in developing the legislation for 
this Assembly. 
 
They do a lot of work, Mr. Speaker, in regards to developing 
legislation, and I though it would be just appropriate if they saw 
how the Chambers worked. And I’m sure all the members here 
would appreciate the work that they do for rural Saskatchewan 
and for the people of Saskatchewan. I would ask all members to 
join with me in wishing them well here, and I hope they find that 
this is both informational and educational. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce a 
group of 17 grade 6 students to you this afternoon. They’re in 
your gallery. They’re from Hodgeville, Saskatchewan. They are 
accompanied today by Alison Peake and Mark Gross. 
 
I’m going to be meeting with them later. I’d ask the members of 
the Assembly to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the Legislative Assembly, a couple of gentlemen from the city of 
Melfort who are in visiting with officials from the Department of 
Health on a very important issue. In our city of Melfort we are 
planning an adult day-care facility, and these two gentlemen are 
representatives on the board in question. I will be meeting with 
them a little later in the day. 
 
And I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming these two 
gentlemen, Mr. Wes Moneta and Mr. Vic Stasiuk from the city 
of Melfort. Thank you. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you, the grade 4, 5, 6, and 7 
students from Wollaston Lake in northern Saskatchewan, along 
with their teacher Mr. Jeff Orr. Wollaston, of course, is about a 
six-hour drive north from La Ronge, and I think it’s very 
important for the students to have come all the way down here 
and to see the goings-on in the legislature. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them at room 255 for some drinks. Also I 
would invite the legislature to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Merger of SMDC and Eldorado Nuclear 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation. Mr. 
Minister, this morning in Crown Corporations Committee you 
declined to answer questions on SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation) as it relates to the merger and 
privatization proposal with Eldorado Nuclear Limited. The 
mandate of the Crown Corporation Committee is to deal with 
matters in the year in review as defined by the annual report. A 
1979 ruling on the mandate of the committee stated, and I quote: 
 

Questions which related to plans made during the year 
under review for future years would technically be in order 
as long as the questions related to plans specifically referred 
to in the annual report being reviewed. 

 
Page 1 of your annual report refers specifically to the 
merger-privatization, while pages 3 and 5 talk about the 
privatization plans for the corporation. Mr. Minister, what are 
you trying to hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we’re not trying 
to hide anything. I think it was February 22, 1988 we had a news 
conference in Saskatoon, a joint conference with the federal 
government and the provincial government, talking about the 
proposed merger and privatization, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me 
that if you’re trying to hide something, you don’t do those kinds 
of things. That’s number one. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker, there was quite a bit of time spent this 
morning in Crown Corporations Committee talking about certain 
information that members opposite wanted to be tabled before 
the committee. I talk about strategic plans of SMDC; I talk of 
financial information that is of a proprietary and commercial 
nature, Mr. Speaker, and as I said to the people in Crown 
corporations this morning, the only people that that would help 
would be the Denisons and the Rio Algomas  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1384 
 

and the Uranerz and all of the competitors in the field, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s never been done in the past. 
 
The other thing that I said this morning in Crown corporations, 
Mr. Speaker, was that from 1975 until 1982, when I was sitting 
on the other side of the table, I got exactly the same answers to 
the same kinds of questions that are being delivered today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you have a duty to answer the 
questions put to you by the members of this legislature. You have 
declined to uphold your duty, so I will ask you some questions in 
this form. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you have absolutely nothing to hide, will you 
today table any independent evaluations that you have that have 
been done on the assets of SMDC? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, these people ought to make 
up their minds. They talk about all of these things of a 
commercial nature remaining in the public domain, remaining 
there in the hands of government for all time. We take a different 
view of the world. We think that it makes a lot of sense to offer, 
to the public, participation in a lot of these commercial ventures. 
 
On the other side of the coin, Mr. Speaker, on the other side of 
the coin, they want all of the competitors to have access to all of 
the information that is used to develop strategic plans for this 
company, that they would like to keep for the public sector and 
therefore blow away any competitive advantage that they might 
otherwise have, Mr. Speaker, in the market-place, in strategic 
planning, in corporate development, and so on and so on. We’re 
not prepared, Mr. Speaker, to do that. We’re not prepared to 
jeopardize the competitive advantage. 
 
What we’re talking about at this point, Mr. Speaker, is a proposed 
merger with a closing date targeted for July 1. There’s nothing 
yet to say that that will in fact take place. We’re very hopeful. 
But if in the event that it doesn’t, there’s no way we’re going to 
have all of this information floating around for those people to 
give to their friends in the private sector resource companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Mr. Minister, when I look at 
the major uranium projects that are in this annual report, I note 
that many of the uranium companies that you referred to in the 
private sector form part of the joint ventures that your 
government is involved with — Uranerz, Denison, and the list 
goes on and on and on. So I don’t really think you have much to 
be fearful of, Mr. Minister. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Minister, you called this process public 
participation. But this public participation is only done in secret. 
Now my question to you is this: if you’re not involved in a 
cover-up, if you’re not involved in a cover-up, will you today 
table in this Assembly all documents relating to the merger of 
Saskatchewan  

Mining Development Corporation and Eldorado Nuclear? Will 
you do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the line of questioning 
sends one very significant message, and that message is that 
members opposite don’t now understand business; they haven’t; 
they’re not likely to in the future. And Heaven forbid that they 
should ever get back to take control of the range of power, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I will undertake to do in the event, in the event, Mr. 
Speaker, that a merger does take place — and we are hopeful that 
it will, and we are confident that it will — in that event, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister responsible for Public Participation, I’m 
sure, will table all appropriate documentation as to the deal that 
isn’t prohibited through confidentiality agreements or otherwise 
deemed to be unadvisable because of proprietarial and 
commercial reasons, Mr. Speaker. That seems to me to be 
eminently fair. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Further supplementary. Mr. Minister, 
regardless of how embarrassing the details might be for your 
government, you have a sworn duty to provide the information to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, will you tell us today 
what debt load SMDC has assumed as part of the deal, over and 
above existing long-term debt; and how is the debt load of the 
new corporation structured? Can you tell us that information 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that I got the 
question. There was a little too much noise coming from across 
the way. And, Mr. Speaker, the noise just keeps coming. I find it 
a little interesting though that they are today showing so much 
concern about this corporation that they wanted to wind up and 
close the mines, Mr. Speaker, close the mines, to the detriment 
of the people of northern Saskatchewan and to the economy of 
Saskatchewan generally, and asking these questions at a time, 
Mr. Speaker, when the member for Athabasca, who supports the 
continued operation of the mine, unfortunately isn’t here to speak 
in favour of the continued operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. It’s obvious that the minister 
responsible for SMDC did not hear the question so we will ask it 
again. And I’ll ask it very slowly. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell us today — can you do that — what 
debt load SMDC has assumed as part of this deal, over and above 
existing long-term debt; and how is the debt load of the new 
corporation structured? Did you hear that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’d be happy to tell the hon. member that 
there’s no additional debt load as a result of this. 
 

Funding for Transition Houses 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question . . . 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1385 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, wife battering and other forms of family violence 
are unacceptable, but unfortunately a reality in our society. And 
it’s incumbent on any government to do all it can to ensure the 
protection of these victims. 
 
Mr. Minister, at a time when many transition houses are turning 
away hundreds of women and children who have suffered family 
violence, why is your government being so lean in its funding to 
transition houses? Why did you cut funding to the Regina 
Transition House by $38,000 over the last two years? And why 
have you only increased funding to the Saskatoon Interval House 
by only 2 per cent, and to The Battlefords Interval House by less 
than 1 per cent, Mr. Minister? Can you explain those unjustifiable 
funding cuts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I could tell the 
member opposite that we spent the money on health care, but he 
wouldn’t believe that. I could tell him we spent it on education, 
but he wouldn’t believe that. I could tell him that this government 
has increased funding to family violence prevention centres by 
91 per cent, and he wouldn’t believe that. And I could tell him 
that we increased funding in Regina by 67 per cent, and he 
wouldn’t believe that. 
 
And we have a political agenda here that this member opposite 
and certain of his friends continuously are trying to tell the people 
of Saskatchewan that we are not doing enough. 
 
We have spent that kind of additional money over the last five or 
six years. We have just announced a new centre for 
south-western Saskatchewan, where there were no services; we 
have to look at south-eastern Saskatchewan. And this member 
says that’s not enough. 
 
Well I tell him that we also have to take care of health care and 
education and social services and highways, and we have to 
balance everything in this province, and we are doing as much as 
is possible. We’ve done more than they ever did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of 
Social Services. Mr. Minister, last year the Saskatoon Interval 
House had to turn away 432 families who’d suffered from family 
violence because there was not the staff or the facilities in 
Saskatoon to help them; in Regina, 167 women and their children 
had to be turned away; in La Ronge, 53 women and children; in 
The Battlefords, 45 families were turned away, all because, Mr. 
Minister, your government will not give adequate funding for 
those transition houses to do their job. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how can your government 
spend $200,000 for a ceremony to spade  

some dirt at the site of the opening of the Shand power project — 
a project that which we don’t think makes any economic sense 
— when you say you haven’t the money to protect these women 
and these children from highly abusive situations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, those people, if their 
statistics are correct — and I can’t accept member’s opposite and 
his usual statistics, that’s why I have no way of verifying those 
— but I can tell you that no one was turned away from assistance 
at Social Services with respect to lodging, counselling; no one 
was sent back to a violent family home; that when people come 
to us, we provide them with shelter, we provide them with 
counselling. Not everything is done by the non-governmental 
organizations. I have a department with nearly 2,000 employees 
that also assists people in need. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can assure you that those 
statistics are correct. For 432 families to be turned away from the 
Saskatoon Interval House trying to escape violent situations is a 
disgrace. 
 
But I have a new question, Mr. Speaker, for the minister. Mr. 
Minister, the majority of residents in transition houses are 
children, and many children come to transition houses in crisis 
— physically abused in some cases, in many cases mentally 
scarred by what they’ve had to endure. The provincial association 
of transition houses has emphasized to your government 
repeatedly the needs for child counsellors in the transition 
houses, and your government has repeatedly turned down that 
request. 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Minister: will you now promise 
to provide funding in your budget for child counsellors in 
transition houses? And do you not think, Mr. Minister, that these 
children are worth helping, or does your PC philosophy of 
survival of the strongest extend even to them, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, when you compare . . . 
you’re looking at wisdom and credibility here — credibility of 
our government, their government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The minister is trying to answer the 
question, but I’m sure many members are having difficulty 
hearing him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The criticism of not spending enough 
money comes from the member who wanted to close all uranium 
mines. He doesn’t have any idea of where we’re going to get the 
money to provide social programs. 
 
Our government funds 191 non-governmental organizations with 
$27 million per year. We spend $34.5 million on family services 
in this province. We increased that by 2.5 million last year. My 
department spends $368 million, of which $168 million is for 
family and improving the lot of children and families. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1386 
 

The welfare bill is not even $200 million. We spend about 168 
million on counselling, on assistance to children, on trying to 
save families, on all of the kind of things that you are talking 
about, money has to be spent on — on young offenders. We spent 
$168 million. We are doing everything that money can do to 
improve the situation in society. 
 
But to some extent society has to improve itself. And I ask the 
minister opposite: how many millions will it take to make good 
people out of everyone in this province? Will money do it? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you had only $339,000 to spend on the Saskatoon 
Interval House. Two years ago, Mr. Minister, they got 332,000. 
You’ve increased their budget only $7,000 in two years when 
they’re turning away 432 families. And, Mr. Minister, time and 
again families are having to go to hotels around this province to 
stay, often without protection, because you don’t provide the 
transition houses with enough money to protect these families. 
 
And my question to you is: when will you get your priorities 
straight, Mr. Minister, and stop spending money like your 
$200,000 on the opening of the Shand power project, and instead 
put that $200,000 where it’s needed, which is in the services like 
transition houses in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he fails to recognize 
that we added more beds in Regina; we added more beds in 
Yorkton; we added more beds in Melfort; we added more beds in 
Swift Current that is coming up now. He fails to realize that. And 
he talks about transition houses. Transition from what? 
 
Our government will spend more and more money and put more 
and more effort into family support centres and family support 
services. 
 
But you know, the member opposite should really settle down, 
relax, and not get so excited and emotional, because this is not a 
political issue. We are talking here about assisting families, and 
we spend millions of dollars. We have a department with 2,000 
employees, more or less, and we are doing everything that’s 
possible. What I am saying is that families, and society as a 
whole, has to help each other a bit more. No one is turned away 
from help from my department or from the NGOs 
(non-governmental organizations). One way or another, our 
department helps people. And if you say somebody had nowhere 
to go and they were placed in a hotel, that was only until they 
could find an apartment. 
 

Reorganization of SPC 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
I’m going to give him another chance to answer a question that 
he wouldn’t answer from my colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Mr. Minister, you’ve been telling the people of Saskatchewan 
that your plans to split SPC into four companies will make for a 
more efficient corporation. Would you inform this House today 
what the level of salary and benefits will be for your three new 
presidents: Oscar Hanson, president of the Saskatchewan Energy 
Corporation; Virgil Nelson, president of Trans Gas Limited; and 
Gerry Labas, president for Provincial Gas Limited? And can you 
tell us the size of support staff for each man? And can you tell 
the people of Saskatchewan how is this increase in bureaucracy 
and increase in cost to the taxpayer making SPC a more leaner 
and efficient company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, all of the people that he 
talks about work there now and they have — in the case of Oscar 
Hanson, I expect for around 30 years; in the case of the other two, 
certainly a long time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s not true of Labas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well he says it’s not true of Labas. Labas 
worked for SaskPower, I think, in 1980 or ’81. He was a 
secondment to my office for some time after that. And he’s now 
back at SaskPower, back in the career that he had started under 
the previous administration. And I think that all three of those 
people are very competent people, Mr. Speaker, but well, I could 
answer that question by saying, Mr. Speaker, it makes eminent 
good sense to me to have a transportation company, Trans Gas, 
taking care of those matters that are related to transporting gas, a 
sector, Mr. Speaker, that’s anticipated to double over the next 
few years. 
 
It makes sense, Mr. Speaker, to have someone responsible for the 
utility, Mr. Speaker, the gas utility. And, Mr. Speaker, and they 
say, how much, how much? I fully expect that they will go over 
there making exactly what they’re making now. I don’t anticipate 
any different arrangement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it makes every bit as much and perhaps more sense than 
what they did, Mr. Speaker. They had two subsidiary companies 
at SaskPower — one was Many Islands in Alberta, the other was 
North-Sask Electric. It’s okay for them, Mr. Speaker, to have 
subsidiary companies within SaskPower; it’s not okay for us. I 
don’t understand . . . maybe I do understand the double standard 
that is so common to those folks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
The minister did not answer the first question. He didn’t explain 
to the people of this province how increasing bureaucracy and 
increasing costs will make SPC a leaner company. 
 
So I want to maybe ask you a new question and this relates to the 
new billing procedures. Your 200,000-a-year man, President 
George Hill of SPC, also indicated that Saskatchewan people can 
expect separate bills from both the gas utility and the electrical 
utility. That means two invoices instead of one, two cheques, two 
stamps, and twice the bureaucracy. Can you tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, how doubling the  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1387 
 

amount of invoices and bills and double the amount of paper 
work makes for a leaner more efficient corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about 
is the administrative functions and the strategic planning and the 
corporate planning of all of these things. SaskPower is a parent 
company; SaskPower is a parent company. Trans Gas and 
utilicorp, whatever it is we call it, — all of them still belong 
unless they suggest that we should do otherwise, Mr. Speaker. 
All of them still belong to SaskPower. 
 
I fully expect they’ll all stay in the same building. They will be 
sending the bills out in the same envelopes. The bills will be paid 
at the same banks, the same credit unions, the same power 
offices, the same gas offices and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we expect, as do the people of SaskPower, 
board management and 2,800 employees of SaskPower, expect 
that this will further enhance the efficiency of SaskPower to the 
benefit of all of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
we will not be drilling wells, Mr. Speaker, or buying gas from 
Alberta. We will not, over the next ten years, pump 2.5 billion 
into the Alberta economy, Mr. Speaker. We will be doing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a question to the same 
minister. 
 
This is a very peculiar response. Your colleague, the Minister of 
Education, amalgamates the Department of Education. You, as 
minister in charge of SPC, divides it by four — from one to four. 
That’s very peculiar. 
 
My new question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister in charge, relates 
to Friday’s Saskatoon Star-Phoenix editorial. And they ran an 
editorial which seems to have your number, Mr. Minister. The 
headline says: “Splitting SPC not rational.” It says, and I quote: 
 

Taxpayers will be skeptical about the chances of running 
four corporate bureaucracies more cheaply than one. 
 
If the provincial government is toying with the idea of 
privatizing the natural gas distribution system and flying a 
trial balloon at the moment, it should quickly reel in the 
string. If it merely wants to tinker with the administration 
of this venerable Crown corporation, it should give the 
public solid evidence (Mr. Minister, solid evidence) that 
changes are needed. 

 
Will you do that today? Will you present some solid evidence in 
this House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what’s even more peculiar 
than SaskPower, as you say, breaking it up and education 
bringing it together, is that members opposite, and I suppose the 
Star-Phoenix, are against both. You’re against both. I mean, your 
arguments just don’t work. Another one . . . the Star-Phoenix, 
back in 1976, spent a lot of time in their editorials talking about 
their opposition to the imposition of the ward system. Now I 
understand that they’ve flipped over, too. So maybe in time 
they’ll flip over on this one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2.33 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 31 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 
of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on 
March 31, 1989. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:35 p.m. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Before orders of the day, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That pursuant to rule 86(5) the estimates and supplementary 
estimates for the Legislative Assembly being subvotes 1, 3, 
5, 7, 17, 20, 23, and 26 of vote 21 be withdrawn from the 
Committee of Finance and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 16, An Act 
respecting the Licensing of Persons who Perform Work of 
Gas Installation or Sell Gas Equipment, be discharged and 
the Bill referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Justice. 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 9, An Act to 
amend The Fire Prevention Act, 1980, be  

  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1388 
 

discharged and the Bill referred to the Standing Committee 
on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 10, An Act 
respecting the Licensing of Persons who Perform Work of 
Electrical Installation or Sell Electrical Equipment, be 
discharged and the Bill referred to the Standing Committee 
on Non-Controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Availability of Information Regarding Government 
Spending 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion to the 
effect: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for refusing to release information about 
government spending practices and privatization deals, and 
thereby depriving the public of the opportunity to review 
the government’s mismanagement. 

 
Before I get to that motion, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few 
remarks. One of the more interesting, if obscure, publications in 
the history of Saskatchewan is a brief pamphlet called Pocket 
Politics: A Quick Reference on PC Policy for Candidates. Now 
this pamphlet was produced in 1982 for the provincial election 
that year. It was intended to provide PC candidates in that 
election with a handy reference to PC policies that they could 
carry around with them wherever they went, wherever they 
campaigned. 
 
This was a necessary reference, I would assume, because PC 
candidates couldn’t be expected to carry all those policies around 
with them in their heads. Well maybe some could, but I suspect 
that a lot couldn’t. You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that was 
the year that we had candidates like Paul Meagher, Bill Sveinson, 
Lloyd Hampton and Gay Caswell. And in the face of questions 
from voters and the media, better they should have a handy quick 
reference that they might consult rather than take a chance on 
them blurting out their own unique perspectives on the questions 
before them. 
 
I want to deal today, Mr. Speaker, with one of the items in that 
particular pamphlet. In the past we’ve dealt with other items of 
PC policy and other items in that pamphlet, suggestions such as 
free telephones for senior citizens in Saskatchewan, policies such 
as a removal of the sales tax for the people of Saskatchewan, and 
a policy that there be a 10 per cent reduction in the income tax 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

But I don’t want to deal with those broken promises, I want to 
deal with the first item in that pamphlet under the heading of 
“Responsible Government.” Now these items come in a question 
and answer format. And the question in this case is: 
 

Is it true that Saskatchewan has no freedom of information 
legislation? 

 
And the answer is: 
 

That’s correct. A PC government will be committed to 
freedom of information legislation. 

 
Now remember, this is the PC position, the PC Party position of 
only six years ago, and they said, and I repeat again: 
 

A PC government will be committed to freedom of 
information legislation. 

 
But that was the promise, Mr. Speaker. That was their 
commitment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what is the reality? What has happened? Do 
we have freedom of information legislation? No. No, we don’t, 
Mr. Speaker. There is no legislation. Has the government, even 
if there is no legislation, acted substantially to provide a more 
open government in Saskatchewan? No, it hasn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
And I don’t think that anyone would say that they have. 
 
Now I know that their campaign pledge in 1982 did not promise 
a more open government, but I would assume that when they talk 
about freedom of information legislation, that they did so because 
they perceived there to be a need for more openness in 
government. 
 
In light of their commitment, it’s interesting to review the facts. 
It’s interesting to review the history of the PC government since 
they made that particular pledge to the people of Saskatchewan 
and since their first election in 1982. Because I tell you, the facts 
tell a different story. 
 
The record of this PC government in six years shows us a 
government that has done everything it can to promote secrecy 
and to deny the people of Saskatchewan access to information. 
That’s the record of the PC government. Their campaign promise 
says one thing; their record speaks a very different message. 
 
I want to consider in that context, Mr. Speaker, something called 
Bill 5. And the people of Saskatchewan might ask, what is Bill 
5? 
 
(1445) 
 
Bill 5 is an Act of the legislature that was passed in December of 
1987 — passed by the government using their majorities and 
notwithstanding the opposition from this side of the House — 
which gave the government sweeping powers to reorganize, to 
create or eliminate entire government agencies and departments 
without having to submit these changes for public debate to the 
Legislative Assembly. What used to be a matter for public  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1389 
 

debate is now something which can be done in secret behind 
closed cabinet doors — from a public forum to closed cabinet 
doors. They say more open government; we got more secretive 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to consider just very briefly the Shand power station as 
another example of where the government is withholding 
information. The government plans to spend hundreds of 
millions of dollars — in fact the estimate of the total cost of that 
project is $1 billion or in excess of $1 billion — to build a new 
power station in Estevan which as it turns out to be the 
constituency of the Premier. 
 
Now this is a very, very major expenditure by the people of 
Saskatchewan that is being undertaken by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, but it’s an expenditure for all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And when we asked the government — when we 
asked them, is Shand the least expensive option when it comes to 
future power supply? They will not answer. And they refused to 
share the information they have with respect to the costs of this 
particular option of providing a power supply. They refused to 
provide that information; they’ve refused to share that with the 
public. They say, Mr. Speaker, they say more open government; 
we get a more secretive government. 
 
Now there’s a long list of other examples where the government 
acts with great secrecy and has simply failed or refused to make 
information available to the public. Many of these concern the 
privatization deals that have been struck by the government. But 
I’ll let my other colleagues, who will want to join in this debate, 
speak more about those particular examples. 
 
I want to focus on a particular case of the government 
withholding information from the public — and in this case about 
its spending practices — and I say thereby depriving the public 
an opportunity to review the government’s mismanagement. And 
I refer to the Public Accounts. Now the people of Saskatchewan 
might well ask: what are the Public Accounts? 
 
The Public Accounts are simply a detailed list of the expenditures 
undertaken by the government in their line department during a 
certain fiscal year. And the Public Accounts that we’re concerned 
about are for the 1986-87 fiscal year, or for the year ended March 
31, 1987. 
 
We have on many occasions asked the government to table those 
Public Accounts to make them available in keeping with the 
tradition of this Legislative Assembly, and the government has 
refused to do that. 
 
Now it’s important for the public to be able to know what is in 
those Public Accounts for a couple of reasons. The expenditures 
are made possible because of taxpayers’ dollars. This is the 
people of Saskatchewan’s money; it’s not the government’s 
money. This money belongs to the taxpayers of this province; it 
doesn’t belong to the government. The government is elected to 
handle the spending, but tradition holds that the people have a 
right to know how their government spent their money. 
 
And I think in any other venture people buy a service or a product 
and they believe that what they see is what they  

get. And it’s no different, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to government. When they spend money, they have a right 
to know how it’s been spent. 
 
And the public should also have access so that they are better 
informed as to how the government actually spent their money. 
The public needs information so that they can judge the 
government. The people need to be able to make decisions that 
are well-informed. 
 
And we also submit that these Public Accounts should be timely. 
If I have a question today and the answer is not provided, some 
two years later there’s a question of how well has the question 
really been answered because of the time delay. 
 
And many of us would submit, and especially those in the media, 
a long delay is like getting no answer at all. And one might say 
Public Accounts delayed is Public Accounts denied. And that’s 
why the Public Accounts should be timely. That is why we have 
made that case over and over again inside this Legislative 
Assembly, outside the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I think the people are especially interested in these Public 
Accounts because the particular year that we’re concerned about 
referred to an election year, and the people want to know how it 
is that a government who said, well we estimate a deficit of $400 
million, could actually end up with a deficit of $1.2 billion and 
be out by $800 million. These things are simply not conceivable 
anywhere else, and I think the people of Saskatchewan have 
some legitimate questions. They want to know why there was 
such an increase and where the increases occurred. 
 
And again, it’s no secret that the government has refused to table 
the Public Accounts. They give any sort of reason that they can 
think of that arises from their fertile imagination as to why these 
Public Accounts should not be tabled. They say it’s a tradition 
that these be tabled at the same time as the auditor’s report, but 
when you check the records of the Legislative Assembly, it’s an 
entirely different matter. When the auditor’s report is late, the 
Public Accounts are tabled, nevertheless. 
 
They say that the Minister of Finance needs time to be able to 
prepare answers to any questions which might arise out of the 
Public Accounts. Never mind the fact that if questions are asked 
of a minister in the House and he doesn’t have the answer 
immediately available, he can take notice like any of his cabinet 
colleagues and come back to us with the answer. What they say, 
Mr. Speaker, is simply not credible. The records and traditions of 
this Legislative Assembly show that. 
 
And I would also say that the experience from other jurisdictions 
shows that this government is not credible. Every other 
Legislative Assembly in this country, in Canada, has tabled the 
Public Accounts, either because of respect for tradition or 
because there are laws in the Accounts. And I might add, the 
Parliament of Canada has also tabled its Public Accounts. Again 
there seems to be great respect for traditions throughout this 
country, except when it comes to Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1390 
 

I think that this motion is entirely appropriate. My time is nearly 
up, Mr. Speaker. I think this motion is appropriate. It should be 
supported because it speaks to their disdain for the public’s right 
to know, for the public’s right to information. It speaks to their 
secrecy. And considering their past policies as enunciated in the 
1982 election campaign, their pocket politics, I think this motion 
speaks to the hypocrisy of this government to say one thing one 
day and their practices being something entirely different. It 
speaks to their hypocrisy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And finally, this motion speaks to the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who are more and more 
interested in having information about the government and how 
it’s run. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by my 
colleague, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for refusing to release information about 
government spending practices and privatization deals, and 
thereby depriving the public of the opportunity to review 
the government’s mismanagement. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
motion, as has been indicated by my colleague, is to condemn the 
Government of Saskatchewan for refusing to release 
information. And I want in the time that I have available to me, 
to pin the tail on the donkey, so to speak, as to why this 
government has refused to table information. 
 
And I want to pin responsibility for refusal to share information 
very squarely on the shoulders of the Premier of this province, 
because if it weren’t for him and for his approach to the tabling 
of information and for an up-front honest approach to the 
government’s affairs, I think that the people of Saskatchewan 
would see a lot more information forthcoming. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the culprit behind the secrecy 
and all the private deals that lead to privatization is none other 
than the Premier himself. He is the perpetrator of this deception. 
And I would like to begin to review the record, just very briefly, 
from the last provincial election, and show very clearly how it is 
that this Premier talks out of both sides of his mouth. 
 
On October 10, Friday, October 10, 1982, during the course of a 
provincial election campaign, the Premier of Saskatchewan 
appeared in Saskatoon and pledged to the people of the province 
that he would spend $50 million over the next five years for seed 
money for the high-tech community of Saskatchewan, $50 
million over the course of the next five years — an election 
promise. And that promise, Mr. Speaker, has yet to be honoured. 
It has yet to be honoured. 
 

A year after the election promise was made, on October 19 of 
1987, this Premier stood in this Assembly with respect to the 
high-tech promise he made, and he said: 
 

I promised that in the next five years we would have a 
program in this province that encourages high-tech 
development, that we would rank among the best of the 
country, and that we would spend up to 10 million a year 
over a five-year program. I promised that, Mr. Speaker. 

 
And you heard that with your own ears. And then the Premier 
continues: 
 

All I can say to the hon. member is: you watch, you watch 
us deliver on a five-year program in high technology. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are watching. It is now yet another half a 
year and we see nothing forthcoming with respect to the 
Premier’s promise made a year and a half ago, during the midst 
of an election campaign. No $50 million over five years in seed 
money for high-tech firms. 
 
This same Premier also talked about $10 million a year during 
the election — it’s not an exception when it comes to high tech 
— he also talked about $50 million a year . . . $10 million a year 
over the next five years to manufacture farm chemicals in 
Saskatchewan — $50 million in total, and we have not yet seen 
any evidence of this money being spent. He talked about all kinds 
of other projects, but he failed to address or recognize his 
commitment, made during the course of the election, to 
manufacture farm chemicals here in Saskatchewan. And there’s 
been an ominous silence on this issue from the Premier. 
 
This same Premier, Mr. Speaker, proposed during the same 
election campaign in 1986 that a new fertilizer plant would be 
built here in Regina, and it’s now almost entered the land of 
mythology that this plant will even be seen. There’s no evidence 
that the government can produce on the promise made by the 
Premier. 
 
And so you begin to see by these examples that the Premier 
himself sets the tone for the kind of duplicity and secrecy and 
cynicism that pervades the election promises made by this 
government. 
 
And I could go on, and I could talk about the Premier going to 
Swift Current and promising a bandage factory at Swift Current; 
that there would be $12.5 million spent on a bandage plant in 
Swift Current; that construction on the project would start in the 
spring of 1987, and it would be completed and built by the fall of 
1987. And we don’t have a bandage plant in Swift Current, and 
we don’t even have the prospect of a bandage plant in Swift 
Current. 
 
There are many promises that this Premier has made. He’s 
promised that there would be an Expo tower in Moose Jaw as 
well. He’s lavish in his promises. And I want to point out more 
specifically how, when it comes to the Department of 
Agriculture, which is very narrowly his own responsibility, that 
again there is duplicity. 
 
(1500) 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1391 
 

Three and a half years ago this government and this Premier 
announced that there would be an agricultural development fund. 
And they put up a lot of hype and a lot of hoop-la in association 
with this announcement that over the next five years — it’s 
always a five-year plan — that there would be $200 million spent 
on an agricultural development fund. And I quote from a 
Saskatchewan Agriculture brochure on the agricultural 
development fund, from the Premier’s message in this brochure, 
with his name signed underneath it, it says: 
 

The agricultural development fund launches a new era for 
farming in Saskatchewan. For the first time in provincial 
history, the Government of Saskatchewan, through the 
agricultural development fund, is making a long-term 
commitment to enhance the competitive and productive 
position of Saskatchewan farmers. 

 
Well that’s about as far as I can go and agree with this message. 
They certainly are making a long-term commitment to 
Saskatchewan farmers, because they’re a long way from coming 
up with $200 million for Saskatchewan farmers in the 
agricultural development fund. 
 
I look at the totals to date so far, given the three successive 
estimates of government spending that have been tabled, and 
even in the estimates, which have been underspent, this 
government in the first three years of the agricultural 
development program has only, by their own estimate, spent $83 
million. Now if they’re on a proper trajectory, to spend $200 
million over five years they would have to have spent $120 
million by this point in time to be on target. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this really means, with the first three years of 
the five-year program eclipsed and only $83 million spent so far, 
is that this government is going to have to double their spending 
in the agricultural development fund from $30 million this year 
to $60 million next year in order to honour their commitment. Do 
you think that there’s a fat chance of that happening? There’s not 
the slightest chance at all of that happening. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the actual figures for the first year of 
estimates with respect to the agricultural development fund 
show, for example, that when it comes to agricultural research — 
and the government pledged, the Premier pledged, that $10 
million would be spent on agricultural research in this 
agricultural development fund — how much was spent? Two and 
a half million dollars — 25 per cent of the total he estimated 
would be spent. 
 
What about the second year in the program? Very interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. We just don’t know. We just don’t know because the 
Public Accounts have not been tabled in this province to let the 
people of Saskatchewan know what this government is spending 
on the agricultural development fund. Because if they knew, the 
results in Eastview and Elphinstone would be even worse than 
they are. 
 
So this points, Mr. Speaker, very clearly to the problem  

that this government faces and the reason why it ought to be 
condemned, very justifiably, because it refuses to release 
information. It plays with numbers and statistics; it deliberately 
attempts to mislead the people and to confuse people . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. The accusation of 
an individual or government deliberately misleading is not 
parliamentary. I don’t think that the member actually meant it in 
those terms, but I’m bringing it to his attention. To accuse a 
government or individual members of deliberately misleading is 
not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I certainly didn’t 
mean to deliberately do that myself. 
 
I would just like to conclude by saying that we see this as a 
continuation of this whole problem when it comes to Shand and 
the development of the power station there. The people of 
Saskatchewan simply can’t get the information that they need 
and are owed by this government, with respect to it being the 
largest project in provincial history, to adequately analyse the 
benefits of this project. 
 
So I condemn this government in the strongest terms for its 
failure to provide information. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad that this motion has come forward today and I’m happy to 
be able to speak to it. I’m happy, Mr. Speaker, because this 
motion has a very broad sweep of relevance, so broad in fact that 
members can make speeches on any matter that requires 
government spending. 
 
Unfortunately, that’s how the opposition in this legislature drafts 
its motions — with a very wide, wide brush, Mr. Speaker, so 
wide in fact that they can say nothing on any point that they think 
they want to make, and then talk about anything under the sun. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will not do that because I do indeed have 
something to say as a private member of this Assembly. 
 
To start, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that at the end of my 
remarks, I will be moving the following amendment: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “that” and substituting the following: 
 
This Assembly censures any member who uses his position 
as an MLA to subvert the democratic system through the 
frivolous or venal abuse of our courts for purely political 
motives and in particular, regrets the recent statements that 
the courts should assume the constitutional authority for 
determining the timing of public release of government 
documents. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is a strong statement, but it is no stronger, I 
suggest, than the fetid piece of work we are debating today. And 
it is certainly no stronger than the reprehensible actions by the 
member for Regina Victoria in corrupting the role of individual 
MLAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think in entering this debate, it is important  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1392 
 

to review the background of the public accounts and how these 
accounts are reviewed. The first thing I want to remind the public 
about is the fact that it was under the NDP, especially under the 
guidance of the member of Saskatoon Riversdale, that had the 
activities of the Public Accounts Committee conducted in secret 
— in secret, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is highly relevant to the motion we are debating today 
because it is supposed to focus the opportunity of the public to 
review public spending. How can the public review government 
spending when the review is conducted in secret? It cannot. 
 
To ensure that the media have the right sourcing — and do not 
think I am abstracting this from the air — I refer them to Hansard 
of April 2, 1981, where the member for Riversdale makes a 
spirited case for secrecy in the Public Accounts Committee. Let 
me quote one statement he made at that time, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Either you get into detailed, specific workings of 
expenditures in private, in the absence of political and 
publicity glare . . . or you open it up to the public. 

 
He also argued if you agreed to open the process to the public, 
you would also have to agree to keep it non-political and 
non-abusive. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government opened it up to the public. 
We, this government, a Progressive Conservative government, 
were concerned that the public did indeed have an opportunity to 
review the spending practices of government. And so we did 
away with the secrecy of the NDP. 
 
And did the NDP heed the concerns of their leader, that the 
process would then have to be a highly non-partisan one? You 
know very well that they did not. Instead, they have sent a 
member before the courts to try and have the judicial system 
intervene in the authority and privileges of this Assembly, of the 
Public Accounts Committee, and without reflecting on previous 
rulings of the Chair. 
 
In my own opinion, Mr. Speaker, they have impinged upon my 
responsibility as an individual MLA. If MLAs no longer have the 
responsibility and the right to seek such disclosures as they see 
fit, if the legislature no longer is the master of such small but vital 
matters as the release of Public Accounts, then it seems 
inescapable to me that the authority of the legislature has been 
questioned and the role of the members diminished. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what the member from Regina 
Victoria, on orders from his leader, has done. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would think they would be a little wiser. I would 
think that they would be a bit more concerned about the traditions 
and values of this particular institution. But they seem to have 
utter disregard for the legislature and disdain for our valued 
democratic system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe too that this motion reflects upon the entire 
strategy of the members of the NDP opposition in this legislature. 
It is a strategy that, I am sad to say,  

seems to be having some effect, at least as it is reflected in much 
of the commentary in the press of today. It is a strategy, Mr. 
Speaker, to undermine the confidence of the people in the 
democratic process, to reduce the estimation of the people for the 
political process and political activities. 
 
You will recall that last year they made a great commotion about 
special warrants. It was the bogyman of the year. And the simple 
fact is that special warrants are a tool used throughout the British 
Commonwealth, the Commonwealth of Nations. Research 
shows, Mr. Speaker, that our use of special warrants was in fact 
nothing particular at all. The numbers were a little higher than 
usual, but the measures were consistent. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, in reading the minutes of the Public 
Accounts Committee, I was treated to the accidental admission 
of the member for Saskatoon South that he would try to break the 
rules whenever he could and that it was not up to him to keep the 
proceedings honest. And that got into the minutes of the 
committee, Mr. Speaker. It is there on the public record for 
anyone who cares to look. 
 
And this year we see again the NDP running up the red flag, 
going to the courts with what even the judge determined was a 
frivolous action designed to remove authority from the 
legislature. They stand in this House, Mr. Speaker, day in and 
day out, and attack individuals who cannot defend themselves 
because of the immunity rule. The member for Nutana can call 
the cancer clinic in Saskatoon and ask for the confidential records 
of cancer patients, and then they have the unabashed gall to 
question government speakers on the right of free speech. 
 
It is appalling to me, Mr. Speaker, that they can be so cavalier 
with such fundamental, such absolutely vital principles. And 
these actions require nothing less than the full censure of this 
Assembly. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that it was the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale who said that, “No system is perfect, including public 
accounts.” And I will grant him that. But to go from that in 1981, 
when he was the government House leader, to try and drum 
public fears through highly questionable practices, this strains 
credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP was the government 
and the opposition tried and tried to get answers to some very 
basic questions, and the opposition tried without success. And I 
tell the member from Riversdale that irresponsibility is going to 
come back to haunt. It will hound him back onto the eastern 
cocktail circuit from whence he came. That member may be glib 
and smooth, Mr. Speaker, but the bottom line in the end is 
integrity, it is consistency, and on these that member fails 
miserably. 
 
You might remember, for example, Mr. Speaker, just recently the 
NDP have been badgering ministers on this side of the House in 
estimates about parking spaces. I watched as the Minister of 
Human Resources was being hounded by members opposite 
about such vital concerns as the parking spaces, and I stop 
because I recalled a time  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1393 
 

when a different opposition was trying to get similar answers, 
and so I went and looked up the old estimates. 
 
Let me quote for you a man who clearly knew where he stood at 
the time, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

It is virtually impossible for a minister to come in and to 
answer details on subvote 1 related to, number one, cars, or 
number two, to government services. I am not going to tell 
ministers that they have the responsibility to know how 
CVA (central vehicle agency) policy for deputy ministers 
on cars operates. I am not going to be standing here as a 
minister in my estimates taking responsibility for cars. I am 
not going to get up here as a minister and answer to you on 
the estimates, and you had better find out that leasing 
policies and building policies is under the control of 
government services. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that forthcoming gentleman was the 
member for Riversdale, and the member who said that parking 
spaces now are a very big concern. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more things that I could talk about 
that takes credibility away from those members opposite, when 
they raise such a motion in this legislature, but they don’t have 
any. 
 
So I think I will read my amendment into the record, Mr. 
Speaker, seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s time has actually 
expired, however, in the interest of the House proceeding, I will 
allow him to continue if the other members . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No way. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Opposition does not agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure and pride to stand here today, as the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, to talk about some of the issues that are 
important to the people of this province, particularly issues 
surrounding the refusal of the government opposite to release any 
information as to its spending practices and privatization deals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note with interest that the member from Thunder 
Creek once again attacked the Leader of the New Democratic 
Party, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. And I want the 
members opposite to know that we will take our leader any day 
over the members opposite leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I understand why the members opposite 
continually rise from their chairs and refer to the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. They refer to the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale because they know that their  

leader can’t stand up to the Leader of the New Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I wait with some anticipation for the next 
provincial election when we will once again, we will see a 
leaders’ debate in this province where the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale, will debate the Premier 
of this province, and we will see who in fact has the support of 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker, it gave me a great deal of pride to 
be in Saskatoon yesterday with the Leader of the Opposition 
when he addressed the board of trade and the whole issue of 
privatization. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition made it quite 
clear to the board of trade that he did not favour the privatization 
deals of the members opposite, and he also made it quite clear 
that once we’re elected, once the New Democratic Party is 
elected in 1990 or 1991, that we will be reviewing those deals to 
see whether in fact they’ve been good business deals. 
 
Now why do we have to review those deals? The reason we will 
have to review those deals in 1990 or 1991, whenever these 
people have the courage to call a general election, is because 
these people refuse to release to the public any information 
surrounding their privatization strategies. Now they talk about 
privatization, and I can see why they use that word, because it 
describes exactly the way that they’re going about these deals. 
It’s all done privately with Conservative Party friends, and 
privately with their big business friends — secretly behind closed 
doors and in private. That’s why they call it PC privatization. 
 
But Saskatchewan people have begun to ask, Mr. Speaker: what 
does the PC government have to hide? What do they have to 
hide? And we witnessed today in question period the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
Corporation, and we witnessed this morning in Crown 
Corporations Committee his refusal to release any of the details 
surrounding the privatization of Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation. 
 
We also witnessed this afternoon in the House during question 
period this minister responsible for Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation mislead the people of this province. 
When we asked that member opposite what the implications were 
in terms of the long-term debt of SMDC, in terms of the merger, 
he said that there was going to be no additional long-term debt. 
And that’s simply not true. 
 
If you look at the record, Mr. Minister, you will note that this new 
merged corporation, this new-called, this new company, has 
assumed a long-term debt of some $600 million. The portion that 
is the responsibility of the people of this province is $400 million. 
The long-term debt presently of SMDC is about $322 million. So 
in fact, Mr. Minister, we have assumed an additional debt of $78 
million, all in the hopes that when these shares are floated  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1394 
 

that we will recover the money. Well, we’ll wait and see. In view 
of the stock market and what’s been happening in this country 
and throughout the world, we will see whether in fact these shares 
are floated in a successful way. 
 
Then I want to talk about the Saskatchewan dental program. 
Where was this government when we asked questions about the 
privatization of the dental program? Where were they? They 
didn’t release to the public of this province one single detail of 
the arrangements that were made between the College of Dental 
Surgeons and the Government of Saskatchewan. Instead what we 
saw was 411 dental workers fired and equipment sold off. 
 
And then we have Saskoil and the floatation of Saskoil shares. 
Once again, when the members opposite on this side of the House 
asked for the details, did they release the information to the 
public? They did not. These people are dealing with 
Saskatchewan assets, owned and controlled by the people of this 
province. They are selling them off, giving them away, and when 
we ask for the details of the deal, when we ask for information, 
when we ask how they value those assets, and we ask for the 
independent evaluations, do they provide them to the members 
opposite — no way. What they do is they hide in some sort of 
rhetoric that they don’t want to let their competitors know what’s 
going on. 
 
Well when you look at the Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation and you look in the annual report, you 
will note that most of the major players in the uranium industry 
in this province are in fact involved in joint ventures with the 
members opposite through the Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation. So what’s wrong? What’s the 
problem? If you have nothing to hide, if these are such fantastic 
business deals, then you should not be afraid to release to the 
public, for public scrutiny, the deals that have been arrived at. 
 
And then we have Saskatchewan Minerals. Here was a fine little 
company that returned to the people of this province more than 
$50 million in royalties and dividends. It returned to the people 
of this province over $60 million in wages. And in terms of grants 
in lieu of taxes, it returned over $2 million to the communities in 
which Sask Minerals was located in. And they’ve just sold off 
this company to two out-of-province companies — this Crown 
corporation, this public asset to two out-of-province companies, 
one in Ontario, and one in Quebec. 
 
When we asked for an independent appraisal of those assets, 
when we asked the minister responsible in Crown Corporations, 
she said, oh no, she wouldn’t be able to give us that information, 
that we maybe could get it from the Crown Management Board. 
And this is the excuse after excuse after excuse. They will not 
release the details. 
 
We have had several, several privatizations in this province. 
We’ve had Saskoil, the dental plan, Manalta coal, the drag-line, 
the highway equipment, SED Systems, Sask Minerals, 
SaskCOMP, SaskPower, SMDC; we fear that there will be SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and a whole host of 
other Crown corporations. 
 

And have they released one detail to the public? They have not. 
Instead we have all these wild and woolly little business 
arrangements between the people who have bought or purchased 
these companies and the Government of Saskatchewan. Have we 
seen much cash for these companies? We have not. 
 
I just want to review the SaskPower sell-off. Here we have $325 
million worth of assets, according to the government. But we 
don’t know that; we haven’t seen any of the independent 
appraisals. But here we have another sell-off of SaskPower, and 
what do we get? We get 13 million common shares in Saskoil — 
you know, Saskoil was the company that was privatized, the 
company that used to be owned by the people of this province, 
which is now owned by . . . 75 per cent of the shares are owned 
by people outside of Saskatchewan — and we got some cash, and 
this amounted to $245 million. But we don’t know how much 
cash we got. 
 
We got 13 million common shares, but we don’t know what the 
value of these shares will be when we go to sell them. Then we 
got 5 million Saskoil shares — purchase warrants valued at $13 
million, so they say — but have we seen the evaluation? No, we 
have not. 
 
Then, apparently, we get a cash flow royalty paid over five years, 
valued at $25 million. Well who knows what that is? And then 
we have a promissory note for 20 million. 
 
Well here we have it, a $325 million asset, according to them. 
But have they released any of the details? No, they have not. Will 
they release any of the details? In view of the past practice of this 
government, I suspect they will not. They are afraid that the 
public, upon scrutiny of their business dealings in this province, 
the privatization of public assets, will quickly throw them out of 
office. So they want to keep everything in secret. 
 
So here we have it, another little business deal, a $325 million 
business deal, but do we know anything about it, have we see the 
details? We have not. 
 
And then we have Saskatchewan computer corporation, a utility 
of the people of this province. This company has a return on 
equity of 33 per cent in some years, 120 per cent in other years, 
100 per cent in other year — and we’ve just sold this thing off, 
apparently. But have we seen the deal? Have we seen the deal 
that’s been entered into with Mercury Graphics and SaskCOMP 
and SaskTel and a number of other little private businesses? We 
haven’t. 
 
But we do know this — that we apparently have some shares in 
this company, this new WESTBRIDGE Computer, worth, 
according to the annual report, some $11 million. We do know 
that. Whether or not those shares will be worth $11 million and 
how they arrived at the valuation of those shares, we’re not quite 
sure of, because they won’t release that information to the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
listened with some . . . well I thought maybe what  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1395 
 

should be some enthusiasm, to see if there was going to be 
anything new coming from the members opposite. 
 
But here’s what we’re hearing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
hearing there’s no freedom of information, secretive, broken 
promises. You know, Mr. Speaker, this is what we’ve heard day 
in and day out ever since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, this is becoming a real laugh, a joke 
— a joke. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that what the NDP are 
trying to do to this legislature is just make a mockery out of it. 
Mr. Speaker, the quackery the NDP are practising is nothing but 
an attempt to demoralize this institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Nutana was talking about a debate 
— a debate — they will debate anybody, anywhere, any time, on 
the particular privatization or public participation; they’re all 
over the map. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, I have — last week 
and I have previous — have always attempted to get these people 
in a public debate. I had challenged these people to come out into 
my riding. And I challenge them any time to come out and put 
their spending habits and everything on the line and I’ll put ours. 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we will find out who can manage 
this province and who can’t. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite, the only thing they know is to try to use scare tactics. 
They still have not moved off of that, Mr. Speaker. They have 
talked about it. We were going to just take away hospitalization 
in this province, health care and everything else like this, you 
know. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there has never been more 
money, more dollars put into such facilities and care as there is 
today. They are the ones that had moratoriums, Mr. Speaker, and 
all this kind of non-government spending. We were the ones that 
expanded on almost every aspect in government that you can 
possibly think of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Riversdale, Leader of the NDP, will not even ask questions 
in this legislature of this government. He is afraid, Mr. Speaker. 
He will not take a position in this province — absolutely no 
position whatsoever. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to indicate to you that I get a little 
bit sick and tired of hearing that rhetoric. But it’s time, it’s time, 
Mr. Speaker, that the NDP were called to account for themselves. 
It’s not sufficient to allow the NDP to repeatedly say, well gee, 
folks, we aren’t opposed to anything, it’s just that we’re opposed 
to everything this government does because it is this government 
doing it. And that’s it! That’s just basically the reason that they 
get up and talk and jabber away. 
 
Well I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, even their past leader, 
Mr. Blakeney, had indicated publicly that he was in favour, in 
favour of privatization and public participation, and he says it’s 
time to move that way. There’s the old folks over there saying, 
oh no, we’ve got to hang on to that old tradition, that old tradition, 
that old NDP tradition, because we’re afraid to move; we’re 
afraid to move. 
 

(1530) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . and further, if they’re sincere about the 
concerns and the public release of documentation and stuff like 
that, I would like and ask them right now to go on record with 
the next speaker, to come on record and to say that he will 
precisely give us a date and a time that if at any time that they 
may, and Heaven forbid, ever form government in this province 
again, that they will give us a commitment here today that on 
such and such a time and a date they will always table a particular 
public account. I want to hear that from the members opposite 
because they know, traditionally, that a particular timetable 
cannot be very well kept because of various different situations. 
But of course they’re not going to do that, Mr. Speaker, because 
they know they can’t keep such a commitment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they can say whatever they like and be as 
irresponsible as they like because for some reason no one’s 
questioning them on it, and we have not questioned them on it 
enough. So I want to do that now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge, like I said before, any one them over 
there to a debate. And here are the ground rules, just one and it’s 
very simple: no vague hints as to what might happen if the NDP 
were the government. You come to my riding — and I’ll even 
pay for your trip — and one of your oratorical wonders can stand 
up on a platform and announce exactly when each year you 
would release your public account. Stand up and tell my 
constituents about your plans for government spending in direct 
and simple terms. 
 
For example, you will have the opportunity to tell the people 
exactly how much you plan to raise welfare rates, as you have 
been demanding we do with specifics. You will have the 
opportunity to tell the people exactly how much more you would 
pay in wages to the bureaucracy, as you have been demanding 
we do. You will be able to tell the people exactly how much 
revenue you plan to lose by closing the uranium mines, as you 
have been demanding we do. 
 
Tell them which one of the Crown corporations you will privatize 
or which one you will create. Tell them exactly what your 
spending plans are for agriculture, what your spending plans are 
for health, for education, for nursing homes, for dental care and 
drugs. Tell the truth. Tell them. It’s that simple. 
 
You come out to my riding and I give you this direct and simple 
commitment again, as I and our government has been always 
doing. I will abide by that same rule, and I will tell the people our 
specific and direct spending habits. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I just want to get back into the basics 
of this individual, why he moved this motion, and that is 
basically, Mr. Speaker, is that he wanted to make a political thing 
out of this. And this is what is demoralizing about the whole 
situation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not finished with this. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to inform the opposition right now that they will  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1396 
 

have another crack at the cat when we get into Public Accounts 
Committee. The NDP will have another crack because I’m going 
to be asking my colleagues on that committee to have the 
committee undertake a full and comprehensive review of the 
whole question of the process of public accounts. 
 
The committee should look into the question of members trying 
to make the courts responsible for the release of that document. 
They should look into the questions raised about members of the 
committee announcing that it is their intent to break the rules 
whenever possible, as the member of Saskatoon South has stated 
on the record. 
 
They should look into the role of the committee and indeed of the 
legislature, and in reviewing the government. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to move an amendment: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
this Assembly censures any member who uses his position 
as an MLA to subvert the democratic system through the 
frivolous or venal abuse of our courts for purely political 
motives, and in particular regrets the recent statements that 
the courts should assume the constitutional authority for 
determining the timing of public release of government 
documents. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to so move this, and it will be — and 
I’m sure the member from Moosomin, who will be seconding 
this, will have much more to say on this. So, Mr. Speaker, with 
that I would beg you to bring this forward. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster has moved an amendment to the motion. I 
have considered . . . Could I ask the hon. members to please 
refrain from carrying on a debate while I’m trying to make a 
ruling. 
 
I have read the amendment. I have referred to the rules of 
parliamentary debate, more specifically to Erskine May, 
Parliamentary Practice, 20th Edition which states: 
 

No charge of a personal character can be raised save upon 
a direct and substantive motion to that effect. 

 
Amendment to a motion is not substantive, and therefore I must 
rule that the amendment is out of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to make a 
few comments on this motion. But I want to, first of all, begin by 
making a few comments about some of the things that have been 
said by members opposite. And I really think it should be of some 
note in this House, and in the public who may be viewing these 
proceedings on television today, that the government opposite, 
rather  

than dealing with the substantial intent of the motion and 
debating the question of: why has certain information, which the 
public has the right to know, not been made available? Attempts 
only to put in a frivolous motion by the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, after the member from Thunder Creek 
forgot to move it on time, in order to try to not debate the motion 
as it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that in itself, that in itself tells you something about what is 
going on here and why this motion is here today. And what is 
going on here today, and in recent weeks and months, is an 
attempt by this government to be secretive and not allow the 
public of Saskatchewan know the kind of shady, corrupt, and 
unscrupulous deals which it is pulling on them. Why, otherwise, 
would they not want to make something as rudimentary, as 
straightforward as the Public Accounts public? 
 
Now I listened to the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, and he’s 
always of some interest to listen to. He does not say a great deal, 
Mr. Speaker, he seldom does, but he rants and raves and quotes 
a few things that somebody else wrote for him and then makes 
no sense. But I want to tell him this: he said that he would debate 
anywhere, at any time, with anyone. If he could only get up and 
speak again, I would like to ask him: if that is the case, why won’t 
he allow this legislature to debate the public accounts? 
 
The Minister of Finance, who is in his seat here today, why won’t 
he allow this legislature to debate the public accounts? If they are 
so free and willing to get into those kinds of debate, why do they 
hide them? what is so wrong, what is so corrupt, that we will 
discover in these Public Accounts, that the government has yet 
not tabled them. That is the question here today. 
 
What is wrong with the deal with Sask Minerals and the sell-out 
of Sask Minerals that they won’t provide the information to the 
legislature and to the public? What are they hiding with the cushy 
deal with Saskatchewan Computer Corporation and 
WESTBRIDGE with their cronies and political friends 
controlling it and are going to make themselves millions of 
dollars? What is so corrupt in that deal, in that arrangement, that 
they won’t make it available to the public? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd — 
and I hate to refer to him because he doesn’t deserve this much 
time — but he made one other comment which I think was of 
note to this legislature. He bewailed the fact that some people had 
suggested, had suggested that this Conservative Party and this 
Conservative government would be attacking hospitalization and 
medicare and, oh, he was so scandalized by it all. Well I want to 
say to you, sir, yes, we said that this Conservative government 
would undermine medicare and hospitalization, and they did. 
 
Tell me, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that in the 1986 election 
campaign they went around promising everyone in 
Saskatchewan that medicare and hospitalization were sacred — 
they wrote it in their literature; they had it on the television 
commercial; they said it was a sacred trust — in spite of all that, 
after the election they betrayed that trust, and they betrayed the 
people. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1397 
 

Tell me this: is the destruction of the dental care plan for our 
children not an attack on hospitalization and medicare? Yes, it is. 
Is this destruction of the prescription drug plan not an attack on 
medicare and our hospital and health care programs? I think it is. 
Is the doing away with many public health inspectors, tampering 
with the very foundations of an important service under our 
health care program? I think it is. Is the fact that there are 11,000 
people waiting on a waiting list to get hospitals in Saskatoon not 
a betrayal of our health care services? Is the fact that, for the first 
time in the history of this province, we’ve got cancer patients 
having to go on the waiting list not an attack on our medicare? I 
think it is. 
 
So while the members opposite want to deviate from this debate 
and try to put those kind of motions, there are some facts that the 
public has a right and should know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Thunder Creek, the one who 
forgot to move the motion, said that the Public Accounts 
Committee didn’t used to meet in public. That’s true. And then 
he said, well finally it did. Well that’s true too. And who would 
disagree with that? 
 
There is no one in this House who would disagree with the fact 
that now time goes on and the Public Accounts Committee is 
open to media, and that it’s not a bad idea. But I ask him, what is 
the good of it all if we can’t even have the Public Accounts before 
us so that this Public Accounts Committee could hold a meeting 
to consider them. That’s the point here, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 
this motion is on there. 
 
There is no purpose to having any kind . . . there’s no purpose in 
having a Public Accounts Committee if the government sits on 
the Public Accounts and won’t make them available to this 
legislature, won’t make them available to the committee so that 
they can be scrutinized and so that the right questions can be 
asked, and so that we know how many of those ministerial 
assistants that they’ve given 15 per cent and 22 per cent increase 
to, how many of them got those increases, while people in 
transition, needing transition homes, which my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon University was asking about today — 
15 and 22 per cent increases to political hacks who work for the 
ministers. 
 
They got that kind of money, but they’re turning 432 threatened 
families, mothers and children, away from our transition houses 
because they don’t have the money to pay for them. 
 
The Public Accounts will tell us where they spent the money in 
order so that they can afford to put it where it’s needed more. 
Now obviously, Mr. Speaker, they have spent the money 
wastefully and frivolously and don’t want the public to know. 
Now I know they would like to hold them off until the summer 
in the hope that somehow, in the hope that somehow nobody will 
notice in the quiet, dull rooms of the hot summer heat. 
 
(1545) 
 
Well I want to say to them, Mr. Speaker, and to you, that that’s 
the basic philosophy or strategy that they applied  

on June 17, 1987 when they brought in that disastrous budget. 
And didn’t the public know? Of course they did. 
 
I say to the House Leader opposite, don’t fool yourself. The 
public will know when those Public Accounts are tabled, all of 
the misexpenditures and the corruption that has taken place in the 
election year of 1986 and 1987. So why not make them available 
in this legislature so that the work can go on, and so that the 
Public Accounts Committee can start doing their study? 
 
Now we heard today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now 
the member from Regina Wascana is speaking from his seat 
again, Mr. Speaker. Now the only time he speaks in here is when 
he feels that there is a point being made on this side of the House, 
so obviously we’re making a pretty good point here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that this government 
has broken the law of this province. There was a case of special 
warrants which one of the members referred to a while ago. And 
he said, oh, the opposition made such a fuss over those. Well I 
say again, yes, the opposition made such a fuss over the fact that 
the government refused to have a budget in this House, and that 
it was spending tens of millions of dollars by special warrant. 
 
Even the Legislative Law Clerk said that the government was 
acting illegally. And it was only then, it was only then, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Premier decided he can’t hide anymore. And so 
he had to call a session of the legislature and he announced it 
almost a month ahead of time, which was rather unusual, to try 
to cover up for the fact that this government was trying to hide 
the major cut-backs that it was initiating, without coming to this 
legislature with a budget so that it would have to answer for them. 
It breaks its own laws and they’re breaking their own laws again 
with regard to the public accounts. 
 
Editorial in the Star-Phoenix. And I know I’m not supposed to 
read the name, but the editorial, if I could read the name, would 
say, the member from Melville, the minister in charge of Labour, 
has ignored the law. 
 
Now for a government that continues to talk about morality and 
integrity, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how can they ignore the very 
laws which they are entrusted to defend and uphold? But they do 
it. And these are only three examples — the Minister of Social 
Services breaking the law; the Premier and the Minister of 
Finance breaking the law; the Minister of Finance now breaking 
the law and the traditions of the legislature by not making the 
Public Accounts available in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Your time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I count it 
indeed a pleasure to stand and to say a few words regarding the 
motion presented by the member from Regina Wascana. 
However, before beginning, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say 
that my first year and a half in this Assembly . . . 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1398 
 

An Hon. Member: — No, no. Not the member from Wascana. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Victoria, pardon me. I am totally floored and 
astounded by the type of debate and rhetoric, brought forward by 
members opposite. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I had far more regard 
. . . I expected far more from many of the members opposite. 
 
The member from Regina Victoria has brought forward a motion 
condemning this government to have refusing to release 
information on government spending, privatization, and . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and he says, depriving the public of 
opportunity to review the government’s management. I would 
endeavour, Mr. Speaker, to say a few words to the motion. 
 
I find it amazing, Mr. Speaker, that during the member’s years 
on Regina city council he was known as a champion of secret 
meetings — behind closed doors. The member from Regina 
Victoria accuses this government of refusing to release 
information about government spending practices and public 
participation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a lie. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I would just like to remind hon. 
members that whether they are on their feet, as the hon. member 
is now, or whether they are sitting in their desk, as the hon. 
member just is, unparliamentary language is not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
this government ought to be proud of its commitment to openness 
in government. In fact, this government was not the government 
who refused television camera crews in public accounts; that was 
the doing of the members opposite when they were in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition speaks about freedom of 
information, yet I recall the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 
during his years in government, giving great pronouncements 
against freedom of information. Prior to the 1982 election, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP government of this province kept hidden from 
the people of this province the real financial state of 
Saskatchewan. And yet they come in this Assembly today to talk 
about openness. Mr. Speaker, who are they attempting to fool? 
What are their motives? 
 
And I realize, Mr. Speaker, that when we are in debate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member is attempting 
to give a speech, and I think all the members realize that in this 
particular case he never, ever interrupts anybody. I’d just like to 
ask members to give him a chance to speak in this House this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe if 
we reviewed the record, we would find that members of all 
governments over the past number of years have used, on many 
occasions, terms and evaded the points that have been brought 
forward. They’ve used evasion when it came time to giving direct 
answers, and no one is immune from using evasive answers. 
Time and  

again during the opposition’s administration, they literally 
fudged on the answers with respect to their spending habits, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are being treated to the spectacle of some 
members opposite . . . the pious member from Regina Victoria, 
in his fashion, a dissertation about openness in government. I 
compare his remarks to an arsonist speaking on the virtues of the 
fire department, or a fox offering to watch the chickens. 
 
Does the member for Regina Victoria not realize that it was his 
party, the present opposition when they were in government, who 
refused to tell the people of Saskatchewan about the details of 
potash nationalization? Has he no idea that it was his party, the 
NDP, who avoided telling the public the costs of their advertising 
extravaganza on the family of Crown corporations? Has he 
forgotten the mockery his party made of the questions on the 
order paper that they hauled in here and tried to make a show of 
it? 
 
Yes, I agree, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Victoria was 
not a member of this Assembly when those events took place. 
That is not a valid excuse, because he was guilty of the same kind 
of secrecy and evasion while on Regina city council. Mr. 
Speaker, I will no longer accept the hypocrisy of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we find there was no set rule with respect to Public 
Accounts. Yes, there have been traditions, but from time to time 
in our history traditions have been set aside for valid reasons. 
 
While we cannot deny there is delay in the Public Accounts, I can 
say with confidence that the Public Accounts will be tabled 
shortly, and the members realize it and the members know it. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, over the years, the years of my involvement in 
public life, I have found that a little patience goes a lot further 
than confrontation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us take a real hard look at the record of this 
government with respect to public participation. The member of 
Regina Victoria accuses this government of secret deals or 
depriving the public of information. That accusation is simply 
not true. 
 
It was this government, a Progressive Conservative government, 
that had the vision and leadership to establish a Department of 
Public Participation. It was this government, the first government 
department of its kind that was established in North America. 
 
This government has made a public commitment to public 
participation because we are confident of what it will do to 
enhance the economic future of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, talking about public involvement, I happen 
to have been involved in a public meeting on public participation 
in Whitewood a little over a week ago. And I will say this — that 
of the 140 or so people involved in that meeting, as I was walking 
around and talking to different people at different tables, there 
were people from all political persuasions. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1399 
 

And one gentleman said to me, he said, I don’t know how I 
received this invitation. In fact he was one of my strongest critics 
in the past election. But he said, I just want to say thank you to 
whoever invited me. He said, this was very enjoyable; I 
thoroughly enjoyed being here and offering my input. And he’s 
a card carrying member of the party opposite. But he enjoyed the 
opportunity to sit down with the Minister of Public Participation 
to discuss public involvement. 
 
We want every citizen of this province, Mr. Speaker, to know 
about our policy of public participation. And we welcome each 
and every opportunity to discuss public participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it is the NDP who do not wish to take a 
formal position on public participation because I don’t believe 
they really know which way they want to go at this time. 
 
Let me take a few moments to talk about the idea of public 
participation. Mr. Speaker, in Australia the Labour government 
down under has brought about some very successful privatization 
for public participation ventures. In France, where they’ve just 
elected another socialist president, President Mitterrand, in that 
country they, too, have had success with public participation. Yet 
the NDP in this province fail to realize that public participation 
cuts across all political boundaries. It isn’t just reserved for one 
political party. 
 
Liberal, Socialist, Communist and Conservative governments in 
all parts of the world are engaged in public participation 
initiatives. The NDP opposition here in Saskatchewan do not 
appreciate the fact that public participation means economic 
diversification and prosperity for our province and for the people 
of this province. 
 
I wish to commend this government for having the foresight and 
the leadership to embark on a policy of public participation. Mr. 
Speaker, the public participation program will offer all of 
Saskatchewan people the opportunity to share in the growth of 
their province and their economy by them being able to invest 
directly in Saskatchewan interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate that the concepts of investment and 
economic growth may be foreign to the opposition considering 
their unflexible and undying support for socialism. In fact, the 
sale of SaskPower bonds is a good example of the positive 
benefits of public participation. The SaskPower bonds provided 
a new and innovative way of raising capital. And for the record, 
I want to point out that these bonds raised a total of $297.5 
million for the corporation to fund and expand their operations. 
 
The same can be said, Mr. Speaker, for the public share offering 
by Saskoil which raised $110 million. Yes, public participation 
is working. It works for the benefit of you and I and all the people 
of this province. Take a look at the example of WESTBRIDGE. 
The Saskatchewan computer union favoured the merger. All of 
their jobs are secure. WESTBRIDGE is now the largest computer 
services company . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has expired. There’s one minute 
left. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the moment that 
we have left, I would just like to reiterate one of the main 
arguments with an example, Mr. Speaker. The motion that we are 
debating is: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for refusing to release information about 
government spending practices and privatization deals and 
thereby depriving the public of the opportunity to review 
this government’s mismanagement. 

 
One very pointed example, Mr. Speaker, and I refer to the 
estimates of this year and of the year previous, under the 
estimates in grants to school construction. Repeatedly, any grants 
to school construction, the government has estimates $63 million 
this year; the year before, $62 million. 
 
My understand is, according to information I’ve been given, that 
the government has only spent $25 million worth of that, and at 
the same time proclaiming and saying that it is budgeting . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we can move 
directly to Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 16 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After a few remarks 
I’m going to be moving the following motions for return. And it 
reads as follows: 
 

With respect to the consulting services of Mr. Oliver 
Letwin: (a) whether the Department of Public Participation 
has a contractual arrangement for Mr. Letwin’s services; (b) 
the remuneration specified in the contract; (c) the amount 
paid for Mr. Letwin’s services since April 1, 1987; and (d) 
who the parties to the contract are. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this is an important piece of information 
that the public of this province is entitled to have. As we 
understand it, Mr. Oliver Letwin was a policy adviser to Margaret 
Thatcher during all of the privatizations that took place in Great 
Britain. As we understand it, Oliver Letwin has been in this 
province on two occasions, as I understand it, speaking to large 
gatherings of Conservative Party supporters about the benefits 
associated with that new and latest economic fad that seems to be 
dominating Conservative governments everywhere: 
privatization. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1400 
 

(1600) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, privatization is something that’s totally 
foreign to Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan has always had a 
tradition of the mixed economy. We’ve had a tradition where 
private enterprise, the public sector, and co-operatives came 
together to ensure that we had a diversified and enhanced 
economy. With privatization, this new concept is something 
totally foreign to Saskatchewan people, and hence I understand 
why the government doesn’t have any inside advisers advising 
them on how to go about privatization. 
 
Mr. Letwin is someone, as I understand it, from Great Britain. He 
has been contracted by the Conservative government to offer 
advice on how to sell off public assets. And thus far, Mr. Speaker, 
it would appear to us that Mr. Letwin’s advice has not been all 
that beneficial to the people of this province. 
 
It’s been a very expensive proposition because it seems to us that 
our assets on some occasions have been sold for way less than 
fair market value. And it would also appear to us that in some 
cases our assets have been given away, totally given away. 
 
So I think it’s appropriate that the government give us this 
information. And therefore I would move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return No. 16 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the form in which the 
return would be ordered if we don’t amend it, I’m quite prepared 
to pass it in the form that it exists except that it would receive a 
nil return. And so I would offer the following amendment: 
 

That the motion be amended by removing the words “Mr. 
Oliver Letwin” and substituting therefor the words: 
 
N.M. Rothchild and Sons, Limited. 
 
and further, by removing the words “Mr. Letwin’s services” 
and substituting the words: 
 
the services of N.M. Rothchild and Sons, Limited. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, will put the order in such a form as to allow 
them to get the information that they seek, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the motion be amended by removing the words “Mr. 
Oliver Letwin” and substituting therefor the words: 
 
N.M. Rothchild and Sons, Limited. 
 
and further, by removing the words “Mr. Letwin’s services” 
and substituting the words: 
 
the services of N.M. Rothchild and Sons, Limited. 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to speak 
to the amendment. I would encourage the minister  

to be as forthcoming on this particular motion — or on other 
matters, as he is on this particular motion. I would presume, Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Deputy Premier, that you won’t be afraid to give 
us the information that is contained in the other motions for 
returns. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am not going to argue with the 
amendment. It seems like the amendment is in order and will give 
us the information that we’re seeking, if it ever gets here. And 
that’s the point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we rise here on the first order for return of this session, we are 
faced with a rather unusual situation. I would only urge the 
minister not to have that happen again as what he has allowed to 
happen with all of the orders of return which were ordered by this 
Assembly in October of 1987. 
 
Some over seven months ago this Assembly ordered, Mr. 
Speaker, returns, large in number, so that information could be 
provided to this Assembly. On this very day which is, I believe, 
the 41st day of this sitting of the legislature, over seven months 
since those returns were ordered, we are yet waiting for the 
House Leader opposite, or one of his colleagues in the cabinet, to 
lay on the Table those orders for return. 
 
Now we’ve just had a debate on the secrecy of government and 
the refusal by this government to make information available. 
Members opposite chose to talk about the past and would not talk 
about that issue. That’s their business; the public will judge them 
accordingly. 
 
And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we will not again see what these 
orders for return that we’re considering today, the same thing as 
we’re seeing with those were ordered in October, 1987. That is 
absolutely unacceptable. It is totally contrary to what the 
purposes of this legislature are, and one of the purposes is for the 
government to be accountable. 
 
The government is not being accountable, has not been, and I 
would urge the ministers when they . . . or the House Leader 
opposite, when he gets up on some of these motions, to give us 
an assurance, or give us a date and when, one, the orders for 
return from last year will be tabled, because he did say three 
weeks ago and asked in this House that he would look into it. He 
has yet to respond. And secondly, I would hope that he would 
give us a specific time when we will have these orders, which are 
being ordered today, made available to the House so that the 
public cannot be denied the information which it has the right to 
know. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 17 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the House Leader gives me no 
encouragement by saying this will be tougher, and I guess we’ll 
find our how much tougher. 
 
The subject of this motion is the free trade conference, which was 
sponsored by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce in 
Saskatoon in March of this year, a  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1401 
 

considerable portion of the costs of which were borne by the 
government, and the purpose of this motion is to ask that these 
costs be reported to this House. 
 
The conference was a large conference attended by people from 
all over North America, I believe, and it is difficult to even 
contemplate how much the cost of that conference may be. And 
we’re particularly interested because we don’t understand the 
purpose of it. If the purpose of the conference had been to discuss 
the contents of the agreement and particularly to educate 
Saskatchewan people as to the contents of the agreement, then I 
think any expenditure would have been justified. 
 
This government, as well as its counterpart in Ottawa, have made 
no bona fide effort at all to tell the Saskatchewan people or the 
Canadian people just exactly what is in that agreement and what 
its impact will be for this country this year, next year, in 20 years, 
and in a hundred years, and for ever. Rather, it’s going around 
selling us . . . trying to sell us that agreement as though it were 
some kind of a magic medical remedy which, if we took, would 
cure us of all of our ills. 
 
Well it’s no such thing. It’s a very complex agreement full of 
provisions that will impact on the futures of all of us and our 
children and our grandchildren and so on, for ever. And it’s an 
agreement that ought to be fully discussed and disclosed and be 
fully understood by the Canadian people. 
 
But this conference goes nowhere in that direction. This 
conference was a kind of a pep rally, when a bunch of people 
who were known to support the agreement got together and 
patted each other on the back, patted each other on the back and 
said, what a wonderful thing this is. Well I’m afraid that it wasn’t 
convincing of anybody who wasn’t in there at the time and who 
wasn’t already committed to the agreement. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Regina Lakeview, the following: 
 

That an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 17 
showing: 
 
With respect to the free trade conference sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce in March, 1988, the 
costs incurred by the Department of Trade and Investment. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 18 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my intention to ask 
some questions about a former member of this Legislative 
Assembly and a former cabinet minister in the PC government, 
one Paul Schoenhals. 
 
Mr. Schoenhals was defeated — and I might say soundly 
defeated — by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland, in the last provincial election. The people of 
Saskatoon Sutherland obviously had no confidence in his 
abilities and therefore defeated him. Or, as you might say, he was 
involuntarily retired. 
 

Yet we see Mr. Schoenhals shortly after the election being 
appointed as the chairman of the Saskatchewan potash 
corporation at, we understand at a very significant salary, a very 
healthy salary. For the first time in history we have a full-time 
chairman of the potash corporation in addition to having a 
full-time president of a potash corporation. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan might well ask, given the 
difficulties of the potash corporation in the last three years with 
lagging sales and the like, why, on top of a full-time salary . . . or 
on top of a salary for a full-time president, do we also need a 
salary for a full-time chairman? Why do we need this double 
expenditure to do something that no one really seems to be quite 
clear what it is that he’s doing? It’s all very vague. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, we feel the public has a right to know 
what it is that Mr. Schoenhals is being paid, what his 
remuneration is. 
 
And therefore, I would move, seconded by my colleague, the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland, to move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 18 showing: 
 

With respect to Mr. Paul Schoenhals, former MLA; (a) 
whether Mr. Schoenhals is paid by the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan; (b) the total amount of his remuneration 
in 1987. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask all 
members to vote this down. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I’ll explain why, since the member 
asked. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Holy smokes! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Holy smokes. And the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it’s the long-standing practice, I say 
long-standing . . . I remember hearing Mr. Elwood Cowley, the 
former minister responsible, and the now Leader of the 
Opposition, and others, and even us — on the question of 
management team remuneration the practice has been to give the 
aggregate sum of the management team. The practice has been to 
offer that when it’s been asked in Crown corporations in that 
way, Mr. Speaker, and that’s been the tradition. 
 
(1615) 
 
This is the same question that was asked last year. The same 
result was that it was voted on. Ten years ago, when we were 
sitting on the other side, that’s the way these things were treated. 
And that’s the way that we will treat them now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would ask all members to vote against this particular return, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, the suggestion by the Deputy 
Premier is simply outrageous, and I am scandalized by it, that the 
public is not entitled to know  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1402 
 

what the former MLA is earning by virtue of a political patronage 
appointment. I think that it’s crystal clear to the people of 
Saskatchewan that that is a political appointment. I know for a 
fact in the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland that people 
recognize it as a political appointment. And as such, I think there 
is absolutely no reason for them to be denied knowledge of what 
their former member of the legislature is now being paid by the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and his remuneration for 
1987. 
 
I think this is symptomatic of a closed government that wants to 
make patronage appointments and secret deals, and I know for a 
fact that the people of Saskatoon Sutherland would have a 
particular interest in knowing what their former member of the 
legislature is now earning as chairperson of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I speak very strongly against the suggestion of the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to join into this debate also. And I think 
it is the most ludicrous thing that I’ve seen before this Assembly. 
Here is a member, Paul Schoenhals, that was rejected by the 
voters of Saskatchewan. He had the opportunity to go into the 
private enterprise, which he supports. But what they have done 
. . . This is not management, Mr. Speaker; this is a specially 
created position to pork-barrel a position for the former cabinet 
minister defeated in the last election. 
 
Here is a man that stood in this legislature when he was a cabinet 
minister and was appointed to head small business, who indicated 
and confessed to this House that he had absolutely no 
small-business experience whatsoever. And they have appointed 
him. He’s not part of management. Paul Schoenhals is in a 
position that was particularly created to give him a pork-barrel 
position at the expense of the potash corporation, at the expense 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I’m going to ask the Deputy Premier to reconsider it. In 
fact, I invite to ask the Deputy Premier a question, if he would 
entertain it. I’d ask you: would you entertain a question in respect 
to your amendment saying that this man is a part of the 
management team? Will you entertain a question? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — See, it speaks for itself. 
 
But let us put it very clearly, Mr. Speaker. In the Crown 
corporations, when it comes to the executive team, it is true that 
you get the global figure. But I’ll tell you that in the review of 
the Crown corporations, when it came to what was paid to the 
chairman and board members, that information was detailed and 
particularized for each and every board member. And this 
member is not a part of management, and he’s a part of . . . 
chairman of the board. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, it’s another cover-up. 
You’re ashamed to disclose to the people of Saskatchewan the 
degree of pork-barrelling that’s going on. Here is a man that is 
costing the people of this  

province close to a quarter of a million dollars, in our estimates, 
and if it’s not a quarter of a million dollars, we have a right to 
know. This is not management. This is a part of the board of 
directors. We should know the per diem. We should know the 
expenses. We should know every detail in respect to him. 
 
I think it’s ludicrous that the minister, the Deputy Premier, tries 
to cover up in respect of one of his colleagues who hasn’t even 
got the qualifications to go into the private enterprise. What he is 
is a leech on the public corporations; that’s what he is. And we 
can’t even find out how much this leech is costing us — 
somewhere around a quarter of a million dollars. And a total 
cover-up again. 
 
I ask all members to consider the implications of what you’re 
doing. You’re changing the rules of Crown corporations. Despite 
what the Deputy Premier says, this is not part of management, 
and in management we had the understanding for global. This is 
a position especially created for the leech who couldn’t even find 
a job in the private enterprise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it he 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Carried. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — No? Will all those in favour please say “aye”. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — All those opposed, say “no”. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask for the 
interpretation on the ruling here, so it’s clear here, so we can 
determine whether we want a standing vote, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. There was a voice vote, and on the basis 
of a voice vote it was defeated, but there can be a standing vote. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We want a standing vote on this one. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well you can. It’s up to you. Okay, standing 
vote. Call in the members. 
 
(1629) 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1403 
 

Yeas — 19 
 

Prebble Atkinson 
Rolfes  Anguish 
Shillington  Goulet 
Tchorzewski  Pringle 
Koskie  Calvert 
Brockelbank  Trew 
Mitchell  Smart 
Simard  Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky  Koenker 
Solomon   

 
Nays — 27 

 
Duncan Meiklejohn 
McLeod  Martin 
Andrew  Toth 
Berntson  McLaren 
Taylor  Hopfner 
Smith  Petersen 
Muirhead  Swenson 
Maxwell  Martens 
Schmidt  Baker 
Hodgins  Gleim 
Gerich  Gardner 
Hepworth  Kopelchuk 
Hardy  Britton 
Klein   

 
Return No. 19 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving an order in a 
few minutes, but I just want to make a comment with respect to 
the subject at hand, which is Mr. Ralph Katzman. Mr. Katzman 
is a case of a voluntary retirement from the . . . by the government 
benches opposite. There is some question as to whether he was 
pushed out, but I’ll be kind and charitable and say that he retired 
voluntarily. 
 
Now Mr. Katzman is one who was a member of this Assembly 
for a good many years, has an outstanding, even if somewhat less 
than distinguished record of service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Upon his retirement he indicated and let it be 
widely known that he was going to move on to the field of 
newspaper publishing and was going to publish a newspaper in 
Saskatoon. 
 
However, we find that that particular arrangement has not come 
to fruition, at least as of yet that we’re aware of. And it appears, 
it appears, Mr. Speaker, that as opposed to going into the 
newspaper publishing business, this retired former member has 
now found his way into the services of the government. 
 
Now I think the people of Saskatchewan are concerned to know 
that if he could not find the kind of remuneration that I think they 
would want to bestow on a former member with long-standing 
service through newspaper publishing, is he being adequately 
paid in the employ of the Government of Saskatchewan? And 
they will want to know that. They will want to make sure of that 
— a retired former member is being well paid. 
 
And therefore I would move . . . and I don’t think that in  

this particular case that Mr. Katzman is part of any management 
team in the Department of Highways, even if he might be part of 
a management team in the private sector in newspaper 
publishing. But I don’t think that he’s part of any management 
team. 
 
So therefore I would move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Centre, an order of the Assembly do issue for return 
no. 19 showing: 
 

With respect to Mr. Ralph Katzman, former MLA: (a) 
whether Mr. Katzman is employed by the Department of 
Highways; (b) his title; (c) his salary. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to resist the 
temptation to get into the long list of pork-barrel appointments 
made by the members opposite when they were sitting in this 
office, except to . . . the first three names on my list are members 
of the Koskie family. Then there’s a couple of other names like 
Don Cody and Dave Miner and John Burton and Louise Simard 
. . . pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I can’t use the person’s name, and I 
withdraw that name and I apologize. I sincerely apologize, Mr. 
Speaker. Then there was a Don Faris and there was a Kramer and 
the list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I know full well that some of these 
people that I would call patronage appointments, pork-barrellers 
of the highest order, simply . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Parasites. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Parasites, leeches . . . and I’m taking 
coaching from members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member from Quill Lakes said that. 
He said that about his own relatives. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Exactly. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, 
I know full well that some of these people were very competent 
and made a contribution and were there because they ought to 
have been there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of providing information, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to amend this one, but it’s a very, very small 
amendment and it’s to make it consistent with a couple of others 
that are coming and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well let us be the choice of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And you’ll decide, right? Maybe, 
maybe, and you’ll get to vote whichever way you want to vote, 
but be sure that you vote the right way, because not every time 
will the Speaker be generous enough to give you a second crack 
at it, my friend. 
 
So the amendment that I make, Mr. Speaker, will have the effect 
of changing (c) his salary to (c) his salary range. And the reason 
for that is people who are recruited into government are recruited 
into a particular range, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that they would 
take the licence, in any event, and allege that the guy is at the 
highest level in  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1404 
 

any event. So I don’t know why they would be so critical of this; 
it’s just a matter of consistency, Mr. Speaker. So I therefore 
move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
“(c)” and substituting therefor the words: 
 
the salary range for such position. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I was anticipating that we 
wouldn’t have to go through the rest of these motions at any great 
length, but I’m listening to what the hon., the House Leader is 
saying. And really I think this is an atrocious example of hiding 
information again. 
 
Now listen, Mr. Speaker: here we have a case of an ex-member 
of the legislature, ex-legislative secretary, who resigned and did 
not run in the last election, but because he was a Conservative 
member of the legislature, is given some cushy job in the public 
service while a lot of other people who are applying are being 
ignored and forgotten. Now that’s one point, Mr. Speaker. I 
won’t dwell on that. 
 
What I want to dwell on is the amendment that the member 
opposite has just introduced. Now here is why he has introduced 
it. There are salary ranges in governments, as there are in any 
other employment places, even in the private sector. But people 
usually start at the bottom of the salary range and work 
themselves up. 
 
Now I wonder, why would this Mr. Katzman, the former member 
for Rosthern, not be prepared to admit that he has maybe been 
hired at the maximum of the salary range, while this government 
is saying to other public servants and teachers and others, you 
will start at the bottom, and he’s saying to many other people, 
you’re going to have zero increases. 
 
This is a person who comes in to the regular public service and 
is not required to start at the same point in the salary range as any 
other individual would have to be to the point, to the extent that 
the hon. — the House Leader has to get up and amend this 
straightforward motion. To refuse to give information on what 
they’re paying Mr. Katzman and simply wanting to give the 
salary range, there can only be one reason, and that is that he is 
not legitimately starting at the point in the range where 
everybody else would and that he is getting a special privilege 
because he was a former member of the Conservative caucus. 
 
I find that, Mr. Speaker, objectionable. I think that this 
amendment is a bad amendment and only reinforces the debate 
that’s taken place in this House all afternoon, and that is a debate 
about this government refusing to provide at every turn, no 
matter how small or big it is, because they hold this legislature in 
contempt and they hold the public of Saskatchewan in contempt, 
and think that this legislature exists for the privileges of the 
cabinet ministers and not for the public of Saskatchewan. I say 
it’s the other way; this is the legislature of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they have a right to know. 
 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 20 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’ll be moving an order shortly, but I just 
want to make a few comments with respect to the next former 
cabinet minister. And moving on down the pork-barrel, we come 
to Mr. Jack Sandberg, who’s a former MLA and former cabinet 
minister in the PC government. 
 
We were given to understand that Mr. Sandberg, even though he 
was involuntarily retired from the public service of 
Saskatchewan, has been rehired by the PC government in a 
capacity with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
So we are curious to know what his title and salary might be. We 
know that the people of Saskatoon Centre spoke clearly and 
loudly in the last election that they did not want to retain Mr. 
Sandberg’s services, obviously thought him overpaid as a cabinet 
minister, and therefore needed to be replaced by a more 
progressive member in terms of the sitting member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
So I think the public of Saskatchewan have a right to know and 
are interested to know just what Mr. Sandberg’s position is. We 
understand it’s in public relations, and they’ll want that 
confirmed because his public relations prior to 1986 weren’t that 
great, and as a consequence lost the election. 
 
People of Saskatchewan also want to know just what he’s being 
paid. Given the very high power rates in this province, to what 
extent can these be attributed to not only George Hill, but also to 
Jack Sandberg, another former PC cabinet minister being 
appointed to a well-paid position in the government service . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . So therefore I’ll move in a minute, as 
soon as the member for Weyburn quits chirping, as is his custom 
to do on every occasion, I will move, as soon as he quits chirping, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Centre, that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 20 showing: 
 

With respect to Mr. Jack Sandberg, former MLA: (a) 
whether Mr. Sandberg is employed by the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporations; (b) his title; (c) his salary. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, for the same reasons as the 
past order, I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
“(c)” and substituting therefor the words: 
 
the salary range for such a position. 

 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1405 
 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
(1645) 
 

Return No. 21 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Moving on down the trough, Mr. 
Speaker, we come to the case of Louis Domotor, and I’ll be 
moving an order shortly. But Mr. Domotor is a former member 
of the Legislative Assembly, I understand, for Humboldt. He was 
replaced in the last election by another member. Obviously the 
public had no confidence in Mr. Domotor, and yet now we see 
Mr. Domotor — or we suspect that Mr. Domotor is being 
employed by the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
Now we know from past campaign literature and Mr. Domotor’s 
sterling record just what his professional competence areas are, 
so we’re curious to know what his title is in the property 
management corporation. I think the people of Saskatchewan 
want to know that Mr. Domotor is appropriately placed in his 
position in that great corporation, and whether or not he’s on the 
management team, and whether we’ll get any information at all. 
 
But they want to know just what his job description is, what his 
title is, and what he’s being paid. I think the public again has a 
right to know and is curious to know what a former cabinet 
minister, who was defeated in the last election, just what 
particular favours the present government is choosing to bestow 
on him, and I think it’s something the public wants to know. 
 
So therefore I will be moving, seconded by the member for 
Regina North, an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return 
(No. 21) showing: 
 

With respect to Mr. Louis Domotor, former MLA: (a) 
whether Mr. Domotor is employed by the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation; (b) his title; (c) his 
salary. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to take the 
criticism from most anybody in this House, but from that 
particular individual who I understand has throughout his life 
been a professional, political hack and has never had a real job 
— he couldn’t get a real job in Manitoba, so he came to 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, and got a job with Sask Housing at a time 
when Sask Housing was doing very little, and he made sure that 
it did less, Mr. Speaker. So I’m prepared to take the criticism 
from most anybody, but not . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. There are simultaneous 
debates taking place, I’m afraid. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s by far the best debate, Mr. Speaker, 
and the best side of the debate at least. And I move, seconded by 
the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after (c) 
and substituting therefor the words “salary  

range for such a position.” 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to spend a very 
brief time talking about this particular motion for return. We’ve 
seen this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, a demonstration of closed 
secretive government, something that this government was very 
much opposed to at one time, but is very much in favour of now. 
 
Now the Deputy Premier has said that he’s not prepared to take 
criticism from the member for Regina Wascana which, by its 
alternative, may suggest that he’s prepared to take some criticism 
from me for this particular amendment that he’s offered to the 
House. 
 
The closed, secretive government that we see demonstrated here 
this afternoon covers a wide variety of positions in this 
government, positions within the public service, within Crown 
corporations, and within the property management corporation, 
which is a corporation that we know very little about because this 
has been the most secretive — this is the most secretive of 
government Crown corporations that we are familiar with at this 
time. 
 
I think the motion seeks to find more information about this 
particular Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation to 
which Mr. Louis Domotor has been appointed. It’s necessary that 
we clarify in our minds whether the person is qualified for this 
position and where in the salary range Mr. Domotor started his 
position with the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
By the amendment the Deputy Premier offers here, he will 
prevent us from obtaining that kind of information. Therefore I 
am opposed to the amendment. 
 
I think the government should come clean with the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation because they’ve stated — and 
they’ve hung their flag on this, Mr. Speaker — they said that this 
corporation will be efficient, well run and well managed and will 
be the flagship, the flagship, of the Crown corporations in that it 
will establish once and for all an efficient operation in the 
administration of the government assets and buildings. 
 
This motion seeks to get some information with regard to that 
corporation, and the Deputy Premier is denying that information 
by the amendment which he’s offered to this motion, and I would 
have to oppose the amendment. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 22 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moving right 
along to one Mr. Keith Parker, and I would advise you that it will 
be my intention to move a motion for an order of the Assembly. 
 
Now Mr. Parker, even if in the last instance with respect to Mr. 
Domotor we may have touched a nerve with the Deputy Premier 
and leads him to make all kinds of wild  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1406 
 

allegations about my employment record, I would certainly 
counsel the Deputy Premier to check his facts, and he would 
know that my very first employment was with the Manitoba 
government; I applied for a job with the public service 
commission and was hired by them. Now you might say that’s 
political patronage. I don’t know how he draws that interpretation 
because it was a Conservative government at the time, so I don’t 
know how you draw that interpretation. 
 
But in any event, with respect to Mr. Keith Parker, I don’t think 
that the same nerve will be struck. Mr. Parker never made it to 
the cabinet, even though he’s a former member of the Legislative 
Assembly, a former PC MLA. No, he didn’t make it to the 
cabinet. Given the fact that historically Moose Jaw always has a 
member in the cabinet, that one of the two members from Moose 
Jaw didn’t make it, gives one . . . leaves a pause for reflection on 
the competencies of the former members for Moose Jaw. Now 
it’s noted that both the former members from Moose Jaw were 
defeated, so obviously the people from Moose Jaw shared those 
feelings about the competency of those former members. 
 
Yet we see now that Mr. Parker, this former PC MLA, has been 
appointed to a position with the Saskatchewan Liquor Board. So 
I think that it’s only right that the people of Moose Jaw and 
Saskatchewan know just what particular job Mr. Parker has been 
appointed to and what salary he is being paid, because after all 
they weren’t impressed with his competencies and decided to 
retire him. Yet we see this government rehiring him and 
appointing him to some position. And the minister for 
privatization said he was a good man and it was a good thing to 
do. Well, he’s working for that member. But I think all the people 
of Saskatchewan want to know just what his job is and what his 
salary is. 
 
So therefore I would move, seconded by the member for Prince 
Albert, that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 22 
showing: 
 

With respect to Mr. Keith Parker, former MLA: (a) whether 
Mr. Parker is employed by the Saskatchewan Liquor Board; 
(b) his title; (c) his salary. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Justice: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
(c) and substituting therefor the words: 
 
the salary range for such a position. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 1 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be moving this 
motion in a few minutes. First I want to state the reasons that we 
are after this information has everything to  

do with public accountability, open government, the things that 
we have seen demonstrated time after time today, where 
members of the government continually stonewall, continue to 
not be forthcoming with information that the taxpayers, the 
people of Saskatchewan, have every right to access to. 
 
It’s interesting that their rhetoric prior to their being elected is 
completely different than their actions now that they form the 
government. 
 
So without further remarks, I move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Centre: 
 

That we issue for return the total amount paid by each 
government department, agency, and Crown corporation 
for the period September 8, 1987 to the date this return was 
ordered, to commercial airlines and travel agencies for air 
fares, including in each instance: (1) the names and position 
of those for whom the fares were authorized; (2) the cost, 
purpose, and destination points for each trip; and (3) the air 
carrier on which each trip was taken. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the information in the form 
requested was ordered in the last session and, Mr. Speaker, it 
resulted in a great waste of man-hours in the civil service in 
gathering what is ultimately useless information. In some cases 
it involved overtime, pulling of invoices from storage, or 
retrieving microfilm records. Some of the information has still to 
be retrieved, Mr. Speaker, and it is the reason that returns ordered 
last September have not yet been completed. 
 
The amendment that I’m going to make, Mr. Speaker, is to avoid 
the mistake, which I take the blame for, of last session, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Back in 1980, Mr. Speaker, the then deputy premier, now Leader 
of the Opposition, said a similar thing, Mr. Speaker. He said: 
 

I don’t know when our officials can be expected to do the 
job. I don’t know how long it will take. I’ll be very 
interested in knowing how many man-hours, or man-years, 
depending on the measurement, will be used in this area that 
it will take to complete this kind of question. 

 
(1700) 
 
I’m not critical of members opposite for the question; I was the 
guy that designed it last year. All I’m saying is that, Mr. Speaker, 
in the present form we’re going to get into the same mess that we 
were into last year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all of the words 
after the words “air fares.” 

 
I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Open government, this 
is not all about. What you are doing is totally  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1407 
 

gutting this order for return. You are being very, very tight-lipped 
with the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan 
that pay your salary and my salary and a good number of other 
salaries. These people have every right to understand how it is 
the government is spending their hard-earned, hard-paid tax 
dollars on their behalf. 
 
Democracy is not necessarily the cheapest form of government, 
but democracy demands that governments be accountable to the 
taxpayers and to the people. I urge back-benchers and members 
of the government to vote against this amendment, and, after the 
amendment is defeated, to vote for the motion as a method of 
keeping an open and an accountable democratic structure here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


