


















































June 22, 1988 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 June 22,1988  
 

2369 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING  
  

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly, through you, sir, some 19 grade 4 
students from Balgonie, from the Greenall School. They’re in the 
west gallery. They are conducted by Mrs. Sharon Gudereit, the 
teacher; chaperons Mrs. Doreen Wagman and Mrs. Heather 
Entner. 
 
I will be meeting with the students, their chaperons and teachers 
after 2:30, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all hon. members to join with 
me in welcoming the students from Greenall School in Balgonie. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got two special 
groups to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
legislature today. 
 
First I’d like to start in your Speaker’s gallery, in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce to you Floriano and Ginetta Paluzzi from 
Italy. They’re here visiting Canada for the first time. 
 
Of some interest, Mr. Paluzzi plays in the Pope’s band, which is, 
obviously, a very prestigious thing to do. Accompanying the 
Paluzzis is Cecilia Diantonio and Maria and Brian Wirth, along 
with their two-year-old daughter, Alicia. 
 
So please join me in welcoming our guests from Italy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Also, Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery 
we have a group of 25 grade 6 and 7 students from St. Anne 
School located in my constituency of Regina North. They are 
accompanied by R. Rodych and Ms. Obrigewitsch. 
 
I will be visiting with both groups. I’m sure you can appreciate my 
schedule for the next hour is going to be busy juggling the two 
groups, but I look forward to meeting with the group from St. 
Anne’s as well as the group from Italy. 
 
Please join me in welcoming the St. Anne’s grade 6 and 7 class. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my 
colleague, the member from Regina North, in extending greetings 
to the students from St. Anne School and the adults who are with 
them — their teacher. 
 
I have had the privilege of substitute teaching at St. Anne School 
on at least two occasions and have enjoyed it very much. It’s good 
to see the students in the gallery; I also hope that they have an 
enjoyable and an educational visit here. And hopefully before too 
long maybe I can come and visit their school again as a substitute 
teacher. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of my colleague, the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, I’d like to 
introduce a group of grade 5 and 6 students from the Archerwill 
School, I understand 32 students in all; they’re in your gallery. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher Barry Neufeld, chaperons 
Annette Kozak, Susan LeStrat, Maureen Miller, Laurette Bzowy, 
and I may have the pronunciation of that wrong, Elaine Murias, 
and their bus driver Gary Peckham. 
 
I would like to ask everybody to help welcome them here. Their 
member is going to be in a little later, I understand to meet with 
them at 2:30 for pictures and refreshments and a discussion of the 
events of the afternoon. I hope you have an enjoyable time here, 
and it’s educational as well here at the legislature. Would 
everybody please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me today to introduce to you and the other members of the 
Assembly, 38 grade 3, 4, 5 and 6 students in the west gallery from 
the Eyebrow School. Eyebrow is located in the north-west portion 
of the Thunder Creek constituency, and it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to welcome the students and their chaperons here today. 
 
They have with them their teachers Yvonne Cross and Jackie 
McCarthy, chaperons Sandra Fowler, Darla Brown, Cathy Russel, 
Glenna Buckmaster and Lorie Fradette; also, I believe, their bus 
driver Mr. Depper is around somewhere. I don’t see him, but I 
wish him well today. 
 
I hope the students are enjoying the trip to Regina. I hope you 
particularly enjoy the Legislative Building and the proceedings 
which you are about to witness now in question period. I look 
forward to meeting with you and answering any questions that you 
may have about things that you see here today, outside on the lawn 
later. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to please help me 
welcome the students from Eyebrow. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
students here from the wonderful constituency of Regina 
Wascana. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce them to you, and 
through you to the other members of the House, in the Speaker’s 
gallery, 24 students from the W.F. Ready School from grade 5. 
They are accompanied by their teacher Joyce Weare. It will be my 
pleasure at 2:30 to join them for pictures, and then later to be on 
the front lawn to discuss the proceedings that will be taking place 
here within a few minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members in the House to join me 
in welcoming these fine young students from Ready School in 
Regina Wascana. Welcome. 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2370 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
  

Changes to Ward System  
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 
in the absence of the Premier, is to the Deputy Premier, and it 
pertains to the government’s Bill with respect to the ward 
legislation, the elimination of the ward system, and Sunday 
shopping. I direct it to the Deputy Premier. I would have directed 
it to the Premier, because it looks as though the Minister of Urban 
Affairs is so adamant and so dug in on this that we have to appeal 
— if I may put it that way — to other members in the cabinet and 
the government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, my question to you is this: in light of the fact 
that opposition to this legislation is mounting — from SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) on Monday in a 
very harsh letter to the Minister of Urban Affairs, in Saskatoon 
City Council on Monday, yesterday in Regina City Council — 
will the government consider the motion that Regina City Council 
introduced yesterday that . . . meetings of the municipal law 
committee of this legislature be convened as soon as possible to 
hear from the public . . . on this dictatorial Bill — that’s not their 
words, my words about the dictatorial Bill — but to hear 
representations from the public on this Bill? 
 
My question to you is: will you be prepared to order such a 
committee of this House, or a variation of it? We’re prepared to 
co-operate right away. We’re prepared to give you all the 
necessary leave of motions to contribute our members. Will you 
consent to public hearings from everybody in Saskatchewan 
who’s concerned about the ward Bill and Sunday shopping, in 
order to give the public a chance to be heard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on the question of store 
hours, there have been more consultations go on than you could 
shake a stick at. As I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, this is not an 
easy one to answer. It has been fixed, as it were, more than once 
before. Both fixes were found wanting. Both of them, as I 
understand it, ended up in court, Mr. Speaker. So we are going to 
try another way. 
 
As it relates to the ward system, we have again consulted broadly. 
And while there is no unanimous agreement on either of these 
questions, we have an obligation, Mr. Speaker, as government, to 
lead, and lead we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the short answer to your question is no, we will not strike the 
committee on municipal law. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. Needless to say, Mr. Deputy Premier, this is a 
disappointing response. 
 
Speaking now specifically to the ward system abolition aspect of 
this Bill, quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Premier, this side can find no 
responsible organization in support of  

what you’re trying to do. SUMA’s letter to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs; the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix headline, “City pleads for 
retention of ward system” — pleads; the Regina letters; the 
Saskatoon letters on the ward system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, my question to you is this: has this 
government so grown out of touch with the wishes of the ordinary 
people; have you decided on such a course of action; have you 
become so arrogant and fixed in your ways that nothing can be 
said or done to convince you that this is not what the people or the 
responsible organizations want? Will you not listen to these cities 
and the people and do away with this ward abolition legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I want to talk about arrogance and 
high-handedness for a minute, Mr. Speaker, because I think it was 
in that spirit that the ward system was imposed on the people of 
Saskatchewan in the first place, and imposed in the face of 
plebiscites in the major centres that were absolutely against such a 
form of local government. 
 
We have said, Mr. Speaker, that the modified ward system is 
eminently reasonable and it gives the people a choice, and we 
believe that that’s reasonable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As it relates to the store hours, Mr. Speaker, I wish members 
opposite, I wish members opposite would decide where they really 
are on this because they have one line in rural Saskatchewan and 
another line in urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I find that 
quite confusing I don’t know, and I listen to these guys every day, 
I don’t know how the rest of the people in Saskatchewan would 
find that particular approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to ask 
another question on this because my colleagues have important 
questions on the Sunday hours issue, but I feel obligated, Mr. 
Speaker, with your consent, to ask a new question of the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
As a very preliminary remark, Mr. Deputy Premier, if the 
argument is that the imposition of the ward system in ’76 was 
wrong, and it may very well have been, nevertheless there was a 
vote subsequently which ratified it, but if the argument was it was 
wrong in ’76, surely it is not your government’s argument that it is 
right today to do that which you accuse us of doing wrongly in 
’76. If it was wrong then, it’s wrong today. 
 
And my question to you therefore, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, is simply this: the plebiscite system has supported the 
ward mechanism of electing our councillors in the cities; that is 
popular consent; that is the wish of the public; every responsible 
organization supports that. Mr. Deputy Premier, will you please 
get down off the high horse the government is in on this position? 
Frankly, I think it is the position of the Minister of Urban Affairs 
who so personally dug in on this and his personal reputation on the 
line, will you back down . . . 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2371 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Will you back down; will you get a committee 
meeting of the cabinet, or the cabinet, together and tell this 
minister that his personal goals simply don’t override the interests 
of the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, my personal reputation and 
goals have very little to do with this matter. I have said at the 
outset that my biggest concern is and always has been for the 
taxpayers of this province. And if we can give a more efficient 
government to the urban centres to deal with, we will. 
 
And they’re talking like we’re taking away the ward system 
totally. It’s a modified ward system. They know that. We believe 
that the taxpayers of the urban centres will now have the best of 
two worlds, Mr. Speaker. They will have their ward representation 
and they will have the democratic right to now elect the entire 
council, which they’ve never had before. They’ve elected one out 
of 10. Now each and every taxpayer will be allowed the privilege 
of electing six out of 10, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to say that there is no support, and the member from 
Saskatoon, you know . . . articles in the paper, “Saskatonians split 
on the ward changes”, articles in the Prince Albert Daily Herald 
supporting the move — so to say that there is no support is not 
entirely fact, Mr. Speaker. We are doing what we believe is best 
and it will proceed. 
 

Sunday Shopping  
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. my question is to 
the Deputy Premier because it’s pretty clear that this Minister of 
the Urban Affairs is dug in on his position, and there’s no sense 
asking him any more questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Premier, the coalition against 
open Sunday shopping has experienced a ground swell of support 
against this Bill, which will cause Sunday opening. It’s even had 
to hire extra staff to handle all of the responses that it’s had. 
 
The responses are coming from business people, from local 
government officials, church people, and most of it is coming 
from rural Saskatchewan. In fact, about the only ones that don’t 
support that coalition are members on that side of the House. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, why don’t you tell that 
Minister of Urban Affairs to get on the inside of what’s happening 
and how Saskatchewan people are feeling and support a common 
day of rest? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the member 
from Prince Albert-Duck Lake asked that question because I have 
in front of me a clipping from the  

Prince Albert Daily Herald, where Prince Albert has been given 
what it wants by the provincial government in the store hours 
question — freedom to control its own matters. And it goes on 
quite lengthily. And it ends up with: 
 

Now is the time for our local government to take up this 
local control and use it in a manner which represents the best 
interests of their own community. Certainly this is a heavy 
kind of a responsibility, but the kind of responsibility elected 
officials should be happy to shoulder, or should not be 
elected officials. 

 
And I didn’t say that; that’s what the editorials are coming out of 
the member’s home town. 
 
Now with regard to the issue of shopping itself, and as I consult 
with SUMA — and I just came back from an interesting SUMA 
meeting at Macklin, and we can talk about that, but it would take a 
rather lengthy response, and I’m not here to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
But I can tell you this: it’s interesting that the members opposite, 
the NDP, say one thing in rural Saskatchewan, while here in the 
urban centres they refuse to say that they’re going to be closing in 
Regina, for instance, Superstore and Bi-Rite Drugs. Now maybe 
one of the members opposite that does his shopping in Superstore 
is in there explaining to the owners and the workers that it’s their 
intention to close down and put them out of work — I don’t know 
what they’re doing — but they don’t tell that to the people of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs, Mr. Speaker. I have never seen a display of arrogance like 
this in my life, and if you want to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, if you’re interested in the 
feelings of the business people in Prince Albert, it’s an indication 
to me from them that you’re nothing but arrogant, and that you’ve 
got not their interests in mind, only your own personal goals and 
your own vendettas. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that the 
business people, that the people in rural Saskatchewan, that the 
working people, and, I would suggest to you, the church people 
and the vast majority of the people in Saskatchewan strongly and 
vehemently oppose your vendetta against whatever it is you’ve got 
to keep the stores open on Sunday, I want to ask you: will you 
stand up in this House and indicate to the people of this province 
that you’re willing to pull this Bill that will destroy the ward 
system and can destroy the fabric of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I can refer to a plebiscite in 
Regina a year ago where the people of Regina have clearly 
indicated that they would like to continue shopping at Bi-Rite 
Drugs; they would like to continue shopping at Superstore. Now if 
the NDP wants to close the Superstore and the Bi-Rites of this 
world, why don’t they say that? 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2372 
 

We are providing, and I’ve met with the coalition of Sunday 
shopping, those folks that want to close, and I told them that now 
if they want to close in their local municipalities because of the 
make-up and the fabric of Saskatchewan, they have every 
opportunity to do that. 
 
And all they have to do is talk to their municipal officials. And if 
the local municipal officials, the local municipality wanted to fine 
their convenience store because Bi-Rite Drugs doesn’t happen to 
be located in Melville or in some other smaller centre . . . 
 
They’ve obviously got convenience stores that fit their needs and 
their habits. And I’ll refer to Macklin, Saskatchewan, where I was 
— a vibrant community, Mr. Speaker, 1,200 people, near the 
Alberta border. Not only are they not concerned with Sunday 
shopping — I was there on Monday — their whole town was 
closed tight on Monday as well, and they didn’t care about that. 
 
They asked me, as a matter of fact, can we retain our own tradition 
and our own flavour? I said, certainly, the legislation provides you 
with the opportunity to close the same two days if you like. They 
said, fine; well then, what’s the problem? I said, I don’t know 
what the problem is because in Regina, clearly the consumers, our 
voters, have said what they would like. And what they would like 
to do is be able to shop on Sundays because there are a lot of 
families now, Mr. Speaker, where moms and dads work. And 
Sunday can be a convenient family day as well where the kids go 
out and look around and talk to the people that are there, pick out 
their groceries, help mom, help dad, and do whatever they want to 
do later. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that for them not to admit that that’s 
what they want to do, they should freely admit that they want to 
close Superstore. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, get your head out of the sand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — On May 4 the coalition of business people 
asked to meet with the Premier, who refused to meet them. He 
sent them to you, and that was the same day that you introduced 
the legislation that will allow Sunday opening. 
 
Mr. Minister, don’t you understand what’s happening in small 
town Saskatchewan. This is going to mean Sunday opening in the 
bigger centres, which is going to mean a polarization of business, 
which is going to mean that there are going to be a lot of small 
businesses in rural Saskatchewan affected. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that I speak with people in 
rural Saskatchewan, small-business people who are afraid of this 
legislation because they know it’s going to run them out of 
business. And I’m asking you again to do what’s right. Pull this 
legislation and allow some time for consultation; allow the people 
to tell you what they want you to do. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I, in my former portfolio as 
minister of Tourism and Small Business, I had the distinct 
pleasure of travelling the province, the breadth and depth of it. I 
talked to perhaps almost the majority of the business community. 
And it’s really interesting as you get into discussion with these 
people and if you understand the business community, you know, 
they understand what competition is all about and what freedom is 
all about and what choice is all about, and they enjoy and respect 
all of that. 
 
Now in this new portfolio I visit with the urban municipalities, and 
it’s also interesting. And we haven’t just come up with this 
automatically. We have tried before to do our legislation, and it 
didn’t work. There’s always challenges. So getting back to the 
question of protecting small town Saskatchewan, I think it’s fair to 
say that this party and this government represent small town 
Saskatchewan and is interested in their protection. 
 
Again in Macklin, right next to the Alberta border, Mr. Speaker, 
where Alberta and B.C. have had this legislation now for several 
years — and ours is similar — I asked the merchants at Macklin: I 
said, when Alberta went into this and are open on Sundays, did it 
force you to open? And they said, it not only didn’t force us to 
open on Sundays, we still don’t have to open on Mondays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no way that there will be a domino effect in 
the province of Saskatchewan by virtue of the make-up of our 
province. We have miles and miles and miles between our 
municipalities. It’s not like Ontario, where one municipality 
bordering on another has millions of people and it’s separated by 
one highway. 
 

Rental of Highways Facility in Rosetown  
  

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Highways, and it is simply this: can you confirm, Mr. 
Minister, that your department rents a new Highways building in 
the town of Rosetown from a private developer, this despite the 
fact that the Department of Highways has an existing building 
there that is now standing empty, and that building is the same 
size, roughly, as the new building. And can you confirm that the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan are paying to West Central 
Developments Ltd. some $320,000 a year for this building? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I cannot confirm 
nor deny the specifics of the amounts of money that we pay to rent 
a first-class facility in Rosetown, Saskatchewan. What I can 
confirm, Mr. Speaker, is that one of the first tasks I had upon my 
appointment as Minister of Highways and Transportation about 
two and a half years ago was to travel to the town of Rosetown, 
with a very large crowd in attendance, and cut the ribbon for a 
first-class highways facility in Rosetown. I can also tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I had the pleasure of viewing the old facility. 
 
Now the member opposite brings this up as a burning and a 
pressing issue. I would say, Mr. Speaker, ask the  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2373 
 

residents of Rosetown and area if they did not feel that a new 
building in Rosetown was very much needed. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d love to bring back pictures of the old decrepit building in 
Rosetown for all members to see. I will indeed bring back to the 
member — I will write you a letter sending you the specific details 
of how much we pay for the new building, but let’s ask the 
residents of Rosetown if that’s an issue. 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister can 
neither confirm nor deny the amount of money, but he’ll find it on 
page 477 of Public Accounts this year to West Central 
Development Ltd. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — The only ribbon that this government has cut is the 
ribbon to patronage of PC hacks and friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, could you confirm that the owner of 
West Central Developments is one Doug Friend, a personal friend 
of the Minister of the Environment and a long-time Progressive 
Conservative Party worker; and can you further confirm that Mr. 
Friend has moved to Kelowna on the money that you are paying to 
rent his building in Rosetown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think for those 
people — and there are many of them who know the Minister of 
Environment — I would say the Minister of Environment has a 
great number of friends. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members opposite, and I include all of them, are not ones to talk 
about building buildings in the lap of luxury. 
 
And I remember, Mr. Speaker, campaigning in 1982 on some of 
the grand and glorious buildings that those people, those people 
built in the cities of Saskatchewan — the Sturdy Stone super store 
building in Saskatoon, with a bathtub in it, with a luxurious 
bathtub in it; the golden arches of the SGI Building here in 
downtown Regina. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I invite the public of Saskatchewan to 
go into rural Saskatchewan and have a look at that much-needed 
facility in Rosetown, Rosetown, Saskatchewan, rural 
Saskatchewan, decentralization of some of these facilities, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’ll guarantee you that the people of Rosetown and 
area look to pride at that new Highways depot in the town of 
Rosetown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The issue here is one 
of patronage and favouritism; it’s not what happened in ’82 or 
before. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this yet another example of your government’s 
famous business acumen? You allow a building to sit idle while 
the taxpayers of this province are shelling out nearly $1,000 each 
and every day for another  

building to replace the one that now sits empty. Meanwhile, a 
friend of the Progressive Conservative Party is reaping in money 
for that building. Is that how your business-like approach to 
government works? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I very sincerely would 
invite the member opposite to travel to Rosetown to see this 
building. I would invite the member opposite to have a look at the 
old building. If the member opposite feels that the price that we 
are paying for the rental of that building is excessive, I’ll certainly 
examine it, but I don’t believe that to be the case. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat amazed that the pressing issue 
of the day is a new Highways depot in Rosetown that’s two and a 
half years old. And, Mr. Speaker, especially in light of the record 
of the NDP Party, and I will quickly recap again, Mr. Speaker: the 
golden gates of the SGI Building here in Regina, the Sturdy Stone 
Building in Saskatoon, the fact that members opposite 
concentrated, in their years in government, on building new liquor 
boards stores throughout the province, but yet have a moratorium 
on nursing homes. Is that fair, Mr. Speaker? Is that right? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Removal of Members of Legal Aid Commission  
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I point out to 
the minister opposite that the pressing issue of the day is 
corruption in the Government of Saskatchewan. That’s what the 
pressing issue of the day is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — My question is to the Minister of Social Services. 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that you recently fire two members 
of the Legal Aid Commission, Greg Whelan of Saskatoon, and 
Gus Louison of Prince Albert, despite the fact that Mr. Whelan’s 
term as commissioner will run until next April, and Mr. Louison’s 
until next June? 
 
And will you tell this House, Mr. Minister, how it is that you can 
fire commissioners appointed to the Legal Aid Commission, not 
appointed by the government, but appointed by local advisory 
boards? Mr. Minister, how do you justify that kind of action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, members of the Legal Aid 
Commission are not hired, they cannot be bought, and they cannot 
be fired. They are appointed. 
 
And we decided that these two individuals were on an 
appointment situation that was indefinite, and that while other 
people are rotated from time to time, that it was time for these two 
people to be rotated and new people appointed. 
 
Two new people have been appointed — a Saskatoon lawyer and 
a native woman who happens to reside in my  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2374 
 

constituency. I can tell you that she is a leader of her community, 
she is an acting band manager, she is a leader among the native 
community and will represent treaty Indians well in 
Saskatchewan. I do not apologize for the appointment of a 
Saskatoon lawyer, because you have to have some legal expertise 
on that commission. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you are 
fully aware, you and I are both aware that your action here is 
contrary to the Act. But let’s talk about appointments for a 
moment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that your government has 
appointed or will appoint one Don Morgan of Saskatoon to the 
long-vacant position of Legal Aid Commission, the same Don 
Morgan, Mr. Minister, who ran the PC campaign in the Saskatoon 
Eastview by-election, the same Eastview by-election, Mr. 
Minister, in which the PC Party was so soundly rejected by the 
people of that riding that you lost your deposit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, will you confirm that Don Morgan is 
to be new chairman of the Legal Aid Commission, and will you 
tell this House what his salaries and benefits will be? Will you 
answer those questions, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it is true that the 
commission has been without a chairperson for some time now. I 
don’t know what the salary of the new chairperson will be. I will 
look it up, and it will be in the range of the former chairperson 
who was a civil servant. 
 
And it is also no secret that we should have more Indian 
representation on that commission. I do not apologize for a 
woman of Indian ancestry living on an Indian reserve in my 
constituency being appointed to this commission. She is a 
graduate of Peacock high school in Moose Jaw, has her grade 12, 
is a mother, a grandmother, is a band leader, has been elected a 
band councillor in her own reserve in my constituency. I knew this 
woman well, and I felt that this particular woman was well 
qualified for the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER  
  

Ruling on a Point of Order  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Prior to government orders, I would like to take 
this opportunity to respond to a point of order which was raised 
yesterday by the member for Regina North East in which he 
alleged that an unparliamentary remark had been by the member 
for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
I have reviewed the verbatim record and found on page 2237 of 
the June 20 issue, that the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden did 
indeed make an unparliamentary remark. And I would like to 
request the hon. member to withdraw and apologize. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t hear the 
ruling. I apologize for any remarks I did make, whatever the 
particular context was. But I apologize to the hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to make just one further . . . I’d just 
like to make one further comment, that the member in his point of 
order did indicate that the Chair is quick to call on members who 
make unparliamentary remarks, and I agree with that assessment. 
And I know that this happens from time to time, but hon. members 
will co-operate and we will try to continue to keep the level of 
debate at a high level, which I believe you have achieved. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act respecting the Control of Distribution 
and the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan  

 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It gives me 
pleasure to introduce the officials that will be assisting me in 
moving this Act through the House today. Seated directly beside 
me is the chairman of the liquor commission, Mr. Ted Urness; 
behind Ted is Miss Anne Thomson; beside Anne is Barrie Hicks; 
and seated to my right is the attorney from the Department of 
Justice, Mr. Tony Koshinsky. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
comments to make in respect to Bill 50, the new alcohol Act, The 
Alcohol Control Act. And I would like to say, in looking through 
the Bill, Mr. Minister, it appears to me that there are two things 
that you as minister are trying to accomplish. One is the 
franchising or the privatization, or piratization, I would refer to it, 
of the liquor outlets, the liquor stores; and the other is scrapping 
the old Act. 
 
And I agree, there had to be some revisions and it was time for 
some updates. But what you’ve done, Mr. Minister, is you’ve 
moved so much into regulation that there is no more 
accountability, or will be no more accountability, with this piece 
of legislation in this legislature. 
 
It’s not uncommon with the legislation that you’ve introduced that 
you move from statute to regulation where decisions can be made 
behind a closed cabinet door. We on this side of the House are 
used to that kind of legislation from this government. We’re not 
sure exactly why it is — if it’s just the fear of bringing some 
changes before this legislature and debating them before the 
people of this province, or if it’s merely a power grab. 
 
I would like to ask, Mr. Minister, as one of my questions why are 
you so hell-bent on moving everything into regulation? Is it the 
fear, or is it the power that you’re after? 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2375 
 

And I want to share with you, Mr. Minister, some of the concerns 
of people involved in the industry. And I would want you to know 
that there are a number of church groups who are concerned with 
the kinds of changes that you’re making or that the kinds of 
changes that you, through regulation, may make. And I refer to the 
accessibility of alcohol for our young people in this province. I 
refer as well to the number of outlets which at one time was in 
statute, the number of vendors, but is now in regulation and is 
open to your whims or whoever may be the minister of this 
particular department. 
 
And there are some other concerns as well. In terms of how 
franchising will affect retailing, there’s no indication in this Act 
that I can find as to whether there will be any control on 
advertising, whether the free enterprise system in retailing of 
spirits and wine will be in place and there will be price discounting 
and competition between the retailers. And I want to say that on 
behalf of a number of church groups and a number of people in 
this province who I’ve spoken to, there’s some concern. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Minister, that this new Act may not 
provide the kind of protection that our rural hoteliers need in this 
province. As you well know, there are many of them, a large 
percentage of them, in some great financial difficulty. And I don’t 
see in this Act any commitment in terms of the proportion of retail 
sales for off-sale beer that they will be allowed, or that because of 
regulation, they may get. I don’t see protection from competition 
to an industry that is having problems already. And I would 
suggest that a number of hotel people in this province are fearful 
in that same fashion. 
 
In terms of franchising or privatization, I don’t see anything in this 
Bill that will protect the taxpayer from patronage or give-aways. 
And I think you will agree with me that there have been, and 
probably will be again, jurisdictions where the franchises for 
liquor stores created an awful lot of corruption and an awful lot of 
patronage and an awful lot of graft. 
 
And I’m not suggesting, and I would hope that that would not be 
the case with the privatization of Saskatchewan liquor stores, that 
we would be looking at that kind of a situation. Because if your 
decision to privatize these liquor outlets is there, and I think you 
have a strong commitment to privatization as the minister of the 
department of privatization, I would ask, Mr. Minister, I guess is 
my first question, along with numbers of questions, and we’ll go 
through them as we go through the Act today — and I would like 
to ask, Mr. Minister, what in this Act will protect the taxpayers, 
the people of Saskatchewan from patronage hand-outs. What will 
protect them from getting an amount for those liquor outlets that is 
not in tune with what a market value might be? Could you explain, 
Mr. Minister, if there’s anything in here that will protect the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan from those particular things. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the member raises a number 
of points and I would respond to as many as I can recall. He raised 
a number of them at this time, and if he’d like to come back over 
them, that’s fine. 
 

Certainly he led off by talking about franchising and was trying to 
insinuate that perhaps the word franchising was opening the gate 
for massive public participation or privatization of liquor board 
stores. Really why the term franchising is being included in the 
new Act is that on advice of the Department of Justice, that the 
term really is the correct definition of what is taking place at this 
time in Saskatchewan, that really special vendors, are they called, 
would be more adequately named franchises, because that is 
exactly what they have, is a franchise to market beverage alcohol. 
 
He mentioned about the scrapping of the old Act. Certainly, and I 
think one can understand that the Act hadn’t been touched for 
about 65 years; therefore I think the very fact that many of the 
things will be adjusted and dealt with in regulation, is perhaps 
something that would be beneficial. Of course if people or the 
opposition was not supportive of a regulation, they have every 
right to debate that and ask for change of a regulation, and those 
avenues are open and they’re open within any Act. Pretty well any 
piece of legislation has a large number of regulations that 
accompany the Act. 
 
He was wondering if this was an attempt to hold power or I think 
he used the words, power or fear. I would say neither of those. I 
think it is an opportunity for whomever is the minister in charge of 
the liquor board, or whatever government may be in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board, to be able to have the vehicles to 
make the changes necessary as the society changes over the 
coming years. 
 
So I think really all the regulation does, and moving a number of 
things to regulation, is allow that flexibility that would be 
beneficial to bring about change in subsequent years, and we don’t 
know what those changes will necessarily have to be. And 
certainly, if the regulations that will be established are not ones 
that are supported, there’s the opportunity to certainly debate them 
and ask for a change in them. 
 
Regarding the hotels, certainly I think the rural hotels . . . I think 
the member opposite must admit that since coming into the 
position as chairman in charge, or minister in charge, we have 
instituted a hotels study, a rural hotels study, which has come 
about with a number of recommendations. And a good number of 
those recommendations — there was some long-term objectives 
and some short-term objectives — a good number of these have 
been implemented, and I deal a lot with a number of the hotels and 
the hotels association, and I think I’ve been well received, well 
received by the hotels association. In fact, we have had letters of 
support for the changes that have been brought about. 
 
So to try and indicate or to try and insinuate that there may be 
some attempt here to in some ways jeopardize the licences for 
off-sale that exist out there for rural hotels, I think is an 
exaggeration. I think the action taken by this government will 
indicate that we are in support of a viable rural hotel industry, that 
the rural hotel is important to small town Saskatchewan, and that 
there is no design or no intent within this Act to have a 
proliferation of off-sale licences that would somehow put the rural 
hotel  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2376 
 

industry into jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think I have three 
points from your response. Number one is in the definition of 
franchising. And I refer to subsection (g) in section 2 of the Act, 
and: 
 

“franchise” means a franchise for the sale of beverage 
alcohol granted by the board pursuant to section 105; 

 
Section 105 gives no definition, that I could find. Now perhaps 
you would want to explain to me what your definition of 
franchises are. Are they special vendors, alone, nothing else? Or 
are they publicly owned liquor stores soon to be privatized? Could 
you perhaps give me an explanation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well basically it is the renaming of the 
special vendors. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well as we go through the Act, Mr. 
Minister, then are you telling me that you have no intention or that 
this Act disallows you from selling the liquor stores? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This Act doesn’t have anything to do with 
the sale of liquor stores. I mean, liquor stores could have been sold 
five years ago, 10 years ago; they can be sold in the future, 
whether or not this Act ever passes. There is no connection at all 
between this Act and the selling of liquor stores. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Then can I ask you two things. Number 
one, is it your intention to privatize the existing liquor stores 
owned by the people of this province? And number two, how 
many of these franchises do you intend to allow in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well secondly . . . or first I will deal with 
the intention to privatize or sell liquor board stores. As I say, with 
or without the passage of this Act, that may be something that 
could be considered, or will be considered by the Department of 
Public Participation. I cannot give you a definitive answer at this 
point in time if it would be something that would come to fruition 
or not. 
 
I can tell you, as I travel the province as Minister of Public 
Participation, I have a number of people discussing this and asking 
if it is something that we would consider. As far as the number of 
special vendors or franchises, whatever we end up calling them, 
certainly we would be looking at perhaps some increase. I’m not 
saying, throwing it wide open; maybe a modest increase, as has 
happened in the past since they first started in the early 1960s, I 
believe. 
 
I think the Act, the present Act had been amended five times to 
increase the number, and certainly we will take a look at this. But I 
wouldn’t want you to in any ways interpret that that it’s going to 
be thrown wide open, as was the suggestion by the NDP task force 
in 1973, which I’m not sure if you’re aware of. But they 
recommended that there be additional appointments of special 
liquor vendors, if required, and that the number of appointments 
be the responsibility of the liquor board. So that task force  

was on record of saying yes, we can enlarge the number. I’m not 
saying that we will not; I would be very doubtful that it would be 
in any way thrown wide open. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m having a little 
difficulty in terms of not only numbers, but locations of franchises 
or vendors, because I can’t see anything in the Act that would 
prohibit any number, be it 200 or 500 or 1,000 retail outlets. I can 
see nothing in this Act that would protect the young people of this 
province from beer in every grocery store, or hard liquor for that 
matter. And if there is, you might correct me, but I don’t see that. 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, why you didn’t put a limit. 
 
It’s easy enough to come to this legislature and make a change to 
the Act. I mean, we sit perhaps twice a year, although under your 
administration, no one knows when we’re going to sit or for how 
long. But it’s easy enough to make amendments to what is in 
statute. But you’ve moved it to regulation, which brings me to my 
second point of your response. 
 
You indicated that moving everything out of statute into regulation 
gives you flexibility, and I agree that it does give you flexibility. 
But what I don’t agree with is that that’s the way you govern, 
because under this system the ministers and your cabinet should 
be responsible to this legislature, who in turn are responsible to the 
people of the province. And I would suggest, far better 
government would come out of it if you were making the 
decisions, not behind closed doors, but here in this legislature 
where it should be. 
 
I told you before and indicated that we felt that there should have 
been some changes and there perhaps was a new need for a liquor 
Act, and there’s no disagreement. But what you’ve done is taken 
146 pages of the legislation; you’ve stripped it down to 57 pages, 
which left us with a bare-bones Act here. 
 
And the Act doesn’t mean an awful lot any more because you’ve 
moved everything into regulation so that you can make the kinds 
of decisions as to how many liquor outlets there are in this 
province, so that you can make the decision behind closed doors 
as to who retails alcohol in this province. That’s what you’ve 
done. And that’s why I say, although you’ve given yourself 
flexibility, what you’ve also done is removed accountability. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that that’s what the British 
democratic system is all about, or should be all about, and that’s 
what your political party should be about, and that’s what the 
legislation that you introduced in this House should be about. But 
you haven’t done that. You’ve gone just the opposite way, moved 
out of statute into regulation, things that should be around for us to 
discuss in this Chamber. 
 
So it appears to me, clearly, Mr. Minister, that we’ll be disagreeing 
on what you call flexibility. I call it non-accountability as opposed 
to flexibility. And if there are changes to be made, why would you 
fear making those changes in this legislature? Why do you have to 
do everything around a cabinet table where it’s not open to public 
scrutiny? 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2377 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it’s interesting to hear the member 
opposite ask about corner stores and grocery stores, and I can 
certainly assure you that there is no intention of expanding into 
that market. 
 
But again, just for his clarification and for those who may be 
watching this passage of this Bill, I go back to the same study of 
1973, headed by one Dr. Don Faris, with members from the 
present legislature from Saskatoon being on the committee, and 
their recommendations were the following: that the NDP 
government recommend that all licensed beverage rooms, cocktail 
lounges, and dining rooms be allowed off-sale of wine and spirits. 
They also recommended that all independent grocers be allowed 
to sell low alcohol wine and beer. 
 
So I think there’s a little bit of contradiction in what you’re saying, 
and perhaps it would have been well to look at your own report 
before you start trying to accuse this ministry of wanting to put 
wine and beer in corner stores. 
 
You also were insisting or saying there should be a number on the 
number of special vendors, and I would again refer to the report of 
January ’83, chaired by Mr. Don Faris, MLA for Arm River, and 
its section 12 had to deal with special liquor vendors. It says, and I 
quote: 
 

There are still many areas in the province that do not have 
the services of either a government operated liquor store or a 
special liquor vendor. Recommendation that there be 
additional appointments of liquor vendors if required, and 
that the number of appointments be the responsibility of the 
Liquor Board. 

 
No mention of a number, no mention at all. However this 
gentleman today seems to feel that there should be a limit on them, 
when his own report of his own party suggested that there be the 
sale of wine and beer in corner stores and grocery stores, and that 
there be the flexibility to allow additional number of special 
vendors as required in the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Act . . . he seems to have some 
concern about regulation. I just stress to the members here, and to 
other people in this province, that any piece of legislation that is 
passed always has a large number of accompanying 
recommendations. And certainly that will be the situation with the 
new liquor Act. The recommendations, whether they be in an 
agriculture Act, in an education Act, in a health Act, or in a liquor 
Act, or whatever it may well be, are certainly subject to scrutiny 
and subject to discussion and change if the regulation is something 
that is not in the best interests of the people of the province. 
 
So to think that there is some plan to do things in secret is simply 
not correct. I mean it’s simply the type of thing that takes place. 
Legislation encompassing the main ideas of the Act are debated 
and passed in this Assembly; amendments can be brought 
forward, and then flowing from that, regulations are written. And 
those regulations are out there for public scrutiny, are out there for 
debate — further debate, further change in development, as we 
move along in our society. 
 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s go through the 
process. If you want to go back to the 1970s, which I would rather 
not; I would rather deal with what we’re dealing with now and this 
legislation that you’ve introduced, because I wasn’t around then. 
Well I would assume you were, unfortunately. But let’s go back 
through the process, a task force to bring in recommendations after 
listening to the people. Then a government introduces a liquor Act 
which puts in statute the rules by which liquor will be consumed 
and sold. 
 
(1500) 
 
So we’ve got you to that step. Now let’s look at what you’ve done. 
What you’ve done is without a task force — and I will agree that 
you’ve been consulting with some people around the province — 
but what you do is you get recommendations from wherever you 
got the, you introduce them to an Act that gives no accountability 
to this legislature but puts them directly into the hands of your 
cabinet. 
 
And I mean, that’s the difference, because under the old Act there 
were some rules that people understood, and they were there when 
the Act was introduced. And it wasn’t to the whim of you or some 
other cabinet minister to make the decision as to what happens to 
the industry or the consumers or the people that are affected by 
that industry. 
 
And I take you to section 28 under the powers, and it says, just to 
make it in short terms, that the cabinet can, under the 
recommendation of the board: 
 

lease to another person any land or buildings, or purchase, 
lease, or sell, or otherwise dispose of furnishings and 
equipment no longer required for the purposes of this Act. 

 
What that tells me is that the cabinet can unload whatever assets 
they want without coming back: 
 

(g) determine the places in which its stores, franchises and 
warehouses are to be established . . . 

 
So what does that tell me? It determines the places, the franchises, 
the warehouses for “. . . the general control, management and 
supervision of those stores and warehouses in Saskatchewan.” 
Well I’m not clear yet. Does this mean Superstore or does it mean 
Safeway? Because we on this side of the House don’t know, and 
maybe you can clarify that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly there’s no intent to have 
Superstore or anything of that nature. I would just quote from you 
so that you are clear, because there seems to be some confusion. 
And I’m reading from October 1983, L-18 of the old Act, section 
11: 
 
The board shall: 
 

(g) (I’m just going to cite one for example, and this from the 
old Act) purchase or lease any building or land required 
for the operation of  

  



  
June 22,1988  

2378 
 

this Act or construct any building so required and shall 
furnish and equip any building so required and may alter 
and renovate such building in such manner as the board 
deems necessary or advisable, provided that no such 
building or land shall be purchased and no such building 
constructed without the approval of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. 

 
So what you’re talking about is exactly the same in the new Act as 
it was in the old Act. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you can quote 
selectively, or do as you wish, but what I’m asking you is, then: 
have you, through regulation — I guess maybe that’s the way to 
ask it — through regulation, can you, sitting around a cabinet 
table, decide any place that alcohol can be retailed in this 
province? And can you, sitting around a cabinet table, decide how 
many retail outlets we’re going to have? And as well, can you 
decide who is going to own them? Can you explain that to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think in the number of outlets and so 
on, if you have read the Act and looked at the emphasis in the new 
Act on local control, I think there is a great deal more emphasis on 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, there is — a lot more 
emphasis on local control as to the number of outlets, as to special 
occasion permits, than there was under the old Act. 
 
So that one of the emphases, and if you read it and understand it, is 
that there is a lot more emphasis on communities having a say as 
to who should have the licences to provide alcohol and also when 
and how many special occasions. So that’s . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, that’s absolutely correct. Obviously you don’t 
understand. And you can see that there’s a lot more emphasis on 
local community control. 
 
You may oppose that. It wouldn’t surprise me a bit if you opposed 
that, because it’s rather foreign to your philosophy to let people at 
the local level decide things that impact upon their lives, but 
however, that is the intent of this Act. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me take you back to 
my question. My question is: can you as minister make the 
decision as to who does the retailing in an area; can you, as 
minister, decide how many areas that are going to be served by 
franchises, or whatever it is? I haven’t had an answer to those 
questions, and I’m going to sit down and wait for your response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well there’s really no change because at this 
point in time, let’s take an example of an existing business that is 
sold and the new person doesn’t want to have a special vendor. 
Someone makes application; there’s an investigation of the 
application by the Liquor Licensing Commission. A 
recommendation comes forward which comes to cabinet and is 
approved and signed, and that person does have that licence to 
become a special vendor. So there’s no difference in the power. 
That is there at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you seem to be stuck  

on special vendors, but I don’t see that referred to. Why didn’t you 
refer to it in this Act as a special vendor, because all through 
sections 102, 105 and 106 you keep talking about franchises. In 
other words, what that says to me is privatization of liquor stores 
and privately owned and operated liquor stores. 
 
Well, why did you change the term from special vendors to 
franchise? Perhaps you can . . . and explain to me what a franchise 
means in your eyes, because we don’t know on this side of the 
House, and I don’t believe the people of the province know. 
Maybe you can explain that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let me explain to you once again that if it is 
the decision to sell liquor stores, that can take place without this 
Act or with this Act. It could have taken place five years ago, ten 
years ago; it can take place five years in the future, whether or not 
this Act is ever passed. You seem to have a hang-up or a great 
concern about the word franchise. 
 
Now a franchise, as the legal people indicate to me, best describes 
the arrangement that exists between the Liquor Board and what we 
have called “special vendors.” Now there may be something that 
you like about the word special vendor, I don’t know. And if 
there’s something that you want to suggest other than a franchise, 
suggest it. But to try and indicate that franchise is some way 
guising the movement to sell a liquor store, there’s no connection 
at all. Because whether we bring in the word franchise, we call it a 
special agent, call it a special vendor, call it something else, has no 
connection whatsoever. If the decision is made, or was made 
under the old Act, you can go ahead and you can sell these — the 
government assets; you can certainly sell them with or without the 
passage of this Act. 
 
So once again, there is no connection, no connection at all 
between the word franchise and the possibility to sell an existing 
liquor store. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well then, Mr. Minister, perhaps you would 
accept a recommendation to return to the term “special vendor.” 
Would you accept that today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would like to know what you see is better 
in the term. You know, McDonald’s, car dealerships, businesses 
all over — where they give that ability to sell, to sell their product, 
to the terminology that I best understand are called franchises. 
You buy a franchise. 
 
I had the Business Opportunities show last year when minister of 
small business and Tourism . . . we had some 6,000 people there, 
Saskatchewan people, that came to buy franchises. They wanted to 
buy a franchise, whether it be a doughnut shop or whether it be a 
pizza shop or whether it be hair-styling, whatever it was, they all 
understood that term franchise; they knew what they were 
purchasing. 
 
Now I believe that this is more adequately describing the action 
that takes place with someone who, in the past, was called a 
special vendor. I don’t know why we use that term special vendor. 
I can understand the “vendor,” but I don’t know what’s special 
about it. You know, a franchise  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2379 
 

is easily understood, and I think it’s a common term used in our 
society, and that’s why we brought it in, in the new Act. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me tell you first of 
all, you’re dealing with alcohol; you’re not dealing with 
hamburgers, and you’re not selling hamburgers here. You’re 
dealing with an item that deeply affects a lot of communities and a 
lot of young people and older people alike. And I want to tell you 
that you’re not selling hamburgers. 
 
And through this whole Act, when you read it, what it tells me is 
that you as a government want to sell franchises to retail alcohol 
the same as McDonald’s want to sell franchises to sell 
hamburgers. And I mean, McDonald’s might have a hamburger 
store on every corner, and I’m asking you: is that what you want 
to see with retail liquor outlets in this province? 
 
And you still haven’t answered my question: is there any limit to 
the number of outlets or franchises that you can allow? 
 
And I ask you another question: is it your intent to privatize the 
liquor stores in this province? because I haven’t had an answer to 
that either. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I did answer that about 10 minutes ago. 
I told you that as I travelled the province in public participation, 
there are a number of people that say, would you, Mr. Minister, 
look at the possibilities of looking at — is it feasible to privatize 
and to sell liquor stores? And I have said, and I’ve said openly, 
that yes, we are exploring that. But that doesn’t mean it’s going to 
be done. 
 
People are wanting to know: if it were, how would it take place? It 
has to be at arm’s length and free, open bids, and all of these 
things. 
 
But the word franchise has no connection to that. I think the word 
franchise describes the relationship between the Liquor Board and 
those authorized to sell their products, and I think it’s a current 
terminology. And certainly it is not as you indicate, that perhaps 
one is looking at going around and selling a bunch of franchises. 
Not at all. And I use only McDonald’s as an example to show you 
that that is a very popular franchise. 
 
Now we can spend more time in this House deciding which word 
it should be, but I believe that franchise better describes the 
relationship between what was called a special vendor and the 
liquor board store. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you haven’t given the 
people of this province any guarantee, because you haven’t 
answered the question in terms of limiting numbers, or a 
willingness to limit numbers; you’ve given no commitment in 
terms of how you’re going unload existing liquor stores if you 
privatize them; you refer to liquor outlets as franchises, like 
hamburger stands. And that’s what scares the people of this 
province, and that’s what’s scary about this legislation, because 
you’ve got so much in regulation and nothing in statute 
accountable to this legislature. And that’s the fear. And that’s the 
fear with  

privatization because there’s fear that as you go on your little 
move to privatize them, it’s nothing but a set-up for some of your 
friends, a very lucrative industry. 
 
And you haven’t answered as well: are you going to be allowing 
price competition with these franchises? Are you going to be 
allowing advertising? And is there anything in this Act that would 
stop you from doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly there’s a certain amount of 
advertising allowed at this time. There’s advertising within some 
of the liquor board stores. There’s advertising within beverage 
rooms. Price wars and so on, we’re not looking at allowing that or 
bringing that type of thing in. 
 
And as far as the sale of liquor board stores, if that did come 
about, as I said to you previously, it would be done at arm’s 
length, it would be done with open tender proposals and calls, and 
certainly there would be some people who would be able to get 
them. But to insinuate that somehow it would be friends of mine is 
simply erroneous and not true. The bidding process would be one 
in which all people of Saskatchewan who were interested would 
be able to participate. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, so you’re giving us a 
guarantee of open, honest tendering, unlike what’s been going on 
in this province since 1982. And you’re telling me if there are any 
franchises or any sale of any liquor stores — is that the 
commitment you’re giving me in this House today? — that the 
tenders will be advertised well beforehand; they will be publicly 
opened; and the tenders will . . . the people who are tendering will 
be able to be there and watch those bids open; and that there will 
be no back room dealing before those tenders are opened? 
 
(1515) 
 
Because I’ll tell you, that hasn’t happened in a lot of government 
contracts in this province. And all I’ve got to do is talk to some of 
the business people in Prince Albert in the plumbing industry and 
in the electrical industry, in the construction industry, who know 
full well that you tend to favour your PC friends. 
 
And that’s the concern we have here, that you’re willing to unload 
public assets to friends of the PC Party behind closed doors, and in 
a lot of cases for a lot less than what the assets were probably 
worth. And that’s the concern, that’s the concern we have with 
franchising or privatization or whatever you care to call it. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Minister, your government has less and less 
credibility every time you make a move and introduce this kind of 
legislation before the people of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can’t be trusted. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Because you can’t be trusted. The Premier, 
the cabinet, and your back-benchers can’t be trusted. Your 
credibility is slipping down a slippery old hill, and this is just 
another indication that you’re setting it up to fill the pockets of 
your friends. 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2380 
 

Mr. Minister, you’re giving us a guarantee today that there will be 
fair, open tendering with no back-room dealing, and that these 
liquor stores aren’t going to fall into the hands of your friends. I 
believe I understand that, and I’d like you to give me a yes or no 
answer on that. 
 
You’re giving me . . . you’re leading me to believe that through 
privatization or franchising that there won’t be any competition, 
price-wise, that they won’t be competing for market share. Are 
you telling me that again? And I’d like a yes or no on that. 
 
And are you telling me that the franchises will not be allowed to 
do any advertising outside of perhaps inside advertising in their 
stores as is the case in the liquor stores right now? Is that what 
you’re telling me, that there won’t be a competition for market 
share? 
 
Because I have a hard time to believe that business men in this 
province who are going to invest in a liquor store aren’t going to 
be competing for market share. I have a hard time to believe that 
because you see, Mr. Minister, I’ve been in business for 20 years, 
and I understand that to stay in business you’ve got to keep your 
share of market. And if you want to make more money, you go 
after a bigger market share. 
 
And I’m asking you: are you leading us to believe that that isn’t 
going to happen through privatization of these liquor stores? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll go back to my earlier statement for the 
member again. Certainly there is no detailed plan as to whether 
there would be sale of liquor board stores; no detailed plan as to 
how that would take place, if it were to take place. I’ve said that in 
travelling the province. There are people saying, would you 
investigate and look at that? And it is at a very preliminary stage. I 
can give you the assurance that if there was any type of sale or 
tendering, it would be done in the most fair manner possible. 
 
And as far as advertising, again I refer you to the Act . . . well I’ll 
refer you to the Act, if you would give me the attention, to indicate 
to you what might help expedite some of the . . . expedite the 
discussion here. 
 
Under section 137, page 43, section 1: 
 

No person shall, for the purpose of promoting the sale or 
consumption of beverage alcohol, make any representation 
to the public: 

 
(a) by means of a newspaper publication or a radio or 

television broadcast; or 
 
(b) by any other means; 
 
without the approval of the commission. 

 
And that’s in the new Act, so I think that covers off what you were 
concerned about. 
 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me carry you a little further in 
section 137, Mr. Minister. It ends off by saying, “without approval 
of the commission.” 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Maybe you don’t understand what the 
commission is. The commission is the regulatory body. It’s set up 
there, and it has to have the permission of the commission — there 
wouldn’t be any advertising that isn’t approved by the 
commission. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And who sets up the commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The commission is appointed. Mr. Urness is 
the chairman — a very popular choice, I should say. As I travelled 
the province of Saskatchewan, a very, very . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . He was appointed by myself, and a very, very 
popular . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If it is your intention to 
criticize, go right ahead, because I talked to a lot of people that are 
in the sale of beverage alcohol and they are very . . . they are very 
pleased with the selection of the chairman of the Liquor Board. 
 
If you want to go ahead and criticize, you please do that. But let 
me tell you, I would be careful if I were you, because it’s a very 
popular appointment. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, the point is not who you 
appointed or for what reason you appointed nor how popular your 
commissioner is. The question is: do you or do you not appoint 
him? And you indicated, I believe, that you do. He nods his head 
and says he did. What that tells me is then you, in the end result, 
have the power to allow or disallow advertising. Is that not the 
case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know if you understand how various 
commissions and boards are appointed. There’s the board 
appointed for the SaskPower; there’s one for SaskTel; there’s one 
for the Liquor Board; there’s one for the General Hospital. I mean, 
obviously you don’t understand the appointment of boards. 
 
Good people are searched out throughout this province and are 
appointed to these boards, take it very, very . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you can laugh; go right ahead and laugh at 
the people that are on the boards appointed to the major Crown 
corporations in this province, because I differ with you, and I 
differ strongly because I’ve dealt with many of those people. 
 
I spent five years in this province dealing with the people on the 
major base hospital boards, and you can laugh at them, and you 
can think that they’re puppets and so on, because I know that’s 
your attitude. But I can tell you that they’re a bunch of dedicated 
people, a bunch of people very, very proud of the mandate they’ve 
been given, and a bunch of people that are dedicated to make that 
aspect of the delivery of service in Saskatchewan, whether it be 
utility, whether it be a hospital, or whether it be the liquor 
commission, function well in the interest of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Now if you don’t agree with that, you stand up and 
you criticize and you ridicule all you want all day long, because 
I’ll stand here and I’ll defend the board appointments on the major 
corporations and on  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2381 
 

the hospital boards in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you made . . . after a question 
period and an answer that the Minister of Social Services gave 
today, you may not want to be talking about how you appoint 
commissions, because when the campaign manager for the 
candidate who lost his deposit in Saskatoon Eastview gets hired by 
the Minister of Social Services and he’s afraid to give the answer 
in this House, it tells me you’ve got a problem with how you 
appoint commissions. 
 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, is what we were talking 
about here was that the end result of this piece of legislation is that 
you have control over advertising, because it’s you who appoints 
the commission, and the commissioner is responsible to you, and 
that’s the chain of events, and the buck stops with the minister. 
There ain’t no more. That’s how it works, and you know that 
yourself. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, in terms of getting an answer out of you 
regarding the control of who sells alcohol in this province, and 
how many places we have that are going to be retailing, and what 
kind of protection the young people of this province have, I think 
we have absolutely no more answers than we did before we came 
and started this committee. And it’s unfortunate, because when 
you’ve taken all this power on your shoulders, you should at least 
answer some questions and tell us what direction you’re going. 
 
I want to spend a couple of minutes before we wrap up, Mr. 
Minister, talking about the rural hotels. And I’d like to know why 
you have eliminated the room . . . or the population ratios; why 
you’ve gotten rid of the guest room requirements; why you’ve 
removed the limit on the number of licences issued from the Act 
into the regulation where they can be changed at the whim of your 
government; what kind of guarantee have you given the 
Saskatchewan hotel association; and what kind of guarantee have 
you given those hoteliers who aren’t a member of that association 
that they won’t have yet more competition in their communities 
where they’re already struggling to maintain their livelihoods? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, going back to 
commissions and using his analogy, because I, as a cabinet 
minister, appoint the liquor commission, saying that I then control 
advertising is rather a long bow. Because if you take that and 
extrapolate it further, then what he is saying is when I was minister 
of Health and I appointed, with my cabinet colleagues, the hospital 
boards, then I controlled appendectomies and tonsillectomies and 
all the things in hospitals. Same kind of reasoning. I mean, does 
that make sense? It doesn’t to me — not at all. 
 
So I think this is a foolish exercise to say that I would control the 
advertising. I mean, anybody understands if you put a commission 
in place that that commission is there to run that function. So I 
mean, that is rather a silly analogy that you indicate. 
 

Getting back to the rural hotels, I think if you would look at the 
very fact that I brought in a rural hotel study which came in with a 
number of recommendations — short-term objectives and 
long-term ones — and you can talk to the hotels association, 
members and non-members, and they will indicate to you that a 
large number of those have been implemented. And I have 
indicated, and I have brought about changes, and the hoteliers will 
tell you that, that it’s benefiting their cash flow, and that there is no 
intention, there is no intention by this minister to have a 
proliferation of off-sale licences that would in any way hurt rural 
hotels. I’ve give that assurance. 
 
You said, what assurance have we given them? I’ve met with 
them many times. Their executive know that. So you also say, 
why did I not keep the necessity to have rooms? Well I really 
think that’s a retrograde step, because I think many of the hotels, 
as I understand, are having trouble with their liability insurance 
and so on, perhaps because of the fact that they have rooms The 
day of the rooms in the rural hotel, I think, in many cases has 
somewhat passed, and therefore it may be an advantage to 
hoteliers to not have it tied entirely to rooms. 
 
And I’ve explained this with their association, met it on many, 
many times — met with them many times. So that was the 
consultation. There are the reasons. And if you have more 
questions, please continue. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, then I ask why you 
wouldn’t have put those things in statute so that the hotel 
association had a guarantee, other than your word. I have to 
compliment you because I know that people in the hotel industry 
respect you, Mr. Minister, as a person. But I want to tell you that 
they don’t necessarily trust you because of the government that 
you’re sitting with. 
 
And I would tell you as well that a lot of hoteliers in this province 
would have far sooner have you put regulations in statute so that 
they’re guaranteed of some protection, because if you’re no longer 
the minister and another minister comes in that maybe wouldn’t 
agree with that hotel association, they’ve got no protection. But 
you’ve moved everything into regulation and they no longer have 
the protection, and that’s what the problem is. And I can’t 
understand why you wouldn’t understand that. 
 
Having sat in government for as many, many years as you have, 
and many more, I would suggest than members on that opposition 
should have sat, you should understand that you’re offering them 
less protection than what they had. And you may have a personal 
commitment that they aren’t going to face unbridled competition 
in rural Saskatchewan, but there is nothing in this Act that 
guarantees those small rural hotels that they’re not going to have 
wide-open competition. That, sir, is the problem. 
 
And that is the problem with this legislation. And that is the 
problem with putting as much as you have put into regulation as 
opposed to statute, because there is no long-term stability for that 
industry right now. And I don’t understand that you can’t 
understand that, after being in this legislature and dealing with as 
many pieces of legislation as you probably have. 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2382 
 

I don’t understand that you can’t understand that the small hotels 
in a lot of cases are the hub of their communities. And if they go, it 
may mean that those small towns are going to be dying. And they 
need some kind of protection in statute. They need more revenue; 
they don’t need more competition, and unless this Act will 
guarantee that, they don’t have any commitment. 
 
And they may get a commitment from you. They may have had a 
commitment in writing from you that they’re not going to be 
facing more competition. But you may not be the minister for 
ever, and there may a government in this legislature some day that 
doesn’t want hotels to exist, as some of your colleagues don’t. 
And one of your colleagues may, in fact, be the head of the liquor 
board and may not want to see unbridled competition as you 
would have allowed in here. And they may want to see six hotels 
in rural Saskatchewan, period, or none. 
 
And the hotel association, because you’ve moved everything into 
regulation, has absolutely no more protection. That’s the problem, 
Mr. Minister. And I ask you, don’t you understand that you don’t 
give them a long-term commitment by moving things to 
regulation? And these people have to plan their incomes and their 
businesses over a period of years, not over months. And don’t you 
understand what you’ve done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I certainly understand what I’ve done. 
I, as I said, brought in a rural hotel study that came with some 
recommendations that would help the viability of rural hotels — 
well accepted by the rural hoteliers. I think, if you’ve been talking 
to them, activities over the last four or five months have been very 
well supported by rural hotels, initiatives brought in by this 
government and this ministry. 
 
Certainly, as I said previously, there is no intention, no intention at 
all, to have proliferation of licences that would in any way affect 
their earnings and their operations. And furthermore, and 
furthermore, I have given the commitment to the hotels 
association that we would be consulting and working together as 
we establish the regulations pertaining to this Act. 
 
Now they have told me they support that. The only thing they told 
me they were a little worried about and that was — and Heaven 
forbid, and I don’t think anyone has to worry about it because it’ll 
never come about — but the only worry they did have was that if 
the member opposite ever became the minister, they were a little 
worried about that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, you’ve been consistently 
referring to the rural hotel study, and you know as well as I know 
that the basic thrust of that study was that the rural hoteliers should 
be garnering a bigger share of the tourist industry. And all the time 
you’re raising camp rates, you’re raising gas rates, the roads are 
going to pot in this province. You have to bring them here first. 
Initially those people have to be brought to this province by the 
business people. But I tell you, the rural hoteliers can’t do it with 
the study you gave them. And you know that as well as I know it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t believe that you feel moving all of  

this to regulation — I can’t believe that you feel moving all of 
these things to regulation are good for the industry. And I can’t 
believe that you can stand up here and say moving it into 
regulation gives them a long-term commitment so that they can 
plan their businesses. 
 
And I ask you: does this give them any kind of long-term 
commitment? If the hotel association feels — as you say they feel 
— fear if I was to become minister in charge of the Liquor Board, 
why wouldn’t you protect them from me? Why wouldn’t you put 
it in statute if I was to make some wild change that would affect 
their businesses or bankrupt them? Why would you leave it in 
regulation where some other elected official could damage, 
without coming to the legislature, the future of their businesses? 
Why wouldn’t you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think, as I said 
previously, ad I’m sure you’re well aware of some of the 
initiatives that have been brought in, with the flexibility in hours, 
the expanded family dining on Sundays, the canned beer, and 
these initiatives have certainly helped the viability of the rural 
hotel. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would refer again to this report because it’s very 
interesting what the government of the day in the 1970s were 
planning to do regarding what they call obsolescent hotels. And in 
this report, the Faris report, it has on page 70, a heading, heading 
44, that says, Obsolescent Hotels. And I’d like to just cite a couple 
of the recommendations so we know exactly from whence those 
people were coming, and I think it shows again a contradiction in 
the member opposite. 
 
Recommendation number one of this NDP report was: 
 

That progressive replacement of obsolescent hotels should be 
implemented where practical in localities in which there is 
virtually no demand for guest room accommodation by 
building a new structure in which the proprietor or operator 
would be licensed to sell beer, wine, and spirits by the glass 
for consumption on the premises with off-sale privileges. 

 
So there they were in ’73 — the NDP were going to say, yes, we 
should not require the necessity to have rooms. 
 
The third recommendation: 
 

That the new licensed outlet envisaged should eliminate the 
qualification of having to operate a hotel in order to qualify 
for a beverage room licence. 

 
So you didn’t even have to have a hotel and you could get a 
beverage room licence under the recommendation of the NDP 
report. 
 
And section 5 is very interesting. 
 

That section 63(4) of The Liquor Licensing Act be amended 
to allow the Liquor Licensing Commission, at its discretion, 
(they were their commissioners appointed, appointed by the 
NDP government), that the Liquor Licensing  

  



  
June 22,1988  

2383 
 

Commission, at its discretion, to issue additional licences for 
licensed premises over and above the present population 
quota. 

 
That was the recommendation of the NDP report. 
 
And I hear . . . see this . . . hear this member here stand up, as a 
hypocritical, and try and condemn that we’re putting things to 
regulation. And as I said previously, and those regulations . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, those regulations. 
 
If the member from Regina Centre would be quiet, I will explain 
to him that those regulations will be worked on in consultation, in 
consultation with the Hotels Association of Saskatchewan. Now I 
think that’s a heck of a lot more input than what was envisaged in 
the famous NDP Don Faris report. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re playing politics 
today, and I think a ridiculous level of politics. 
 
You full well know the difference between a report, when you 
send people out to gather ideas, and what actually turns up in 
legislation. And you know full well that there was a liquor Act 
introduced after that, and you know which of the 
recommendations, if you’ll read through Hansard tomorrow, were 
adopted and which weren’t. And the people of this province 
clearly understand which were and which weren’t. So, I mean, 
let’s not play silly games. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am going to defer for a couple of moments to my 
colleague. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to ask with respect to this legislation, and the liberalization of 
liquor franchising across the province, how you square this with 
your Premier’s commitment to fight alcohol abuse? 
 
I refer specifically to a press release, communiqué number nine, 
which came from the Parksville western premiers conference, 
May 18 to 21, in which he was certainly a party to this premiers 
conference, that reads: 
 

The rapid pace of change in family and working lives is 
placing particularly intense pressures on today’s youth and 
their families. These pressures have resulted in an alarming 
increase in drug and alcohol abuse. 

 
And it goes on to talk about the premiers directing their ministers: 
 

to identify specific actions which can be taken co-operatively 
in the provision of services to assist these young people and 
their families. Ministers will review existing services, 
programs and facilities in the west. 

 
I’m wondering how you can square this kind of communiqué, with 
its self-professed concern for young people and for family life, 
with the kind of legislation that you’re proposing now which will 
see the franchising of liquor stores on every street corner in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

I further want to know, Mr. Minister, how you square your 
Premier’s self-professed concern for alcohol and drug treatment 
when you can introduce this legislation yourself on Monday, May 
30, and then on Wednesday, June 1, have the Premier go to 
Whitespruce to open a drug and alcohol treatment centre? Isn’t 
this rather hypocritical to introduce legislation like this and then to 
preach the virtues of alcohol restraint? How do you square that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
quite easy to indicate the degree of support that our Premier has 
for the control and treatment of young people with drug and 
alcohol problems. I think the very fact that the Whitespruce centre, 
the only one of its type in Canada, has been opened in Yorkton — 
an initiative of this government — and I think one can look back 
on the initiatives and the money put towards SADAC 
(Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) by this 
government is unprecedented, and certainly the Premier’s 
commitment to the treatment of drugs and alcohol, especially for 
our young people, is one that he is very strong on, and I’m very 
proud to be part of the government that supports that type of 
action. 
 
The member opposite again tries to deliberately mislead. I heard 
him say, in the last line, the proliferation of stores on every corner 
and every street corner. If he had been paying attention previously, 
he would have understood, he would have understood . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — A point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I wonder if you could check with the records, 
Mr. chairman. The hon. member used unparliamentary language; 
same term that was, I think, just this last day declared 
unparliamentary and should be withdrawn. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d just like to ask the member from Prince 
Albert to phrase his . . . just reword it; I was talking to the Clerk 
here and I missed, totally, what his point of order was. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The minister used the words “deliberately 
misleading” which is definitely a term that is unparliamentary and 
has been ruled, even within the last two days in this House, that 
has been . . . as being unparliamentary. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Okay, I hear the point of order brought 
forward by the member of Prince Albert. I did hear the minister 
say the words, use the word, “misleading”; unfortunately, I missed 
the “deliberately misleading”. But I also am aware that the 
Speaker of the House has ruled the “misleading” referring to a 
member misleading the House as being unparliamentary. And if 
the . . . ask the minister to withdraw that remark, we’ll continue 
with the procedure. 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2384 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, if that’s what it takes to move things 
along, I’ll withdraw it, but I get a little annoyed when I see people 
getting up and changing statements that had been made previously 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Changing statements, yes, because, 
Mr. Chairman, in discussion with the previous member, I had 
made it very, very clear — very clear . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’ll just ask the minister just to withdraw the 
one remark and proceed with the response to the question without 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I did withdraw it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, you did not. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Just one second. The minister has withdrawn 
the remark and has made the attempt to withdraw the remark; and 
yes, he . . . and I just ask him to now proceed with the response 
and not trying to carry more . . . (inaudible) . . . Very good. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s all I’m trying to do. I’d like to move 
things along. I said I withdraw, but I also say I get a little 
concerned with people trying to make statements that are not 
factual. And that’s exactly what happens — that’s exactly what 
happened. 
 
I explained to the other member not more than three minutes ago 
that there would not be a proliferation of stores in the corners of 
the streets of the cities of this province. That member stood in the 
House and said there would be. That’s what he said. And that’s 
why I say that is incorrect — that is a wrong interpretation of what 
I said, and that’s why I get a little upset when I hear that kind of a 
statement. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, with that I want to assure the member — 
assure the member that it isn’t the intention of this government — 
it isn’t the intention of this government to allow the sale of beer 
and wine in street corner stores as it was of the government that 
you represent when they were in power. 
 
And I want to indicate a couple of more things, Mr. Chairman, a 
couple of more things that come from that same 1973 report, 
because I think the people of Saskatchewan would be interested to 
know what was in that report. He talks about the safeguard of our 
children and our young people. That Don Faris NDP report of 
1973 indicated that minors be allowed . . . or recommended that 
minors be allowed to consume alcohol with meals in the company 
of their parents. That’s what they thought was right. Let the 
minors consume alcohol in the company of their parents with 
meals. 
 
(1545) 
 
Also that individuals of legal age, other than the driver, be allowed 
to consume alcohol in a vehicle. So the driver could drive and the 
rest could drink. That was the recommendations of the NDP Faris 
report. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, when that member stands up and criticizes our 
Premier for initiatives like Whitespruce, the best of its type, the 
only youth treatment centre in Canada  

of that nature; when you look at the fines and the penalties in the 
Act that I’m bringing forward that really crack people who 
bootleg; that really crack people who serve minors; that really 
crack people who pull beer for minors, those fines in this Act are 
extended considerably. And I think those are the kinds of 
safeguards that will protect our young people. 
 
And when I see a hypocrite, like the member opposite, stand up 
and in a pious manner, in a pious manner, try and indicate that 
there’s something in this Act that will allow young people greater 
freedom and access to alcohol, I take exception with him. I take 
exception with those kinds of remarks because, as I said, read the 
penalties, read the penalties that are in here. There’s no 
recommendation in here that young people be allowed to drink 
beer with their parents. There’s no recommendation in this Act 
that the . . . there’s no recommendation in this Act that people be 
able to drink beer in a car. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I really hate to interrupt the proceedings, 
Mr. Chairman, but the minister, I think, has lost control of himself. 
And I want to raise a point of order with you, Mr. Chairman, 
which I’m surprised you didn’t call because you clearly heard, as I 
did, the minister refer to the member on this side of the House, the 
critic, as a hypocrite, and I say to you that that is unparliamentary, 
and I think that you should require the minister withdraw that and 
apologize to the House because it’s the second time in the last five 
minutes that he has been out of order, and he’s doing so 
deliberately and mocking the Chair. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order, 
and I did hear the remark you made, but I was also aware of the 
fact that prior to that I was close to calling the House to order 
because of some of the accusations and the calls being made on 
the other side of the House. I guess, as a chairman, I find it 
difficult sometimes to really control the Assembly when remarks 
are coming from both sides of the House when a minister . . . 
when a member is trying to speak. So in light of that, I’ll ask the 
minister to report. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The point of order; you have not ruled on 
the point of order. I respect the fact that it is your job to call the 
order of both sides of the House, as I think certainly members on 
this side would respect. But in order to be able to do that, Mr. 
Chairman, you have to be prepared to keep the minister in order as 
well. 
 
The minister clearly said, and the record will show, that he called a 
member on this side of the House a hypocrite. Now that is not in 
order, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman. That is unparliamentary, 
and I ask you to rule on it. Is it unparliamentary or is it not? And if 
so, the minister should withdraw and apologize. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. I have listened to 
the point of order, and has been noted earlier, I asked the minister 
to withdraw the one remark. And I also acknowledge that the word 
hypocrite is unparliamentary, and I’ll ask the minister to withdraw 
that remark. 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2385 
 

But I’m also aware of the fact that there have been some calls 
made from the back benches, and it makes it difficult. So I ask all 
members of the House then to . . . they acknowledge this at this 
time. Then I’ll ask the minister just to withdraw that remark and 
. . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I withdraw. Let’s proceed with the Bill. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I simply want to 
make the point, Mr. Minister, that the people of Saskatchewan are 
entitled to know that there is a flagrant contradiction between what 
the Premier of this province is doing with respect to alcohol 
treatment, and what you, as his minister, are doing in this 
legislation. That’s a flagrant contradiction, and I think the public 
of Saskatchewan will very shortly see, by your own actions as a 
result of this legislation, that there is a contradiction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I see no contradiction 
at all. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, excuse me. I was just . . . Order, please. 
I was just going to ask if the members wanted to approach this 
going page by page, that we’ve got a number of clauses, till we 
come to the clauses where there is . . . Is everyone agreed we go 
page by page? Agreed. 
 
Pages 2 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 79 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 79, an amendment to clause 79 of the 
printed Bill: 
 

Amend subsection 79(3) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“occassion” and substituting “occasion.” 

 
I believe it’s a spelling error. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Page 28 agreed to. 
 
Pages 29 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 105 
 
Mr. Chairman: — On page 34 we have an amendment to section 
105 of the printed Bill, by the opposition. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
at the end of my remarks move an amendment to section 105(2). 
The nature of the amendment, Mr. Chairman, is that the 
franchising process be conducted in an open tendering fashion, 
unlike what this government has been about for the past years. 
 
I just want to say, speaking to this amendment and to the Bill, Mr. 
Chairman, that the conduct of the minister  

clearly shows why he is so sensitive, simply because he hasn’t put 
in place the kind of protection that he knows the people of this 
province require. 
 
We’ve seen a surprising display, I would want to say, from the 
minister, and I think it’s because he’s uncomfortable with what 
he’s putting before this House. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Chairman, deals with something that’s been 
lacking from this government since 1982 — and I’ve referred to it 
before — and that has to do with fair, open tendering, and not just 
shoving government dollars into the pockets of their friends. 
 
This government’s displayed a record, I believe, unparalleled in 
Saskatchewan, and that’s why we’re putting this amendment forth. 
It calls for open tendering. And I think that if they’re going to be 
unloading government assets, that’s what should be done. Whether 
you’re selling private or public assets through a tendering process, 
it should be done fairly and not just to benefit friends of your 
political party or friends of your particular philosophical beliefs. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Minister, I would like to move that we: 
 

Amend section 105 of the printed Bill by striking out 
subsection (2) thereof and substituting the following therefor: 
 
(2) The board shall not grant a franchise: 
 
(a) if the municipality in which the franchise is to be located 

has adopted a by-law pursuant to subsection 100(2); or 
 
(b) if the enfranchisement process has not been conducted 

through an open tendering process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think this amendment 
really deals with the situation as it is out there. There is really no 
sale of a franchise at all. The franchises being named in this Act is 
what previously was the special vendor, and there is no sale or 
transaction if there would be a change. There is application made 
by an interested business, and then they go through a rather 
complicated screening process by the commission and the 
application . . . there’s a selection committee and an application is 
awarded. 
 
So I don’t think section (b) pertains at all to what is taking place. 
 
So it would not . . . What this would mean is that if, let me give 
you an example, if there was a special vendor in the town and that 
person changed . . . sold his business and two other businesses 
wanted a special vendor licence, then by this they would have to 
go for a public tender. Well there’s really nothing to tender. 
There’s no sale of an asset. They would put forth a proposal, as is 
the case now, and the proposal would be investigated by the 
commission, both proposals, and a decision would be made. So 
really section (b) does not pertain to what actually takes place in 
the Act at this time. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well then, Mr. Speaker, you  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2386 
 

wouldn’t be arguing with us . . . or Mr. Minister, you wouldn’t be 
arguing with the substance of my amendment if you have no plans 
to franchise out public assets. Then this particular part . . . this 
particular amendment wouldn’t interfere with any problem, but 
what it would do would be protecting the people of this province if 
you decided that a public asset should be franchised out. And 
that’s why I’m asking that you support this amendment, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Speaker, the member is wrong. 
Any sale or change of asset would take place under the powers of 
the board, as I read out previously when the member had raised 
those, and I said that they were the same as they were in the old 
Act, they were lifted from the old Act. 
 
This has to do with the franchise . . . or the changing and special 
vendors which will be called franchising. And there’s no sale, 
there’s no sale of an asset, so there would be nothing to tender, so 
it doesn’t pertain. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
(1600) 
 
Page 34 agreed to. 
 
Pages 35 to 50 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 162 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 162, amendment to subsection 162(3) 
of the printed Bill: 
 

by striking out “substance in beverage alcohol” in the sixth 
line and substituting “substance is beverage alcohol”. 

 
Clause 162 as amended agreed to. 
 
Page 51 agreed to. 
 
Pages 52 to 54 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 179 
 
Mr. Chairman: —  
 

Amend clause 179(b)(xix) of the printed Bill: 
 
by striking out “hospital suite” and substituting “hospitality 
suite”. 

 
Clause 179 as amended agreed to. 
 
Page 55 agreed to. 
 
Pages 56 and 57 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 
comments as we finish off the clause by clause voting on this 
particular Bill. 
 
I want it on the record, Mr. Chairman, that I will be very interested 
to note where some of the members of the  

caucus on the government side will be when this vote is taken. 
And I wonder where the member from Rosetown-Elrose will be 
and the member from Rosthern and the member from Morse, 
because I think a lot of people in their riding are very interested in 
what kind of response they will give to this minister’s Bill, this 
new liquor Act that, I would suggest, has the possibilities of 
opening up the accessibility to alcohol to young people in this 
province. A government that on one day opens alcohol and drug 
abuse treatment centre, and in the same day introduces a piece of 
legislation that gives the minister the power to do just about 
whatever he wants, is not the kind of legislation I believe that their 
constituents are looking for. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Chairman, and I would want you to take close 
note of what I’m saying, and I would want you to include yourself 
when you’re looking at the passing of this Bill as to what your 
people and what the people in the respective ridings that I 
mentioned will be saying about this Act. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the officials for all their help 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to thank the officials for being with me this afternoon. 
And more than that, though, Mr. Speaker, the very fact that this 
Bill had never been opened for 65 years, and it combined two very 
large Bills into one, took a considerable amount of work by my 
officials over the past number of months. So it wasn’t just passage 
of this Bill today, but all the preparation and the work that went 
into it. I want to thank them and I want to thank the opposition for 
his questions. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like 
to thank the minister and his officials, and I noted the enthusiasm 
that some of your members support you with. And members on 
this side of the House certainly appreciate the work that they put 
into the Bill, and I would just want them to note that their 
enthusiasm did not go unnoticed, nor will it go unrecognized. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS  
  

Bill No. 50 — An Act respecting the Control of Distribution 
and the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan  

  
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be read now a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill, with leave, be now read a 
third time and be passed under its title. 
 
(1615) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division 
 

Yeas — 24  
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2387 
 

Andrew Hardy 
Berntson Klein 
Lane Toth 
Taylor Sauder 
Smith Johnson 
Swan Hopfner 
Muirhead Petersen 
Maxwell Swenson 
Schmidt Martens 
Hodgins Baker 
Gerich Kopelchuk 
Hepworth Britton 
 

Nays — 18  
 
Romanow Hagel 
Prebble Pringle 
Lingenfelter Lyons 
Shillington Calvert 
Tchorzewski Lautermilch 
Koskie Trew 
Simard Smart 
Kowalsky Van Mulligen 
Atkinson Koenker 
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

SECOND READINGS  
 

Bill No. 84 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

Certain Acts and the Passing of Certain Orders and 
Regulations pursuant to The Government Organization Act  

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, when The Government 
Organization Act was dealt with by this Assembly in December of 
’86, I made it clear that the creation of departments or agencies 
under its provisions be regulations would in no way affect the 
statutory authority of existing departments and ministers, because 
this Assembly would have the opportunity to consider any 
amendments to statutes required as a result of reorganization of 
government departments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill reflects the only amendments required as a 
result of government organization made in the past year and a half. 
This Act recognizes the changes required to statute because of the 
creation of the departments of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment; Environment and Public Safety; Economic 
Development and Tourism; and Trade and Investment. 
 
This Act also recognizes changes required from the merger of 
some departments into now existing Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs; Finance; Education; and Parks, Recreation and Culture 
departments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Many of the amendments contained in this Act, Mr. Speaker, 
consist of repeal of provisions now continued in departmental 
statutes, that are no longer required because they are covered by 
standard provisions in The Government Organization Act. As a 
result, a number of statutes are repealed in their entirety, and the 
provisions in them that are of a substantive nature are moved to 
other  

substantive statutes of similar subject matter. 
 
In other cases, after the removal of departmental provisions, this 
Bill renames Acts to reflect the substantive provisions now 
contained in the statute. The best example of this, Mr. Speaker, is 
the renaming of the Department of Finance Act, 1983, as The 
Financial Administration Act, to better reflect the prime content of 
that Act. 
 
The second major purpose of the Act, Mr. Speaker, is to change 
references to the new names of Acts that are contained in other 
Acts. For example, amendments contained in 55 of the 116 
sections of this Act relate to the renaming of The Department of 
Finance Act, 1983, as The Financial Administration Act. 
 
A further 17 sections relate to the renaming of The Department of 
Revenue and Financial Services Act as The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act. Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that 
wherever possible, provisions contained in existing Acts have, 
whenever they are moved to another statute by this Bill, have been 
moved unchanged. 
 
Three new provisions are added by this Act, Mr. Speaker. Section 
86 permits renumbering of regulations made under an Act that has 
been named and renumbered under this Act. 
 
Section 115 permits continuation, amendment, and repeal of 
existing regulations, even though an Act is repealed under this 
Act. Section 27 of this Bill also adds a new section for point two, 
to The Human Resources, Labour and Employment Act to provide 
clear statutory authority, now assigned to the Minister of Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment, to accommodate the needs 
of and programs for senior citizens in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Government 
Organization Consequential Amendment Act, 1988, Bill No. 84. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me first of all at the outset 
say that I am going to allow this Bill to proceed to committee. 
Most of what the minister has said, from my reading of the Bill, is 
correct. But there are some points I wish to make, because this Bill 
highlights certain very important fundamental issues that I think 
deserve comment on and should be put on the record. 
 
I draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, and I hope through you, to 
the minister opposite who spoke on the Bill, that the Bill itself has 
many flaws in it. There are references in the Bill to legislation 
which is not relevant, and I would hope that the government 
would have their officials take another look at it. And I raise one 
example. Sections 57 to 60 seek to amend four liquor laws, but 
one or more of those is now repealed. One certainly is repealed, 
and I think a second one is as well, because of the new Bill 50 
which was just dealt with today. 
 
That’s only one example of several which I think are no longer 
necessary in the Bill. And the government should consider that 
and should have considered it, quite frankly, when they were 
writing the Bill, knowing the  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2388 
 

legislation they were going to bring forward. 
 
There is also one other, and I will raise it in committee, one 
particular example of an amendment that is troublesome, and that 
is that by repealing certain sections of The Revenue and Financial 
Services Act, the government has repealed the requirement and the 
necessity to provide an annual report to the legislature. That has 
always been the case with the department of revenue, and supply 
and services. 
 
Now that repeal arbitrarily, with several sections, takes away that 
requirement and I really will want the minister to explain why that 
is so when it makes it unnecessary to provide an annual report to 
the legislature as has always been the case. 
 
Now in the general way, Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point. 
This Bill, according to the comments we just heard, is 
consequential to the government reorganization Bill which was 
dealt with by this legislature at some length last December of 
1987. I think everybody in this House is fully aware of the 
implications of that Bill. 
 
It was simply another attempt, which has been doubled and tripled 
and quadrupled since that time by the government, to turn this 
government operation into a centralized government operation, put 
more central authority into the hands of the cabinet, and take away 
and remove the authority and the powers of this legislative 
Assembly. 
 
This Bill relates to that Bill which was done, and I think that that 
point needs to be made, especially in light of the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
when one considers what was the result of this terrorization that 
took place after the introduction and passage of Bill 5. And I use 
the word terrorization of Saskatchewan very deliberately, because 
it was terrorization — it was terrorization by a government that 
has run amok. 
 
Because after the Bill 5 was given, it gave them the power to do 
all kinds of things. They began to take advantage of it and cut 
programs and cut services and spend tens of millions of dollars 
without even a budget, which they proceeded to do between 
December of 1987 and June 17 of . . . 1986 was when the Bill was 
introduced, and June 17 of 1987 when finally, under the threat of 
legal action, the Minister of Finance and the Premier finally 
decided they had better introduce a budget into this House. 
 
This is just one example of how this particular legislation portrays 
the kind of attitude that has been displayed by this government, 
which appears to think that it has to answer to no one, it has to be 
responsible to no one, it can do whatever it wants without regard 
for public opinion. 
 
In question period today, the Minister of Urban Affairs made it 
very clear. Although by a vast majority — in some cases, almost 
unanimous — there is opposition to changes that he wants to bring 
in with regard to Urban Municipality Act dealing with wards and 
dealing with store hours, he’s going to do it anyway. That’s just 
another example of what I have been talking about, with what has 
been taking place in Saskatchewan since Bill 5 was introduced in 
1986. I find that quite despicable and  

unfortunate, and it’s a bad reflection on what we have always 
known to be the legislative process and the democratic process in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The same thing was again exemplified by the fact that the Minister 
of Finance refused to table the Provincial Auditor’s report for 
months after it was made available. Mr. Speaker, the 
government’s failure and refusal to table in the legislature certain 
annual reports . . . and I know that the government House Leader 
has yet to table — and he will be tabling, I’m sure — certain 
reports which have yet not been tabled from the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Corporation, from the Crown Investment 
Board corporation, and at least two others which have yet to be 
tabled in this House; a very unusual practice, because those reports 
were completed and made available to the government months 
ago. 
 
So I think we see here, Mr. Speaker, not only an attempt by the 
government to be able to put itself legislatively in a position to do 
whatever it wants without being accountable to this legislature, but 
also an attempt by the government to hide information from the 
public which it has a right to know. 
 
I suppose if I was in those treasury benches, knowing all of the 
difficulty they were in, knowing all of the scandal that is obviously 
hidden by a lot of this information which is not being made 
available, I guess if I was a Conservative member, I would have 
the mentality to think that maybe I’d better hide it. 
 
The fact is that what is hidden today, Mr. Speaker, will become 
available before the next provincial election, and the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to know. And that’s going to be a very 
significant reason why this government will be lucky if it elects 
one Conservative member on the other side of the House when 
that election is completed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will be asking some of those questions which 
I have indicated in my brief remarks. I think that maybe at that 
time it will be a better place in which to debate this Bill. And so 
for now, I am prepared to let it go to the committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 89 — An Act respecting certain Consequential 
Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Municipal Board Act  
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, under rule 87(3), where it 
says the government may withdraw a Bill from the Committee of 
Non-Controversial Bills at any time, I would like to indicate that I 
would like at this time to withdraw Bill. No. 89 from the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee and proceed with second 
reading. 
 
Bill No. 89 is a Bill respecting consequential amendments arising 
from The Municipal Board Act. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that 
that Bill was turned back from the committee because it couldn’t 
properly be passed in advance of the Bill that it is consequential to. 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2389 
 

So I just offer that simple explanation, Mr. Speaker, and move 
second reading of Bill No. 89, An Act respecting consequential 
amendments arising from The Municipal Board Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1630) 
 

Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act  
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, under the same rule, I 
would like to withdraw Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Wildlife 
Act, and move second reading at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand today and move second reading of a Bill to 
amend The Wildlife Act. This Bill is intended to ensure that 
Saskatchewan’s unique and valuable wildlife resources are 
maintained and enhanced for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wildlife has formed an important part of our heritage. 
Indeed, a recent Canadian survey clearly established the 
importance of wildlife to all Canadians, including Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Wildlife Act provides for the legislative 
authority for the conservation and management of our wildlife 
resources. It governs the disposition, as well as the protection, of 
these resources. Inherent in wise management of these resources is 
the need for appropriate enforcement. The passage of the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms recognized certain 
fundamental freedoms and democratic rights for all citizens of 
Canada, and in so doing, established a standard by which all other 
enforcement legislation must be measured. 
 
However, The Wildlife Act was enacted prior to the passage of the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. It is therefore essential 
that we ensure the enforcement powers provided to wildlife 
officers in The Wildlife Act are consistent with the charter, and yet 
ensure sufficient authority to adequately protect our resources that 
are so important to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the charter-related amendment, along with a few 
other housekeeping changes contained in the bill I’ve introduced, 
reflect this government’s commitment to conserving 
Saskatchewan wildlife resources. 
 
I move, Mr. Speaker, second reading of a bill No. 71, The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
  

SECOND READINGS  
  

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 56 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development corporation be  

now read a second time. 
  
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a few words 
about this Bill, Bill No. 56. It appears the legislation is put before 
this House for the sole purpose of lining SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation) up to be privatized. 
 
And it’s not privatization, Mr. Speaker, that concerns members on 
this side of the House so much, but the fact that the government 
has spent little time in making any effort to analyse the effects of 
privatization. Their efforts to privatize the assets of the people of 
this province have been consuming so much of their time that 
they’re forgetting to properly manage the Crowns so that they can 
return profits to the people of this province, to deliver health care 
and education and to build highways, and to plan for the future of 
this province. 
 
And I would want to say that members on this side are very 
concerned when we see the massive deficits that are built up by a 
lot of the Crown corporations that the Premier and his cabinet are 
managing. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that SMDC doesn’t 
happen to be one of those. It’s been returning consistent profits to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and I wouldn’t want to venture a 
guess as to whether it’s because of management or because the 
commodities that it markets are as lucrative as they are, but the 
facts are that in the last couple of years SMDC has been able to 
return, over the last couple of years, almost a hundred million 
dollars to the people of this province. 
 
I note in ’86 the company has returned 15 million, an din ’85 it’s 
returned 15 million, and in subsequent years it’s . . . in previous 
years it had returned millions of dollars as well. And I ask why 
this government would want to put into the hands of outside 
interests a corporation that has been as lucrative as SMDC clearly 
has been. 
 
And when I have another look at what the proposal is between this 
government, the PC government in Saskatchewan, and their 
counterparts in Ottawa, and the amalgamation, the merging with 
Eldorado nuclear, it gives me some concern, because we know 
that that corporation has a long-term debt, a very massive 
long-term debt, and last year lost $144 million. 
 
And I would ask why this government would want to merge a 
Saskatchewan-based, Saskatchewan-controlled — owned and 
controlled by the people of this province, a corporation that’s been 
returning consistent profits to the people; why they would want to 
merge that with a federal Crown corporation that’s not in that 
good financial condition as certainly and clearly as SMDC is; why 
you would want to merge these corporations, and then why you 
would want to privatize them? And I say it’s simply because of 
this government’s inability to use any other tool other than just 
strictly the private sector in order to run the economy. 
 
And I say it’s a sad commentary that a government of any 
philosophical belief wouldn’t want to use the tools that are 
available in order to deliver the programs, and whether that be 
public enterprise or private enterprise or the co-operative system, 
all of these vehicles should be looked at and considered. And 
clearly, just because  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2390 
 

SMDC is a Crown corporation is no reason to unload it. 
 
Its mandate was to preserve the resource revenue for the people of 
this province, and I believe SMDC has fulfilled that mandate and 
would continue to fulfil that mandate. But just because it’s a 
Crown corporation, this government introduces an Act to 
reorganize, to merge, and then to privatize. 
 
And I would want to say that the people of this province — 
although a lot of them don’t believe that government has to own 
everything, and I would suggest members on both sides of the 
House in this legislature feel that way as well — people are not 
going to be satisfied with a government that is determined to 
privatize for privatization’s sake. 
 
And I’d want to say if this government believes in this province 
and believes in the future of this province, that they would want to 
make a special effort to broaden their views and to look at the 
different tools available to them, and I use the Crown corporations 
as one example. And I say it’s a sad commentary on the 
government, simply because they’ve got the blinders on and 
they’re not willing to look around them. 
 
The future for this province lies in a mixed economy, and I believe 
that strongly. The future of this province can’t be tied to one 
sector. I think history has shown that a mixed economy has 
worked in this province, and that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I have some 
problem in looking at this kind of legislation that is put before this 
House for no other reason but to privatize the corporation. 
 
SMDC, as I indicated, is in very good financial shape. It’s got a 
debt of some $318 million, that’s true. But looking at the history 
of the corporation and into the future, it’s very possible that the 
debt may be retired in three years, which would mean we’re sitting 
on a large asset base, a corporation with no debt, a corporation 
paying no interest, a corporation with the ability to return money 
to the coffers of this province, so that we can deliver health care, 
and so that we don’t look at the scrapping of the children’s dental 
plan or prescription drug plan fees or 13- or 12- or 11,000 people 
waiting to get into our hospitals. 
 
And I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
lost sight of what this province can be, and all because of their 
narrow-minded philosophical beliefs, the belief that the people of 
the province haven’t got the right to own their own resources. 
 
And I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in committee I believe 
that this Bill is going to take some time to pass. And I say that 
because the critic in charge of this particular piece of legislation is 
going to want to question the minister in depth. And I think not 
only in terms of the legality of the Bill or what the particular 
clause might mean, but I think one of the aspects that the critic 
will want to review is the overall intent and the reasons behind 
having this Bill before the House. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, if this government had spent as much time 
trying to develop an economy in this province that would work, 
using all of the tools available — the  

private and the public and the co-operative sector — and if they 
hadn’t squandered half of their time scheming with the Margaret 
Thatchers of the world and the Fraser Institutes as to how to 
destroy a public company, that there would be a better 
Saskatchewan, and there could be and there should be a better 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But this government has turned in on itself, it’s moved the people 
away, and it’s no longer governing with the mandate, that mandate 
being: deliver decent health care . . . or for the mandate, to deliver 
decent health care and education. It’s dealing with its own agenda, 
its own philosophical beliefs, and that’s why we see this kind of 
legislation. 
 
Before I close, I would just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill 
will indeed take some time to discuss in committee, and for that 
reason I would beg leave to adjourn the debate . . . I’ll let it go. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill. No. 60 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few remarks that I 
wish to make on this Bill, as I know a good number of my 
colleagues do. And when I spoke on it the day that the minister 
introduced it, I outlined the reasons why I thought, and we believe, 
the Bill was ill-advised and wrong. I won’t get into some of the 
same arguments, but I want to make some other points which I 
think are important to be made on this very fundamental and 
important issue. 
 
First of all, let me begin by saying that in my opinion this Bill is a 
clear statement on the style and the ethics of this Premier and this 
Conservative government. There is no other way to describe it, 
except that it is a clear statement of those particular aspects of the 
government. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it portrays a government that is 
morally and ethically corrupt, a government which has become so 
preoccupied with its own self-interest that public interest and 
public policy have become secondary considerations. Patronage 
has become the guiding hand to decisions on government policy, 
government programs, and government legislation. Every day in 
this House we are able to find another example of this blatant 
patronage that is running rampant under the direction of this 
particular Premier, and this cabinet, and this government, and the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, who knowingly smiles in his chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I never believed, I never believed that we would ever 
see such a disregard for democratic principles as has been 
witnessed in the last several years. While this government took 
away information, it took away powers of this Legislative 
Assembly and invested more and more power in the cabinet and in 
the chief executive officer of this government, the Premier 
himself. Has this been good, Mr. Speaker? Has there been benefits 
because of this approach by this government? I say no, and the 
record  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2391 
 

speaks for itself. 
 
(1645) 
 
Bad fiscal policy has led to an accumulated deficit of $3.7 billion, 
and it has left a mortgage which will take generations to pay back, 
a legacy that is costing Saskatchewan people over $300 million a 
year in interest and debt charges which we are paying to banks and 
financial interests and brokerage houses out of this province, 
mostly out of this country, in New York and throughout the world. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, just think what $50 million of interest 
from that interest costs that we’re paying in revenue sharing to 
municipalities would do — just $50 million of that $300 million 
which they are blowing away because of the mismanagement and 
the corruption and the patronage. Property taxes might have been 
reduced for a $50 million injection into the revenue sharing fund. 
Streets and roads and water and sewer systems would be built and 
improved, and jobs would be created, job which are so badly and 
sorely needed. But instead of dealing with the real problems that 
municipalities face today, this government spends all of its time 
attacking local governments with this legislation, with its 
introduction of the ward system, and provincial abdication in the 
regulation of store hours and providing a common day of rest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say, Mr. Speaker, those are misplaced 
priorities. There are so many children living in poverty in 
Saskatchewan today that our province has achieved the unenviable 
status of having the second-highest rate of poverty in Canada. And 
all that the Premier and the Minister of Urban Affairs can do is 
spend their time and their energy undermining the democratic 
right of urban municipal citizens, people who live in our cities, to 
choose the electoral system that they think is best for them. 
 
All they can do, Mr. Speaker, in light of all these other important 
things that they ought to be paying attention to, is abandon the 
small family business and rural communities by turning the 
control of store hours over to the chain stores and the board of 
directors of large corporations in Montreal and Toronto and New 
York. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, this government has lost touch with 
Saskatchewan. It refuses to listen to them. The minister is out on a 
personal vendetta. And I really find this very regrettable, because I 
would think that there is a bigger role for members of the 
Executive Council to play, and cabinet ministers, and all of us who 
serve in this Legislative Assembly. But this personal vendetta of 
the minister’s against the ward system is really outrageous. He has 
become the servant of business from outside of this province, 
completely ignoring the interests of the people of Saskatchewan as 
a whole, and completely ignoring the interests of small business in 
Saskatchewan and particularly rural business in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And what I find extremely shocking, and 
maybe most shocking of all, is that the Premier has allowed him to 
get away with it. The coalition of business people and community 
leaders and church leaders has asked for a meeting. On May 4 
they asked for a meeting with the Premier because they wanted to 
discuss alternative proposals. And do you know what he did, Mr. 
Speaker? He refused to meet with them. He refused to meet with 
them on this very fundamental and important issue, and he said, go 
and meet with my Minister or Urban Affairs. 
 
Well the minister refused to meet with them too. He refused to 
meet with them until the day in which he was going to introduce 
this Bill in this House and the first thing that he indicated to them 
was that no matter what they told him, he was going to go ahead 
with the legislation. And I ask, what kind of a consultation process 
is that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Arrogance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That is arrogance at its extremest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The whole exercise, Mr. Speaker, by the 
minister was a fraud, an absolute fraud. From one end of this 
province to the other, in cities and in rural communities, individual 
citizens, elected officials of local government, business people and 
everyone concerned about the quality of family life has said to the 
minister and to the Premier: this is not the time to do it. 
 
They have said to him and to this government, we want to have 
some input as it is our democratic right to have the input. And they 
have been ignored, these people who have vigorously spoken out 
against this Bill. They spoke out against the government’s attack 
on the right of people in urban centres to choose the electoral 
system that works best for them. They spoke out against the 
legislation on store hours, which in reality is a case of the minister 
and his government running away from their responsibility. And 
through all of this, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province has 
stood by and not provided the leadership that has been so sorely 
needed here. 
 
Instead, he has stepped back so that the Minister of Urban Affairs 
can satisfy his own personal ego. That’s not leadership. And I say 
to the Premier, stand up for what is right, stand up for 
Saskatchewan families for once instead of simply just talking 
about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say to the Premier, stand up for rural 
Saskatchewan communities who are going to be critically 
threatened and hurt by this store hours legislation. Stand up for the 
small-business people of Saskatchewan who want to enjoy their 
families, too. They want to enjoy their families just like anyone 
else in this province — like you do, Mr. Speaker, or I do, or 
anybody else in this House. 
 
Many of them are struggling now to survive. Don’t allow this 
legislation, I say to the Premier, which will put the chain stores 
and the corporate businesses from outside of  
  



  
June 22,1988  

2392 
 

Saskatchewan in control, and ultimately squeeze many family 
businesses out of business. 
 
I say to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, stand up for the employees who 
will be hurt by this legislation. Stand up for our municipal leaders 
and for SUMA who have petitioned you, Mr. Premier, or that have 
petitioned the Premier, to stop the legislation which takes away the 
right of urban residents to have a ward system. 
 
The message that has been sent from all over the province has 
been overwhelming. In fact I’m even surprised at this power and 
the extent at which it has taken place. I would say to the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, and to the members opposite, don’t proceed with this 
legislation at this time, and allow the public to have a say on this 
issue. 
 
The Premier should stop his stubborn minister from imposing 
legislation which no one supports, and by which many will be 
hurt. And so I urge the Premier — as have other people not at the 
political level, but other concerned and interested people — to set 
up an all-party committee of this legislature which can hold 
hearings around the province and give people an opportunity to 
say what they think so that all of us collectively in here can then 
come back and do what’s right for them, and do what’s right for 
Saskatchewan. They have a right to have a voice in this important 
issue, and they should not expect from their government to 
arbitrarily have this rammed down their throats. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, when all of the other important arguments 
are put aside, one has to recognize that the government is now 
facing the question of leadership credibility on this issue. And I 
simply will be interested to know: will the Premier show that 
leadership that is required here, or will he allow himself to be 
railroaded by this Minister of Urban Affairs who has a personal 
agenda not related to the public interest. That’s the question that 
will be answered on the way this Bill proceeds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier is receiving hundreds of letters on this issue — 
hundreds of letters. Government MLAs are receiving letters of 
protest. Opposition members that I know of are receiving letters 
and phone calls on a daily basis. The only people who seem to be 
listening are the New Democratic Party caucus here. 
 
And that’s why we have taken the position that we have, Mr. 
Speaker, because we reflect the concerns of the small-business 
community. We are reflecting the concerns of people who are 
concerned about their family out there and how many of them will 
be devastated by this, people who run family businesses. We 
reflect the concern of people in . . . not only in municipal 
government levels, but the citizens at large who are afraid of this 
government’s attack on their right to choose the electoral system 
that they want and that they feel will serve them best. 
 
And when you think about it, Mr. Speaker, the next question that 
comes to mind is: who’s next? Is it the divisions in rural 
municipalities that will be next? Is it the divisions in our school 
divisions that will be next? With this government, with their 
record and with this Bill and  

the way they have approached this, everything is at risk and 
everything is being threatened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record what the message from all 
of Saskatchewan has been, and I will do it as briefly as I can, to 
allow other members to be able to say some of the things that need 
to be said. 
 
Just in case the members opposite have been so blinkered that they 
have not noticed, there has been a letter that has been sent to every 
MLA in this House by the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Grocers in Saskatchewan, president Lawrence Lanovaz, who is 
the chairman of the committee, from Duck Lake, Saskatchewan, 
and it has urged every member of this House — the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the members over there, you, Mr. 
Speaker, the members on this side of the House — that this 
legislation not proceed. And they state in their letter, Mr. Speaker, 
the open letter, the announcement that the Sunday opening 
question would be passed down to the municipalities is certainly 
not welcomed by independent grocers in this province, nor, we 
suspect, by the vast majority of municipalities. 
 
They went on to say that: 
 

We firmly believe that it should be the responsibility of the 
provincial government to draft appropriate legislation which 
deals with this issue, and we urge all members of the 
legislature to give careful consideration to the legislation 
recently enacted in the province of Manitoba, which, in our 
opinion, strikes the right balance between providing the 
services required by the population at large without moving 
to wide open Sunday shopping. 

 
And all that the public wants, and these organizations want, is for 
the government to consider that fact that there are other 
alternatives. The Manitoba experience is working. It is a perfectly 
good model for us to look at. It has not been challenged in courts, 
as all over the rest of this country other legislation has been. It’s 
working, Mr. Speaker. Why would the government not at least 
provide an opportunity for others to take a look at it and make 
some recommendations to see whether we can do the right thing in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I think it’s very telling. One other 
comment that has been made in this letter to the members of this 
House, when they say what is at issue is much greater than mere 
commerce, but the very essence of the Saskatchewan society that 
we wish to live in and pass on to our children. That’s what we’re 
dealing with here, Mr. Speaker — those kinds of issues. Those 
kinds of issues. 
 
Not giving Saskatchewan away to the corporate sector out of 
Toronto and Montreal, not giving Saskatchewan away to the 
United States of America, but using the talents of our people in 
this province today to make our decisions here in the best interests 
of ourselves, who are here now, and the interests of our children 
who will be here after us, and their children, too. 
 
  



  
June 22,1988  

2393 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We don’t need the kind of arrogance, we 
don’t need the kind of arrogance that is being displayed by the 
government which is refusing to recognize the importance of that. 
And that’s why I urge as strongly as I can that the government not 
proceed with this Bill altogether, and that it take a look at a 
legislative committee, as has been urged by this letter to all 
members, which I know members opposite are aware of and I am 
really quite surprised that they would ignore, particularly since 
most of them represent rural constituencies, which have rural 
communities which are going to be particularly hurt by the actions 
of that minister, who does not seem to care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a letter here to the Premier, written by the 
Coalition Against (open) Sunday Shopping, signed by the Rev. 
Bill Portman, the chairman. And that letter, Mr. Speaker, says very 
clearly that we suggest an all-party committee be struck to allow 
public opinion to be heard — another example of a group that is 
saying that what the Tories are doing is not good and is wrong. 
 
As a matter of fact, the protest has become so great that this 
coalition, Mr. Speaker, has said a couple of days ago in a press 
conference and a news statement, that they have had to hire extra 
staff to handle the response. Now why the government wouldn’t 
note that and pay attention to it, I don’t know unless they have 
now developed a death wish. 
 
(1700) 
 
Unless they’ve now developed the fact, the mentality, that they’re 
gone and therefore it doesn’t matter and they’re just going to put 
their mark on the province, as much damage as it might create and 
torpedoes be damned. And I think it’s true. They are gone. 
 
And I’ve heard the minister argue: well all over the rest of the 
country, we’re having this legislation and therefore it’s good for 
Saskatchewan. I wonder if he noticed that just recently, Toronto, 
one of our largest cities, if not the largest, rejected Sunday 
shopping and strongly protested in a vote of 30 to 2 in their 
council, city council, to the provincial government’s proposed 
legislation which would do similar to what this government is 
doing here. But at least in Ontario that government is interested in 
consulting people and is listening. That’s not happening here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I draw your attention to another argument that 
needs to be made and that is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


