


















































June 23, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 23, 1988 
  
 

2475 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, as 5 o’clock came around I had 
two or three minutes left to my speech but I think it was . . . My 
thought was interrupted in the middle of a sentence and I feel 
obligated to repeat the main points of the address, which I shall so 
do now. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in starting off these estimates, I was trying to make 
the point before adjournment at 5 o’clock — and I am now going 
to summarize the points that I make — that there is a major 
difference between ourselves and the government about the vision 
of the Saskatchewan and of the Canada that we want. I tried to 
describe the three or four areas which we will try to concentrate on 
with respect to the consideration of the estimates to highlight — 
although there are many areas — but to highlight what I’m trying 
to say. 
 
I’m trying to say that we on this side believe that the political 
philosophy of the government and the Premier opposite and the 
programs and the policies that they’ve implemented pursuant to 
those philosophies are harmful for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me give you the specific examples that I allude to. First of all, 
free trade, which in some ways is an over-arching issue for the 
people of Saskatchewan and Canada. It’s over-arching because 
this government has made a commitment which seems to be 
irrevocable and a commitment which it now seems to be, if I may 
say so, blinded to, blinded in what I think are the facts, the face of 
the facts — a commitment to locking Canada and this province to 
a continentalist economic policy, a policy which, in effect, limits 
the options, as we see it, of this province and this country, 
searching out for other economic trading patterns with other 
nations. 
 
We believe that Saskatchewan people can be the best in 
competition with the world, that we ought not to be doing 
anything else but setting forth economic changes and economic 
policies and economic choices to keep our advantage in the 
trading world and the trading markets of the world — to keep our 
options open. 
 
But with this deal, what this amounts to, in effect, is a North 
American economic constitution, as President Reagan himself has 
called it. This is more than a trade deal, Mr. Chairman. This, in our 
judgement, is the first step of a form of economic union. On this 
point we have a major difference with the government opposite 
because not only is it economic union with a foreign country — if 
there was any other country in the world to unite with, I suppose 
this would be it — but it’s still a union with a foreign country. 
And more importantly, or as importantly, it is union with a foreign 
country whose basic rationale and operation is that of a 
market-place, market-driven 
 

economy only. I don’t think that’ll work for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. So free trade is a point of difference. 
 
The second point of difference is economic policy with respect to 
economic development and, in particular, one aspect of that, as 
we’ve seen in the 1986 period, and that is privatization. 
 
We say, as New Democrats, Mr. Chairman, that the theory and the 
history of Saskatchewan is economic development employing the 
principles of co-operation, or if you will, employing the principles 
of the mixed economy, the model of the mixed economy. But long 
ago, our pioneers recognized that no one mechanism alone would 
work — not private enterprise alone; not the co-operative sector 
alone; not public enterprise alone; that the three of them working 
in tandem, working in co-operation, working with a purposeful 
goal in mind, were the ones that were going to generate economic 
wealth, and from that wealth be able to redistribute the benefits for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have a vibrant private enterprise sector. Now it’s 
suffering, of course, for a number of reasons. We’ve had a 
relatively vibrant co-operative sector. The department of co-ops 
has been done away with, unfortunately, by the government 
opposite, and I think that’s had a negative impact, but it is blunted. 
And through privatization we’re seeing the public sector being 
dismantled; being dismantled presumably in pursuit of an ideology 
by this government. 
 
I wanted to say, as I did before the adjournment at 5 o’clock, that 
this is an ideology which in many ways is foreign to the North 
American continent. The Americans don’t have a large sector 
co-operative movement. There are aspects of co-operation, but it is 
not as essentially integral and important as it is to the Canadian 
economy — Saskatchewan, western Canadian economy. And 
certainly the public enterprise role is even greater diminished. 
 
So what we have is the market-driven, the private enterprise 
system of the United States, and what we are seeing here is no 
privatization of the scale undertaken here, there in the United 
States. This is unprecedented. In fact, it is almost unprecedented 
except for the fad of the mid-1980s, mid-’85, ’86, and certainly 
since this government was re-elected in 1986. 
 
It was unprecedented in Canada that all of the western Canadian 
governments, be they Liberal or Conservative or NDP, straight 
from Lloyd to Douglas, Thatcher, Blakeney, Lougheed in Alberta 
— all we sought to employ in various degrees the combination of 
the mixed model and the principle of co-operation, that we need to 
be competitive, but we don’t promote the principle of competition 
to the point where we destroy two of the three cylinders, the 
co-operative cylinder and the public enterprise cylinder, and 
thereby destroy the wealth generation that we see Saskatchewan 
people having been the beneficiaries of as a result of 50 years or 
more of progress. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2476 
 

This government has to go outside of the North American 
economy, outside of the North American unit. It has to go to the 
United Kingdom, it has to import the techniques and the 
approaches, and it seeks to kind of graft or translate, as it were, 
this approach to the Saskatchewan, western Canadian situation, 
and I say, we say, it won’t work. 
 
It won’t work, not because of ideology — I don’t say this because 
of any democratic socialist ideology necessarily — I say it won’t 
work because the realities, the pragmatic, common sense truth is 
that we have big obstacles to overcome to diversify and develop 
economically. We have been dealt a hard hand; we’ve got hard 
climate; we’ve got large distances; we’ve got a small population. 
All of those things mitigate against classic, free enterprise 
economics. 
 
If we had pursued classic, free enterprise economics, Mr. 
Chairman, we would be in exactly the same boat as our friends 
south of the 49th are who are in the private enterprise mode, pure 
and simple — the North Dakotans and the Montanans, 500,000, 
600,000 people. And so we oppose them for that reason too. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Chairman, we also think that this government’s 
major policies as a result of the second point that I make has led to 
the consequences of high taxation, the consequences of utility 
rates which are very high. 
 
And the other side of that coin is the necessity to cut back in 
programs and services: the elimination of the dental program; the 
change, if not the elimination, of the drug plan as it was 
constituted; the reduction in services to schools; the quotas at 
university; the radical change-over of our technical institutes, 
under the guise, of course, of being futuristic. But the reality is in 
the fact that normal students, ordinary students who wish to seek 
access are now being denied. The opportunities are not there. 
 
The infrastructure of rural Saskatchewan is perilously close to 
being — not in collapse, perhaps that’s overstating it — but very 
seriously tattered, as we see towns and villages struggling for 
dollars from the province to them as they worry about how they 
keep their sewers and their infrastructure in line. The recreational 
grants — those are problems as well for them. 
 
We see the difficulties in the cities with working men and women, 
as well — all of this because the wealth generation, to be fair to 
the government, partly because it is beyond its control of the 
circumstances of the world but also because it has embarked on 
this mono-minded, single-minded policy which we say, I say, is 
contrary to the traditions and the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Therefore, Mr. Chairman, we argue that what 
we need to do is to put in place a policy of economic development 
based on the principles of co-operation, based on the principles of 
the mixed model economy, the mixed economy model that I 
discuss, and based on the principles of compassion and sharing 
and 

the redistribution of that wealth creation to those who need, to 
restore our health care programs, to restore all of our programs to 
the high level that they once were. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It was, I think, Mr. Chairman, at that point that 
5 o’clock was called, which brings me to the fourth point of 
difference from this government. The fourth point of this 
difference between us and the government opposite, frankly, Mr. 
chairman, deals with the question of what the role of government 
is with respect to building consensus in society. Some describe it 
the attitude of a government. In government and in politics, Mr. 
Chairman, it is so easy . . . I confess at time falling into this trap 
myself, the temptation to divide harshly the lines, the differences, 
between various groups, between various philosophies and 
ideologies. But it is the job of government to build a consensus. It 
is the job of government to build a consensus for economic growth 
and social policy and all the things that that entails. 
 
Time after time in recent years, Mr. Chairman, in my judgement, 
we’ve seen this government — sadly, far too often — pick fights 
with minority groups and others, thereby destroying the 
consensus. The arguments that exist with the native people, the 
arguments that exist with the labourers or the trade union people, 
the trade unions, drawing distinctions there; some of the divisions 
which take place with respect to the working poor or working 
families at the poverty line or below. Some of these might have 
been made by a slip of the tongue, but I refer to the divisions as a 
result of an unfortunate comment made by a member of the Crown 
with respect to the United Church of Saskatchewan, and the 
politicization of that. 
 
The attempt to build country versus city as a province of 
Saskatchewan, not realizing that we are all Saskatchewanians, not 
realizing that all of us are in this boat together. This province is 
still, at a million people, so small that we cannot draw those kinds 
of distinctions and divisions, that our children, be they on the 
farms or in the cities, they intermingle. We are still a small 
community and it is the role of government to build and to seek 
that consensus. It is not the role of government to divide, no matter 
how meritorious their ideals may be or their objectives may be. 
The role of any government, this government, of any political 
party, is to seek compromise within the framework of its ideology 
and build towards that greater step forward for the future for our 
young people, our children, and their children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — In my judgement, there’s been much too much 
of that confrontation purposefully set out. Thankfully, I think the 
two by-elections just completed a couple of weeks ago, or several 
weeks ago, in Saskatoon and Regina, gave a message, I hope, to 
all of us, including myself, that the people of Saskatchewan want 
us to get on with the job of building, the job of coming to grips 
with our differences because the crisis of drought, the crisis of 
international markets, the crisis of the prairie basin and North 
American economy require the best of brains and the best of 
intentions and the best of policies if we’re ever   



 
June 23, 1988 

2477 
 

going to pull out, if we’re going to get that bright future for the 
1990s that all of us seek. 
 
We need to work and to develop for consensus. We need to 
co-operate. We need to practise that principle. We need to adhere 
to it. We need to build bridges, not to tear them down. We need to 
understand our history and our traditions, not wanting to be 
captive in those histories and traditions, but we must understand 
them and build on them. Governments build from the preceding 
governments. It’s successive building. Not all things that 
governments have done should be destroyed. There is no need for 
this government to follow a scorched-earth policy. 
 
(1915) 
 
Not everything that we did between ’71 to ’82 demands that 
dismantling because of some devotion to ideology. I don’t say that 
they do, but sometimes the words which are articulated and even 
the actions which are actually implemented seem to imply a 
scorched-earth policy. 
 
That’s not the way mankind progresses. That’s not the way society 
goes on. That’s not the way governments grow. That is not the 
way of consensus, that is not the way to build a bright future 
tomorrow. It is the obligation of all of us to build on a consensus 
basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And so we object on that basis too. Those four 
points, Mr. Speaker: free trade, and I’m going to be asking specific 
questions on them; the question of economic development and the 
government’s approach and our approach; the question of taxation 
and utility rates and the redistribution of programs and wealth — 
these are tied in to the second and third and first points; and the 
question of attitude, the question of consensus building, the 
question of working for a bright, new tomorrow for the 1990s and 
beyond. 
 
I think there are two visions here. I don’t throw personal 
aspersions on the Premier’s vision. I believe that the Premier and 
government opposite genuinely believe that this is the way the 
province of Saskatchewan should be developed. I believe that. I 
don’t think this is a bunch of men and women who enter into 
government simply deciding to destroy everything, although there 
are words in elements of the scorched-earth policy that I’ve 
referred to. 
 
But I strongly object to the fact that the overall thrust will bind us 
to be continentalists, will bind us to be free-marketers, will turn 
the back on the history and the tradition of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. There are two visions, Mr. Chairman, 
there are two different ways to go. In our judgement, the vision 
that I’ve outlined is contrasted here, is the way of the 1990s, and 
we’re going to work with the people of Saskatchewan to achieve 
that in the months ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Chairman, and members of the 
Assembly, I regret having to take the time to repeat 

essentially great portions of what I had said before 5 o’clock, but I 
feel that it is only fair to the members of the House and to those 
who may be watching on television on a beautiful evening, if there 
are any, that the overall theme had to be put into context and I had 
to repeat the remarks. 
 
Before I take my place and invite the Premier — not invite him, 
I’m sure he’ll do it as he sees fit to respond — I would like to, 
following the breakdown of the four areas that I’ve identified, 
pursue the first area, which is free trade. And I want to do so with 
a specific argument that I want to develop for a few moments and 
then end up with a question on the matter of free trade — a very 
important issue for all Canadians. 
 
And I want to begin, Mr. Chairman, by referring to the free trade 
Act, which has been introduced in the House of Commons by the 
Mulroney government. This is Bill C-130. And in particular, I 
want to refer to two sections of this Act, which to me are 
extremely troublesome in the context of provincial autonomy, 
vis-a-vis the federal government and Ottawa, and keeping in mind 
my general comments abut free trade, become doubly troublesome 
if the analysis of the free trade agreement that I have advanced is 
one which, at another level, means the surrender of autonomy by 
Ottawa to Washington in the degrees that I have outlined. 
 
Let me refer specifically to this section, and to C-130, and 
provincial autonomy and provincial constitutional control, and 
what I believe to be the premier’s responsibility — I don’t now 
mean this Premier . . . Yes, this Premier — but every premier’s 
responsibility and that is to defend jurisdiction. If not to defend 
jurisdiction, at least if one is surrendering jurisdiction, to do it in 
such a way that precedent is not established so that 5, 10, 15, years 
down the road, the federalism and the division of powers that our 
fathers of confederation established for us is not totally eliminated 
and thereby preventing us from developing a mixed economy and 
the programs of medicare and hospitalization that I alluded to 
earlier. 
 
This Bill, C-130, Mr. Chairman, the Bill which seeks to validate in 
law the Mulroney-Reagan trade deal, as some have described it, 
has a number of sections in it, and of course also has a tariff 
schedule attached to it, the totality of which comprise the legal 
implementation of the negotiated deal between Mr. Reisman and 
Mr. Murphy, as approved by the Prime Minister and the President. 
 
The statute itself has two sections. I want to read them, at least one 
section. The other can be easily summarized. Section 6 is the one 
that I wish to read. It says this, Mr. Chairman, and I invite the 
Premier and all members of the Assembly to listen carefully. Well 
not the Premier; I know he knows the section. It says as follows: 
 

For greater certainty, nothing in this Act (I’ll stop again to 
repeat that, Mr. Chairman — nothing in this Act) by specific 
mention or omission, limits in any manner the right of 
Parliament to enact legislation to implement any provision (I 
repeat, any provision) of the Agreement or fulfil any of the 
obligations of the Government of Canada under the 
Agreement. 

  



 
June 23, 1988 

2478 
 

The other section, 9(3), which I won’t read, gives the cabinet, 
federally, wide, all ranging, encompassing powers to pass 
regulations — that is to say, not to come back to the Legislative 
Assembly but regulations in furtherance of the legal 
implementation and enforcement of the free trade deal. The 
operative section is section 6 that I referred to. I won’t read it, but 
just note the points that I make. Nothing limits, in any manner, any 
provision, any obligation of this free trade deal on the part of the 
Government of Canada. 
 
Now if you take a look at this free trade deal, Mr. Chairman, 
which I have in front of me, members of the Assembly will see 
that it’s like a book. In fact it is set out like a book. It has chapter 
by chapter. Chapter 9, I think, is trade and energy. There is a 
chapter on agriculture. Tonight . . . And we could debate this for 
the next three weeks. Obviously we can’t do that in the interests of 
moving the public business along. But this is an all-encompassing 
document, dealing with services, investments, binding dispute 
mechanisms. This is the point that I wish to make and I did make 
in my opening remarks. This is not a trade treaty. This is an 
economic union document. 
 
If you take a look at this deal, Mr. Chairman, what you see, by 
almost any objective analysis, is a number of areas which impact, I 
argue, to the Premier and to his legal advisers, directly on matters 
of provincial control, provincial jurisdiction, matters dealing with 
contracts, matters dealing with educational standards, matters 
dealing with consumer products. Because if under the United 
States-Canada free trade deal the flow of goods comes in from 
Canada to the United States, for example, which goods do not 
meet our standards, our Saskatchewan standards, which standards 
have been regulated by our consumers legislation or Canadian 
consumer legislation, or if tradespeople move in, or if professions 
move in under the services section, all of which have been, in 
effect, obligated to come in by the free trade deal, under section 6 
of the enabling legislation, the House of Commons says that 
nothing can limit Canada’s power to do whatever is necessary, 
coupled with the regulation, nothing whatsoever to implement the 
implementations and the aspects of the free trade deal. 
 
By the way, it doesn’t stop there. I will have specific questions, 
after the Premier responds, on similar theories with respect to what 
subsidies mean. I will have similar questions with respect to 
energy. But the same thrust exists with both energy and subsidies 
as it does under section 6, as it does on the general combination of 
provincial powers, which I have heretofore described, saying that 
this is an assumption by the federal government that it has 
all-encompassing power under the so-called treaty-making powers 
of the federal government to do anything that it wants with this 
trade deal, which will, if implemented, mark my words, whether 
you’re for it or again it, one thing that is right, it will change 
Canada. 
 
Now I think that a provincial government that accepts section 6 
without protest is a provincial government which has abdicated its 
sworn constitutional duty to 
 

uphold the responsibility of this legislature acting on behalf of the 
million Saskatchewan people in developing the kind of 
compassionate, mixed economy society that I’ve talked about. 
That’s how serious I think section 6 is. There are constitutional 
authors and lawyers who advance that argument. To be true, there 
are those who advance us a different argument, constitutionally, 
but I’ve not heard that argument advanced by the Premier or this 
government of the day. 
 
Again I won’t take up more time; I’ve spoken far more than I’d 
intended to because I do wish the Premier to respond so that we 
can move on expeditiously with these estimates this evening. But I 
think that even the concepts in the Macdonald commission, which 
was the genesis of this free trade deal, conscious of the decision 
making precedents in Canada of the Parsons case, the insurance, 
the labour case — labour conventions case — all of these which 
say that in our system of government, if the federal government 
enters into an international treaty, which is what the free trade deal 
is, if that treaty impacts on provincial jurisdiction, this legislature 
has a say. There must be brought legislation. 
 
By the way, that’s not in the United States. In the United States, 
the U.S. commerce power is so wide . . . interprovincial trade and 
commerce power is so wide that there is no obligation to go to the 
individual states to get their approval. But there is in our context, 
Mr. Chairman. That has been the constitutional set up of a 
balanced federalism, where some things pertain to Ottawa and 
some things pertain to Regina. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in my judgement section 6 holds the potential in 
the future as it in interpreted, especially in clashes and 
interpretations, to be the wide open, sesame door which will allow 
Ottawa, regardless of the political stripes, to basically overrule all 
of the traditional and constitutionally assigned powers of 
Saskatchewan and all the provinces in the areas which range from 
contracts to consumer protections to education, and I’ll talk about 
medicare when I come to subsidies, and other areas. I think that is 
unacceptable. 
 
Now let me just close before I ask the question of the Premier. I 
think I’m not alone in this. Premier Bourassa knows the danger as 
far as his province is concerned. If there is any province in Canada 
which is safeguarding the provincial right — perhaps, maybe 
some might argue, to excess — it is Quebec. He knows the 
difference. He is going to introduce provincial legislation which 
will give the same effect to section 6. I could still argue about the 
impact of that, but at least he is being constitutionally true to the 
duty that he has been sworn to carry out That’s what he’ll be 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I don’t know. I don’t know what the province 
of Ontario will do. There is some talk that under this section 6 and 
other provisions, this legislation will be challenged in a court of 
law. It is no answer, I submit, to say, well go ahead and sue — as 
Mr. Crosbie says — we’ll let the courts decide. I mean, the courts 
might decide, all right, but they might decide to the point where 
there’s no use to having a province of Saskatchewan or a province 
of   



 
June 23, 1988 

2479 
 

Ontario in the wording. 
 
Federalism implies — like Meech Lake, like the deal before 
Meech Lake, like confederation from 1867 — a negotiated 
balance between provincial rights. And there’s a reason for that, 
because no matter how well intentioned Ottawa is, as I said in my 
opening remarks, they will never be able to understand this region. 
We don’t have the voting strength; we don’t have the members of 
parliament. We have relatively small provinces; we’ve had to 
combine to get the western Canadian voice herd. We’ve had to 
rely on the protection of the British North America Act. We’ve 
had to defend our constitutional rights, because if we gave them 
up and we put them in the hands of Ottawa, we would be captive 
to the majority — the majority being Ontario and Quebec — and 
our chances for diversification and growth would be further 
blunted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question is this: I know the Premier is a 
passionate and eloquent debater and proponent of free trade. I’ve 
stated my reasons why I’m against it. But even though he is, will 
he not concede to me that the argument that I advance on the 
impact of section 7 raises a serious collateral issue about the future 
of our jurisdiction and our powers to pass legislation, be it farm 
debt legislation or land ownership legislation or contractual 
legislation? Does he not share this concern? If he shares it, at least 
would he bring forward complementary legislation? His majority 
will carry the day; we can fight him for it, but at least it will be an 
implication and an act of confirmation of provincial power in 
doing so. Does he not share this concern? If he does, will he not 
introduce the legislation so we can debate it? 
 
And if he has absolutely no concern about what I raise, if he is 
prepared to surrender, as I would describe it, to Ottawa this 
sesame door, if he’s prepared to do that, which I would very much 
sadly say is a wrong thing to do, then surely isn’t this something 
which, as Canadians, whether we’re in the provincial legislature or 
our national legislature, that is something that Canadians should 
decide by a national vote? 
 
It may be said to be too complicated; it may be said that people 
don’t understand this about free trade. I say to you, Mr. Chairman, 
and I say to the members of the gallery who are watching this 
debate here in this Assembly, and I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, mark my words, if you like the kind of society that 
we’ve built, understand that we have built it because we’ve had 
the constitutional authority to do it and the political parties with a 
will to do it. Understand that if you want that society sometimes 
built in the future again so that we can be great again, understand 
that section 6 in the free trade deal raise major risks which 10 or 
15 years from now may make this province and this country a 
satellite to the Americans — as I say, not the worst fate that could 
befall us, but not the Canadian fate. Understand that, and that 
should mean an election for us Canadians for all to decide. 
 
(1930) 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I ask the Premier, I say to the Premier: do you 
not share my concern, even a bit? If you don’t share it, will you 
table the . . . I don’t ask for all the government reports, but show 
us some legal analysis, constitutionally, internally or externally, 
which defeats the argument that I advance. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will take a few minutes to 
respond to the hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition, in 
general fashion, then I’ll address his point with respect to free 
trade. 
 
When the hon. member was talking, I’m reminded of my decision 
to get into politics. And at that time, in the late ’70s, the hon. 
member that was just speaking, the Leader of the Opposition, was 
deputy premier of the province. And I wasn’t very political, I have 
to admit that. I had never been involved in a political party, and 
had heard stories about the Liberals and the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and the PCs and others — Social 
Credit. 
 
But I can say to the hon. member that — and I’m sure that he will 
take this at face value — that while I had very fond memories of 
the imagination and the compassion of the former premier, the late 
T.C. Douglas, I have to tell him that I found no excitement and no 
imagination and no future coming out of the NDP. And I looked 
hard. In fact I was involved with some of the cabinet ministers at 
that time doing research and some other things. 
 
And I asked myself, well how can we really get the people 
involved in government? How can we give the province back to 
the people so they will feel really good about government? And I 
remember somebody at the university saying, if we could only 
have government as good as the people, so that the people could 
be involved all the time. And they said all over then, in late 1970s 
and obviously then again in ’82 and again in ’86, that it wasn’t 
there with the NDP. It just wasn’t evident. It was a feeling that the 
government came first and the families came second. 
 
I believe, Mr. Chairman, you will remember there were even the 
ads on television that said, the Saskatchewan family of Crown 
corporations. And it offended a lot of people, because it talked 
about the government as the family, as the most important element 
in society. Well what about the farmers? What about the towns 
and the villages and the cities and the children? It didn’t mention 
that. And many, many of us said to ourselves, you know, it seems 
to me that the family should come first, people should come first, 
and the government should be there to facilitate. 
 
Let me put it another way, Mr. Chairman, just so the hon. member 
knows exactly the philosophy of this administration under my 
leadership. I see government not unlike perhaps he does, and he 
has an affection for co-operatives. Everybody’s involved. In the 
co-operatives that were developed in western Canada, everybody 
had a share, and they still do. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2480 
 

I want to remind the member, and I will touch on it in a little bit 
here, say that there have been 60 new co-operatives formed, 
incorporated in 1987-88 in the province of Saskatchewan; all of 
them with new shareholders, and each of them that are 
participating have a share. 
 
And people said to me: why can’t, we, the people of 
Saskatchewan be involved in government? Why can’t you give the 
government back to the people, give the province back to the 
people, rather than just have it run out of Regina with bigger and 
bigger Crown corporations that call themselves the family? Why 
don’t you put the power in the hands of the people? 
 
And I’ve often thought, and I’ll touch on it again when we get to 
public participation, and I say that in tremendous respect, but if 
Mr. Douglas had the concept of allowing the people to share in 
government, to publicly participate, I don’t think he would have 
knocked that concept at all. I think he would have endorsed it. 
 
I believe the former premier would have said, why not share it 
with the people? Why deny any man, woman, and child the 
opportunity to participate in Crown corporations, in government, 
whether it’s power bonds or whether it’s shares or its 
involvement? And why not decentralize government and put the 
crop insurance in Melville and the agricultural credit corporation 
in Swift Current and other departments in other places? Let the 
people be involved. Philosophically, I don’t think he would have 
been against that. That’s what the co-op movement is all about, 
people having control of their future and their government. 
 
Now I come back to where I started. I didn’t see any of that, nor 
did my friends and my colleagues when I was at the university in 
the late ’70s. I saw more government buying more things and 
running more things, not in the hands of the people, but in the 
hands of a few elected officials. You get elected and then you’d 
have, you know, more to play with and more control over people’s 
lives. And it offended people. 
 
And I say to the hon. member, I believe that philosophy of a few 
people controlling it at the top offends Canadians, not because 
they don’t want to be co-operative — they like to be involved — 
but it offends Canadians in Manitoba, and in New Brunswick, and 
in Quebec, in B.C., Alberta, here — all over this country. You 
don’t see many governments that are now standing up as the hon. 
member has just gone through, because he’s raised on it and he cut 
his teeth on it, that the government will run it in the middle and 
control it and they will have these engines of a mixed economy, 
centred at the cabinet table — not the people in control, but the 
cabinet members. 
 
Now that’s foreign to what developed this country. It’s foreign to 
my grandparents that homesteaded here, all immigrants. And I 
believe it’s foreign to the youth today. They don’t want . . . In fact, 
they don’t want politicians to have more power. They’re sceptical 
of politicians with power — all of us — and maybe we’ve earned 
that. They said, let us be part and parcel of what’s going on in 
society. Well, I won’t belabour it. 
 

I got into government sincerely, to build with people at 
universities, on farms, in villages, everywhere, not just to run it, 
not to be involved in having control over everything that happens. 
Decentralize and provide that opportunity to the public — that’s 
the way we build the farms, the co-operative, all the things that we 
do in this province, and indeed across Western Canada. 
 
Now, you could call me CCF or you could call me Social Credit or 
Liberal or PC, or whatever that is, but I would think that if you 
take the strength of the CCF and the strength of Social Credit and 
the strength of the people that built in the Liberal Party, and the 
strength of the people that built in the PC Party, that’s what you’ll 
find in common: working with each other, building, sharing, 
everybody involved — not just a few at the top, but everybody. 
 
Now let me just touch on the four points the hon. member made 
and I’ll address his question on free trade. First thing he said . . . 
And I understand why he’s doing it philosophically and it’s quite 
clear. I mean he’s on one side and I’m on another and we can go 
around giving speeches on it. The hon. member knows that we 
need to trade — he said that. We should expand trade world-wide; 
we should liberalize trade — he said that. 
 
I will just touch on a couple of documents before me and I won’t 
elaborate because he has read them both. The biggest argument 
I’ve heard from the opposition about free trade is that this free 
trade agreement between the United States and Canada isolates us 
to the United States as Canadians, and we won’t have access to the 
multilateral trade around the world. 
 
Well if that was ever put to bed, it certainly was in this last 
weekend. The seven major leaders of the world, including Japan, 
strongly endorsed the free trade agreement between Canada and 
the United States as a step towards more liberalized trade 
world-wide. It represented the 13 countries that trade in the 
European Economic Community because the general secretary 
was there. Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, specifically, and 
Japan in the Pacific Rim, endorse this as being perfectly consistent 
with more liberalized trade world-wide. 
 
Now they signed on the bottom line. And I’m sure the hon. 
member knows — he’s written communiqués, he’s been to 
meetings as a minister, as vice-premier, deputy premier — he 
knows that when you sign on the bottom line that you’re going to 
have to stand with it. 
 
And they’ve done that. And this was clearly watched by the rest of 
the world. And I just quote item 15 of the communiqué. It says: 
 

We strongly welcome the Free Trade Agreement between 
Canada and the United States, and the steady progress 
towards the target of the European Community to complete 
the international market and the internal market by 1992. 
 
It is our policy that these developments, together with other 
moves towards regional cooperation in which our countries 
are involved, should support   



 
June 23, 1988 

2481 
 

the open, multilateral trading system and catalyze the 
liberalizing impact of the Uruguay Round (the next round of 
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). 

 
It says, if I can paraphrase, Mr. Chairman, that the agreement that 
we’ve put together between Americans and Canadians is the best 
example they know today towards more liberalized trade and trade 
peace in the world — in the world. 
 
The Soviet Union is moving towards more liberalized trade and a 
more market-oriented economy. The Chinese are moving in the 
same direction. People all over the world are doing it and the top 
leaders, the top seven, including 13 countries in the European 
Economic community, disagree with the Leader of the Opposition, 
the NDP. They say no, no. François Mitterrand says no, this is 
good. This is a socialist leader, just elected in France, in Europe, a 
major country — says this is good; we welcome the free trade. 
 
Now we have eight out of the 10 provinces, the majority of 
Canadians, the seven top countries in the world, 13 in the EEC 
(European Economic Community), including Japan, all saying this 
is a very positive thing. It’s not perfect. Not perfect, but positive, 
moving towards more jobs, more prosperity, and trade peace. And 
my hon. colleague, the member from Riversdale, says no, we 
shouldn’t do this. 
 
Well, we obviously know the game of politics at the local level, 
when he mentions by-elections and others, that you can knock on 
doors and say, well I don’t think we should do this. I understand 
that. But we carry some responsibility in this Assembly, and we 
carry some responsibility as leaders. This is progress towards trade 
peace, and trade peace is good. Nuclear peace is good. Peace 
generally between nations, knowledge, exchange of information, 
and the global village is good and positive. This is exchange of 
goods and services and ideas and mend and women endorsed by 
the world, at least the free world leaders. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s pretty reasonable. We’ve 
got eight out of 10 premiers in the country. We have former 
Liberal cabinet minister, Donald Macdonald, who supports it. The 
Leader of the Opposition says that . . . And he speaks highly of the 
former premier of Alberta, Mr. Lougheed. Mr. Lougheed endorses 
this, is part of promoting it. The Premier of Quebec endorses it; 
the Premier of New Brunswick endorses it. Not necessarily 
Progressive Conservatives. Former Liberal leader of Manitoba, 
Izzy Asper, endorses it — prosperity and growth. 
 
I mean, I talked to . . . You know, I don’t think it’s out of school at 
all. I talked to union people and leaders and they say, look, I have 
nothing against it except I’m NDP. That’s the line. Well we 
understand the politics of that. But for the country and for this 
province, it’s good. 
 
Now let me just change it. I just go back, and I won’t dwell on it, 
but the Leader of the Opposition was deputy premier. In his 
cabinet, he asked to have research done for P&P, priorities and 
planning, and he did in 1974, on 
 

Saskatchewan’s position with respect to more liberalized trade. 
And I’ve obviously read this in the House. At that time he sent this 
to the Hon. Alastair Gillespie and said, this is Saskatchewan’s 
position with respect to free trade and liberalized trade, 
world-wide and with the United States. And it was signed by the 
minister at that time, Mr. Kim Thorson. 
 
(1945) 
 
And I just want the public to know, in case they didn’t catch my 
first speech the time that I read this — anybody wants this, if they 
write me, I’ll certainly be able to present it to them and send it to 
them. This research done by the NDP cabinet endorses free trade, 
endorses liberalized trade. In today’s figures, if you sum it up, it 
says it’s worth $335 million a year net benefit to the province of 
Saskatchewan, 1987 dollars. Three hundred and thirty-five million 
in new economic activity every year to the province of 
Saskatchewan if we could just reduce the tariffs particularly on 
processed goods. 
 
Now why processed goods? And it’s well documented, and I 
congratulate the hon. member because that’s the items that we are 
trying to manufacture and process and export. They don’t have 
many tariffs on fence posts, on live animals, on the raw material, 
but they have the tariffs on processed goods, and we’re trying to 
process, manufacture, and do all those things, and right in here it 
says, these are the kinds of goods and services that we would 
benefit by if we reduced the tariffs. 
 
Well I want to remind the hon. member, as it says in here, on a per 
capita basis, exports are much more important for Saskatchewan 
than for the total of Canada. Now if this deal is good for Canada, 
imagine what it means to the province of Saskatchewan . And the 
report goes on and it indicates, and I’ll just read a couple of 
paragraphs: 
 

Sizeable foreign tariffs exist on processed goods exported 
from Saskatchewan (this is page 11). This is unfortunate. It is 
well documented that the exporting of processed goods 
yields much greater return than the shipping of products that 
are unprocessed. 

 
And it goes through and it documents it in some detail. 
 
It goes on, Mr. Chairman, and talks about the impact of the 
Canadian tariff structure and the fact that western Canadians have 
been asked to pay the tariff and we don’t play on an equal playing 
field. We pay the freight both ways; we have to pay tariffs on our 
textiles, on our refrigerators, on appliances, on chemicals, and all 
the things that we might be able to buy on an international market; 
we have to pay tariffs in central Canada as we reduce tariffs. The 
report says, for Heaven’s sakes, we get the benefit here in the 
West and it doesn’t just go to Ontario and Quebec. Now you can 
find that on pages 15 and 16. And it goes on to say that: 
 

This is evidence that the Canadian tariff structure does not 
take into account the needs of the Saskatchewan economy 
(that is the tariff structure we have today). In fact it is in 
general a hindrance to the development of manufacturing and   



 
June 23, 1988 

2482 
 

processing industries in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the Canadian tariff structure as it applies particularly to the 
United States, our largest trading partner, and the rest of the world 
— documented. 
 
Now on page 18 it says, “Our philosophy that free trade is superior 
to no trade . . .” and that, The province favours reduced trade 
barriers both in exports and imports.” 
 
The philosophy of the report, and at that time evidently when you 
were in government, the NDP, on page 20 you say that, “The cost 
to consumers in Saskatchewan of the tariff structure between our 
countries is $119 million. For the manufacturers and processors, 
it’s $39.8 million.” And the net cost of tariffs and levies to the 
Saskatchewan economy at that time was $130 million, 335 million 
to date. 
 
And then you go on and you have conclusions. And if I just might, 
I’ll read your conclusions, sir: 
 

Saskatchewan is (this is page 22) essentially interested in 
seeing the major trading countries move towards free trade 
(free trade). Saskatchewan would not endorse general 
increases or the maintenance of protectionism either at home 
or abroad. Extensive trade liberalization at the international 
and domestic levels such as will be recommended below in 
this report could result in savings to the Saskatchewan 
economy of more than $130 million annually. 

 
And as I pointed out in 1987 dollars, that’s $335 million. 
 
And here specifically on page 23: 
 

Recommendations. The reduction of United States tariffs on 
processed and manufactured forest, minerals, and agriculture 
products, would assist the Saskatchewan economy. 

 
We understand the game, Mr. Chairman. I believe that . . . Well all 
I can say is, I agree with the seven leaders of the free world, the 
majority leaders. I agree with your own research in 1974. 
 
I don’t think you can get away with just saying this is the 
Reagan-Mulroney deal and expect people just to dislike it because 
you use their names like that. Canadians and Americans, with 
some of the smartest, most intelligent external affairs people that 
we could find in either side, public servants, career civil servants 
that have worked under many presidents and many prime 
ministers, put this deal together, and it’s an example for GATT, 
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 
 
And you can’t debase it by saying it’s the Mulroney deal or the 
Reagan deal. It’s Canadian and American setting an example for 
the rest of the world. And I am happy that it’s there and I’m proud 
to have made a contribution. And all of Canadians certainly 
shouldn’t be intimidated by our ability to participate on an 
international level. Well and I’m certainly glad that the world 
leaders endorse it, strongly support it, and recommend it to the rest 
of the world. 

Let me say just a couple of words about economic development. 
The hon. member mentions, and I’m quite proud of the mix that 
he’s talking about, in his view of the world there’s three major 
engines of growth in Saskatchewan, and I agree. Three major 
engines of growth are the private sector, the public sector, and the 
co-operative sector. And they all can be very powerful and very 
instrumental. And I agree with that. 
 
The trick is, again when I go back to the late ’70s and I think about 
why I got into politics, it wasn’t working. What was the public 
sector doing? It was dominating the private sector. it was 
nationalizing things, taking them over. I don’t know, I don’t have 
a list of them all, but I can give you some of them, I suppose. You 
know the government took over PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) and borrowed $186 million at 17 per cent interest and 
locked it in — American funds; bought 171 million in land bank; 
450 million, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Where’s the 
co-operation? Where’s that nice mix? I didn’t see the mix. It was 
intimidating the private sector. Everybody was saying, you don’t 
invest in Saskatchewan. They’re socialists; they got one thing in 
mind, you control it at the centre. And it wasn’t popular, wasn’t 
fashionable any more. You tried it and it didn’t work. 
 
Let me talk about co-ops. The co-operative movement — I’m 
proud of it. I think it has a very good philosophy, and I want to 
have people participate. We’re so proud of it that we built the 
largest project in the history of Saskatchewan with a co-operative 
in the city of Regina. I didn’t hear you mention that. 
 
This upgrader, the NewGrade upgrader, which is a partnership 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Canada and the co-op movement in this province, is a tremendous 
project, the largest in the history of Saskatchewan, let alone 
co-operatives. And it will help co-ops for decades and generations 
to come. And you know that. They have a source of strength and 
power. They can diversify — processing, manufacturing, access to 
the U.S. market, making our own gasoline and diesel fuel from our 
own oil for the first time in Canadian history and Saskatchewan 
history, our oil right here. And you say you were a promoter of 
co-ops. I didn’t see that. I didn’t see you do that. I didn’t see you 
helping co-ops, putting hundreds of millions of dollars on the line 
and your political neck on the line for co-ops. You talked a lot 
about it, frankly, but I didn’t see the action. 
 
I saw you buying potash mines and taking over pulp companies 
and taking over packing plants. But what did you build? Sixty new 
co-ops we’ve had in ’87-88, incorporated under this 
administration, and a huge co-operative program that we’re proud 
of, that will build on this province and its strengths, and not just 
buy your energy from Alberta. And I can spend some time on that 
and I might. 
 
All that money you put into the Alberta economy and Alberta 
heritage fund because you wouldn’t build it here, not just because 
of your royalty structure, which left us with a $300 million debt 
because you paid for dry holes, but you wouldn’t build. You didn’t 
build upgraders. You   



 
June 23, 1988 

2483 
 

didn’t build the kinds of things that you’d like to see with 
co-operatives. 
 
The second thing, the public sector. The hon. member says that we 
don’t use the public sector; all we do is cut it down. Let me just 
make a point. I don’t know what he thinks rural gas is, but it’s 
public sector — $300 million, $350 million rural gas distribution 
system across Saskatchewan. That’s building with an 
infrastructure, Mr. Chairman, and I didn’t see that before. And I 
was an economist at the university talking about rural 
development, and I was out in extension, and I couldn’t find it. 
 
And he says we don’t use the public sector. We used the public 
sector to help build the Co-op upgrader, NewGrade upgrader. We 
used the public system to provide rural gas to towns and villages 
and every farmer in this province. Individual line service, public 
project, $150 million — public government; power lines; burying 
them, making the cables here. Those are government projects the 
hon. member didn’t mention. I mean, just to be fair. You know, it 
is the mix. It is the mix, but the mix has to be in balance. 
 
Now the private sector; we encourage them to come in and work 
with us. Upgraders, paper mills, VCCs (venture capital 
corporations) that we established, manufacturing bacon, 
recreational vehicles, turbines — all the things that we can do 
together with co-ops, public sector, and the private sector to build. 
 
I can say to the hon. member, it’s not perfect. We’ve been through 
some difficult times. We’ve made mistakes, but we will continue 
to build on the combination of things that obviously we think are 
important with the three. 
 
Now I’ll add to the hon. member, he talks about fiscal 
management. I can say to the hon. member . . . I can say to the 
hon. member . . . I must have struck a key, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I remember in 1982 people said, I’m not so sure why, with a 
province that has all this energy, we can’t reduce the tax levels on 
individuals. Why can’t we reduce the sales levels on individuals. 
Why can’t we reduce the sales tax on gasoline — and we did. And 
we’re the only province in the country that still has no tax on 
gasoline for individuals here as long as you have the rebate, you 
have no tax and you keep your receipts. 
 
No sales tax on clothes under $300, Mr. Chairman. People want to 
see that response. We have the second lowest tax levels in all of 
Canada now, Mr. Chairman, the second lowest tax levels in all of 
Canada. 
 
And when we look at it, Mr. Speaker, and we look at the kind of 
expenditures that we want to make in terms of the expenditures 
that we receive and the dollars that we receive, we taken 
health-care expenditures from sixth in the country to second in 
Canada — number two in Canada — spending over $1,240 per 
man, woman and child in this province as a result of the 
management we’ve been able to put together, as the Leader of the 
Opposition says, under some pretty difficult times — drought, $2 
wheat, $10 oil, varying kind of problems that we faced. 
 

Mr. Chairman, I will say to the hon. members, when you talk 
about a consensus, I suppose that would be one area that really 
encouraged people not to support the NDP. We look at the 
national energy program. We look at the FIRA (Foreign 
Investment Review Agency). We remember the fact that the 
federal government took $50 billion out of western Canada — out 
of Alberta and Saskatchewan in wealth — as a result of the 
national energy program. it was the Trudeau administration 
supported by the NDP. Mr. Chairman, I remember those programs 
and I remember the people who supported the programs at the 
national level. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when I look at the four points the hon. member has 
raised with respect to trade — I don’t believe that he’s done his 
homework — with respect to the combination of things in the 
economy that really make it work. He failed to recognize several 
points that I believe that he could add to. 
 
With respect to the kind of tax regime that we have today and the 
breaks, I would gladly compare it to other jurisdictions. And when 
he looks at the consensus . . . when I look at Meech Lake, when I 
look at the free trade agreement, when I look at the kinds of things 
that we’ve been able to do . . . And frankly we did not leave out 
Quebec as was the case in 1981, id not leave them out, they’re 
included in this and that’s extremely important. So I say to the 
hon. member, the combination of things that we can do to build 
the consensus today — reconciliation and consensus — 
reconciliation and consensus is extremely important. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the hon. member says, well what about C-130 in 
section 6; aren’t there concerns with respect to federal and 
provincial jurisdiction. There are concerns and there have been 
concerns and there will continue to be concerns with respect to 
provincial and federal jurisdiction. The hon. member knows that. 
He’s been involved himself. Many of the provinces have been 
involved, and will be involved in them in the future. 
 
(2000) 
 
He knows very well that a provincial government or a federal 
government cannot change the constitution unilaterally. And the 
constitution, Mr. Chairman, the constitution says that the federal 
government has jurisdiction over interprovincial and export 
matters. And the provincial government has control over 
resources, education, and the various other items that are there 
within the constitution. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve looked at the comprehensive legislation. 
Other provinces have. Provinces will continue to examine it and 
look at it from a legal perspective, as well as an economic 
perspective. And we support the free trade agreement between 
Canada and the United States, and fully know that the federal 
government has all the legislation that it needs to implement a free 
trade treaty with another nation, as it has with GATT for decades. 
And we’ve been doing these trade treaties for the last 40 years. 
 
So I say to the hon. member, his own research has shown him that 
more liberalized trade is a good idea. The   



 
June 23, 1988 

2484 
 

research that we have shows that it’s a good idea. And if he is 
saying that the federal government doesn’t have the power to 
implement a free trade agreement or a treaty with another country, 
I’d be surprised, because obviously it has that kind of capacity to 
compete at the international level under the jurisdiction of the 
constitution we have today. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I had hoped that the 
Premier would have engaged in perhaps a little more factual 
discussion of the estimates, but I see that that’s not possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’ll tell you why it’s not possible. He says, 
“your own research,” referring to the 1974 agreement. Now this 
comes from a Premier. This statement and this interpretation 
comes from a Premier who, although he is a leader of a political 
party, and we understand as he says in his words, “what the game 
is,” misrepresents totally and completely the nature of this 1974 
document. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, this document is dated 
October, 1974, and it says, Saskatchewan and Canada 
International Trade, I quote: 
 

Submission by the province of Saskatchewan to the 
Canadian Trade and Tariffs Committee, Government of 
Canada, with respect to Canada’s participation in the current 
trade negotiations, under the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade. 

 
This was a submission by Saskatchewan to Canada, to aid Canada 
to make its submissions known on GATT. GATT is world trade, 
world tariff reduction, that is the nature. It is not with the United 
States-Canada free trade deal, not whatsoever. 
 
And for the Premier to take highly selected quotations out of 
context and to say that we supported free trade is nothing short but 
a gross misrepresentation not worthy of the Premier’s position, not 
worthy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — In fact, I’ll go one step further, Mr. Chairman. 
I will say that if the Premier of Saskatchewan, in 1988, endorsed 
this document, full stop, period, and not the United States-Canada 
free trade deal, we’d have a blueprint for international trade and 
development in Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — If the journalists take the time to read it, if the 
members opposite take the time to read it, if all the members of the 
public take time to read it, as I’ve said in the covering statement, 
this is a submission to GATT, it deals with tariffs, to the extent 
that the United States-Canada free trade deal deals with tariffs and 
the reduction of tariffs — few people are going to oppose that. 

But it goes beyond tariffs. What the Canada-U.S. free trade deal 
does, it enters into an economic union, as I’ve tried to explain to 
the Premier and to the members of this House. In this thick of a 
book, it involves subsidies with respect to agriculture; it talks in 
terms of the marketing boards of agriculture; it talks in terms of 
energy, giving the Americans equal access to energy; it talks about 
giving the Americans equal access to water in Canada, Mr. 
Chairman. That is not even mentioned in this 1974 agreement, not 
mentioned. In fact, any provincial government, especially in 1988, 
that would sign off the right to water, if you will, for Canada and 
Saskatchewan in the United States-Canada free trade deal, and 
then represents it back to 1974, is not doing his job for the people 
of Saskatchewan and misrepresenting what the people of 
Saskatchewan want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Make absolutely no doubt about that — no 
doubt about that. And he knows it. And he knows it. Everybody 
knows it. 
 
Let me just tell you about how this free trade deal works, as an 
example, on water. Let me just tell you how it works. I told you 
that the free trade deal, in consequential terms, sequential terms, is, 
first of all, this negotiated deal, from A to Z, the comprehensive 
operation. It is the book right there. 
 
Now the next thing that takes place is the legislation, Mr. 
Chairman, which I referred to — it is there — and the tariffs 
which were attached to legislation. What do we see happening 
with respect to this deal? We see under the arrangements of this 
particular deal of all the — not all. Many researchers now are 
pointing out that water is treated as a “good” under the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. And what is, under the definition 
of the tariff schedule, a “good”? It’s included. And how is water 
described under this tariff schedule? It is described as follows, 
under the free trade deal which this Premier and this government 
endorses. I refer now to, I think it’s page S144 on the volume 3 of 
the attached regulations to the free trade deal, schedule 1 to the 
customs tariff. I’m going to ask the Premier some very pointed 
questions about this. 
 
And 22.01 says this: 
 

Description of goods (covered by the Canada-United States 
free trade deal): 
 
Waters, (waters, including — not only, Mr. Chairman, but 
including waters,) including natural or artificial mineral 
waters and aerated waters, not containing added sugar or 
other sweetening matter nor flavoured; ice and snow. 

 
This provision, the federal government negotiator, Mr. Reisman, 
wanted excluded from the free trade deal. This is admitted in the 
House of Commons. They wanted it excluded. The record of the 
House of Commons shows that in the question and answer period 
when Mr. Axworthy of the Liberal Party raised questions of John 
Crosbie. And they did not get it excluded. It is now in the   



 
June 23, 1988 

2485 
 

deal. Then when it’s in the deal, what happens to it next? 
 
Now it’s in the deal; the next provision that takes place in the 
Canada free trade deal is this: that with respect to this definition of 
water, to this definition of water, the Americans have the same 
provision under clause 409 of the deal as they have to energy and 
oil and natural gas — equal access. What does that mean, Mr. 
Chairman? It means this: you can’t charge the Americans a price 
higher for our oil and natural gas, and if you have to cut back in 
supply of oil and natural gas to the Americans, you got to supply 
the Canadians the same level. That’s the deal says it, in 704.3. And 
the same provision provides to Ottawa. 
 
Now the Premier’s argument is, but we don’t sell water to Ottawa 
or to the United States. The Premier says, we’re not selling water. 
I mean, this is a provision which doesn’t count. He would have us 
believe that it’s little bottles, carbonated little bottles that the 
Americans are interested in. He says, the Canadians don’t sell 
water and we as a Saskatchewan government doesn’t sell water, 
and I commend him from that point of view, if that’s the point of 
view that he takes. 
 
But the very provision which he defends in the trade Act that I 
refer to, section 6, the very provision which he defends as a federal 
power, permits the federal government to enact the appropriate 
legislation under the international trade and power to determine 
water and water exporting future arrangements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s the situation. That’s the situation, and if 
that interpretation isn’t right, the Premier can answer me this: why 
is it that the Canadian negotiator sought to have that provision on 
water excluded? They sought to have it excluded; they admit that 
in the Hansard. But they didn’t get it excluded because they went 
down there to negotiate not a tariffs deal, which the 1974 
document talks about, they went down there to negotiate a 
comprehensive economic union from energy to water to 
investment, to selling out the birthright of Saskatchewan and 
Canada. I say, shame on the Premier and the people opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, take a look at the schedules. Oh well, the 
Premier and the people opposite will say, well, you know, we’re 
not going to sell any water under our jurisdiction. What happens 
when there’s water under interprovincial jurisdiction? What about 
the rivers that flow interprovincially? What about the inquiries 
which have taken place recently from British Columbia, but 
sponsored by the federal government, on the level of control. But 
that’s not even the relevant point. I mean, it’s relevant that water is 
so essential to the free trade deal. What’s relevant is that the 
Premier defends section 6 of the free trade deal as having been the 
power and the right of Canada. He won’t raise a finger, because he 
says that it’s a negotiated deal, an international deal. He says, if 
it’s a negotiated international deal, it doesn’t matter what’s in it, 
we, as a provincial government, can’t say or do anything about it. 
That’s what he says. 
 

He says, if the federal government negotiates another international 
trade and commerce or international treaty between the powers, 
what I’ve got to do is sing the Hallelujah Chorus, is what he says. I 
can’t stand up for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and I say to the Premier and to the 
members opposite, that is pure and simple, a sell-out, a sell-out of 
the Canadian right. That’s a sell-out of Saskatchewan farmers and 
the sell-out of this province. And my question to the Premier is: 
how in the world do you dispute that interpretation of that 
provision and that history with respect to water? Give us an 
explanation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, you can usually tell when the 
argument doesn’t carry a whole bunch of weight on the other side 
because there tends to be a lot of bravado and a lot of support and 
a lot of hollering and a lot of screaming, but not much logic, not 
much logic. And they talk from their seat, Mr. Chairman, a lot, 
because they can’t deal with the facts, deal with the facts. 
 
Let me just make a point with respect to water, and the hon. 
member mentions it. Right now in the Souris river system the 
United States gets 98.6 per cent of the water that is produced in 
Canada. It gets it. And the water goes down into the United States, 
and we’re entitled to 50 per cent of it, but the United States get 98 
per cent. It leaves Saskatchewan, and we do nothing about it, and 
it’s gone. And we’re entitled to 50 per cent, and he’s . . . the hon. 
member’s talking to me about water. 
 
I dare say, Mr. Chairman, if the former premier, T.C. Douglas, 
was alive today, he would build Rafferty dam. He would manage 
water resources for drought. 
 
I’ve read in this legislature, Mr. Chairman, I’ve read in this 
legislature the words of Mr. T.C. Douglas on Gardiner dam and 
Diefenbaker Lake, on Diefenbaker Lake, Mr. Chairman, and he 
said, this project will be good for power generation, it will be good 
for irrigation, it will be good for tourism, it will be good for 
agriculture, it will be good for tourism, it will be good for 
agriculture, it will be managing a non-renewable resource. And 
that’s exactly what we see with respect to sharing water with the 
United States. 
 
And the hon. member says, well he doesn’t want to do anything 
with water. Well I can only say, Mr. Chairman, this project that 
we’re doing will allow Canadians to have our fair share of the 
water. Why would you deny Canadians and Saskatchewan people 
the right to have our 50 per cent of the water? 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s a typical example. And then he goes into the 
free trade agreement and he says, well look at this, my gosh, 
you’re going to be trading water with the United States. He’s 
prepared to give them 98 per cent of the water going out of 
Saskatchewan for nothing, yet he won’t be able to trade. He 
doesn’t want to build and manage a resource that is very valuable 
for southern Saskatchewan or any place else across the Canadian 
West. 
 
And then he goes on to say, well they’ll be able to have   



 
June 23, 1988 

2486 
 

access to energy and a brand-new agreement and we’ll have to 
provide them with all our energy. He knows very well that this 
agreement is subject to the international energy agreement of 
1974. And he was the deputy premier of the time. And he’s 
familiar with that, which says, under all conditions with our allies 
we will treat each other with respect, and if we have contracts with 
our allies, under emergency allies, under emergency conditions, 
we’ll honour those contracts. That’s all it says. And he knows that. 
 
So he goes on . . . and then he says, well we should vote on this. 
Well of course we’ll vote on this. Mr. Chairman, there will be a 
federal election this summer or this fall or next year. And the 
question will be: voting on free trade, it’ll be voting on Meech 
Lake, but particularly on trade. It will be the very thing that we’re 
talking about here. So the hon. member says we should have a 
chance to vote on it. 
 
I noticed that they had a chance to vote on it in Manitoba. They 
had a chance to vote on it in a major by-election in Quebec just 
recently, which was exactly on Meech Lake and free trade, and it 
was endorsed. And I think the NDP lost in Manitoba, and I believe 
they lost their deposit in Quebec. So, Mr. Chairman, I point out to 
the hon. member, we’ll vote about it all across this country and the 
hon. member knows it. 
 
Now he’s made his point. He doesn’t want liberalized trade. And I 
make this offer, I will send this research to any member of your 
caucus or any member of your party that wants this information. 
And we can talk about whether it relates to United States, and I 
can quote right out of it that we should reduce tariffs between 
Canada and the United States, that’s what it says, okay? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well that’s what it’s all about. 
 
(2015) 
 
And reduce tariffs between . . . Listen, Mr. Speaker, they have to 
make up some sort of monkey business and say, I won’t believe 
this. This is good research, they say, more liberalized trade. It’ll be 
very good. Reduce the tariffs between U.S. and Canada, reduce 
the tariffs world-wide. We’ve got the seven major leaders of the 
world supporting it. We’ve got eight out of 10 provinces 
supporting it, saying it’s consistent with your research. 
 
Well anybody that wants it, I’ll send it to you and you can read it 
for yourself because it says this province loses, this province loses 
$335 million a year because we don’t have lower tariffs and our 
biggest trading partner is United States — documented in here and 
you’re saying, well I’m against it. I’m against it philosophically, 
first, because it wasn’t multilateral. Now when the Japanese 
support it, well, I guess it’s because of energy or water or section 
6. 
 
I mean, you just keep going from one thing to another. I would 
just say, in all respect, your research endorses a free trade 
agreement. It says we should reduce the tariffs. I agree with the 
research. I agreed with you in 1974. I just wish you’d stay on 
target and be consistent with what you did in 1974. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romanow: — I tell you, Mr. Chairman, it looks like the 
Premier and I have got an easy agreement. he agrees with me in 
1974 and I agree with him in 1974. Now we would have total 
agreement, Mr. Premier, if you agreed to drop the Canada-U.S. 
trade deal because it is not . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And by the way, I will mail 1974 to anybody 
who asks. I’ll mail 1974 to anybody who asks. And by the way, 
I’ve had several business people who attended a Premier’s dinner 
where one Mr. Oliver Letwin was the guest speaker — we’ll come 
to that also, I hope, some time over the next several days — where 
Mr. Letwin made some address and you referred to this. And 
business people have been saying, I’ve written to the Premier 
asking for a copy, I haven’t got it yet. I hope you’re not delaying, 
and I sure hope that by accident there isn’t a removal that this is a 
paper submitted to the general agreement on trades and tariffs and 
the reductions. 
 
In any event, I say to the members in this House and to anybody 
else, I will make it available, and if you stick to 1974, we can go 
forward on the united policy for trade. But I’ll tell you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay fine, but I’ll tell you one thing, 
Mr. Premier, where we will disagree when you go beyond 1974 
into water. 
 
And I want to ask you this question, and I want a specific answer 
on this question, please. I’m not going to make a speech. I want to 
ask a question. I want to ask this: do you agree that under volume 
3, schedule part (b), tariff 22.01, water is included in the 
U.S.-Canada free trade deal? Call it what you will — 
Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal. Do you agree to that? Do you 
agree that therefore under this same deal, articles 409, page 30 of 
the free trade deal apply, namely that the Americans have equal 
access to water as they would to our energy? Do you agree? And 
if you do not agree I want you to pin-point . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re nuts. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And the Deputy Premier says I’m nuts. Thank 
you very much for that. I want to know exactly if you disagree. If 
you disagree, I want you to point to the chapter and verse where it 
is wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, no, I do not agree, and I will 
get the chapter and verse and provide it to you when I have the 
opportunity to bring the information forward. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — All right. I’m going to ask the Premier another 
specific question. And this is an incredible display, Mr. Chairman. 
This is an over-arching agreement that affects all of Canada, and 
the Premier says he does not know — on water. 
 
Now I have another question. I want to put a specific question to 
the Premier. Do you deny to me — do you deny to me that under 
this United States-Canada free trade deal, in particular under 
chapter nine under the free trade deal, that the Americans have 
equal access — note the words I use — equal access to Canada’s 
energy   



 
June 23, 1988 

2487 
 

supplies, inasmuch as we cannot charge the Americans more than 
we charge ourselves, and inasmuch as that if we reduce the 
product to the Americans, we have to reduce it in the same 
proportions to ourselves. And if you don’t agree, I want you to 
give me chapter and verse where it says I’m wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I do not agree, and the hon. member knows 
that he’s wrong, and he’s building straw men out of both water 
and energy, and he knows it. And he can sit there and hum and 
haw and fool around all he likes. He knows that you can charge 
Americans whatever the market will bear, and you can cut a deal 
on energy. You can cut on energy and you can charge them 
whatever they want to pay. All it says that, during times of 
emergency — when, in fact, that you are under, you’re threatened 
from an international source — that you will honour the contract 
that you signed. That’s what it says. The business contracts that 
you’ve signed, you will honour. And you know that. That’s 
exactly what it says, and the 1974 international energy agreement 
says exactly that. 
 
In fact, this agreement is subordinate to the 1974 energy 
agreement, and you were the deputy premier at that time when that 
was signed. And that says — and I’ll dig that up, I don’t have it 
here, but I’ll dig it up — where it says, under times of emergency 
we will honour our partners and we will honour the contracts. 
Now you should with your allies. 
 
It says, if I have a contract and I set a price and that’s there, then, 
in fact, I can honour it and you will honour it. And we’ve agreed 
to that. We agreed in 1974 to do it and we’ve agreed here to do it. 
That doesn’t mean that you can’t go — that doesn’t mean you 
can’t go and charge whatever the market will bear, as we sell 
either water or hydro power, water-power, or coal-fired generated 
power, or energy of any sort. That’s exactly what we can do, and 
any observations with respect to any changes since 1974 are . . . 
Well you’re just making straw men out of them because we can 
charge whatever we like. We get to control the resource, and, in 
fact, only in times of emergencies will we even have to honour the 
contract — which is only fair — with an ally, but you would. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well I really . . . Mr. Premier, I do want to say 
this . . . I say this to you, I say this to you genuinely. At some point 
earlier, later in this afternoon, you said you didn’t want to get into 
the crowd — referring to the back-benchers on my side — and I 
really don’t want to get into your crowd, especially the very 
profound words of the Deputy Premier who elevates the debate 
with this kind of name-calling which, unfortunately, I think, is all 
too frequent, but that’s neither here nor there. 
 
I’m going to come back, Mr. Premier, to ask you a very specific 
question. I’m asking you, Mr. Premier, a specific question with 
respect to energy. I said this — I repeat what I said — I said that 
the United States-Canada free trade deal gives us equal access, 
gives the Americans equal access — note the words — to our oil 
and natural gas. I said that the United States-Canada free trade 
deal prohibits us from charging the Americans more than we 

charge ourselves. The Premier shakes his head. 
 
I refer the Premier, in support of my proposition to article 903, 
amongst others. I shall read it: 
 

Neither Party shall maintain or introduce any tax, duty, or 
charge on the export (that’s Canada and the United States) of 
energy good to the other Party, unless such tax, duty, or 
charge is also maintained or introduced on such energy 
goods when destined for domestic consumption (here at 
home). 

 
That is my authority to say that we cannot charge the Americans 
more by way of export price than we charge ourselves. I say that 
on that interpretation the competitive edge that we have had to try 
to diversify our province, our region, is lost, because we have to 
charge the same prices. You shake your head. 
 
My question to you is: where, by exact chapter and verse, do you 
have your authority that says that we can charge different 
disparaging prices? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already said to the hon. 
member, in 1974, we had an international energy agreement that 
said that we would honour our contracts at those prices, when we 
found that there was an emergency internationally. And this is 
exactly what we are doing here, exactly. So if there’s an 
international emergency, we will not cut them off, we will honour 
the contracts that we’ve had. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, we can charge them 
anything we like in the contracts we’re about to sign. You can 
have a contract, you can take what the market will bear, and you 
can go out there and can cut deals. We’re doing it all the time, and 
we’ll continue to do it. 
 
All that’s said there, as it did in 1974 with our allies, we will not 
cut them off during an emergency. Now I’m just point it out, that 
it’s the same thing as in 1974, it’s subordinate to the agreement of 
1974, and only, only under emergency situations. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to belabour this 
because I say, quite frankly, with the greatest of respect to the 
Premier, and I do respect him and the office of the Premier, the 
answer is absolutely inadequate. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you will be very simple. You get 
your officials or you do it yourself, take a look at article 903, and 
you tell me how you interpret that article which says that: “ . . . 
any tax, duty, or charge on the export . . .” On the export, it must 
be the same tax, duty, or charge on domestic consumption. And if 
that doesn’t mean that the Americans have equal access to our 
resources, will you please tell me how in those black and white 
words it’s different? 
 
You’re talking about supply. That deals in another capacity, in 
another section on supply. On supply it says   



 
June 23, 1988 

2488 
 

if we cut back on the Americans, we’ve got to cut back on 
ourselves in the same proportion. We’ll deal with that later. You 
tell me how you interpret 903. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I have just said to the hon. member we can 
charge what we like to whoever we like internationally, including 
the United States, under this treaty and the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade. 
 
We have and we will continue . . . We will go back and say, as we 
did in 1974, under emergency conditions we will honour our 
contracts, and we will not tax them, we will not cut back, we will 
not do things different, because under emergencies we treat our 
allies in a proper fashion, and we’ve agreed to do that. Now we 
always have. Now why wouldn’t you want to do it now? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s what it says. It’s the same as 1974 
and this is in fact subordinate to 1974 where we signed an 
international energy agreement that says when we have contracts 
with our allies during times of emergency, we will defend each 
other and we will not renege on those contracts. And you will not 
cut them off — and that’s exactly what this agrees to do. And it is 
subordinate to 1974, and you were deputy premier when that was 
signed. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to push the Premier 
on this for a little while because what will satisfy me, Mr. Premier 
— and I’m prepared to admit that I made an error — what will 
satisfy me, sir, is if you read to me a specific section in this free 
trade deal which justifies your provision. That’s all you have to do. 
 
Now look, I know what you’re referring to. I will read to you the 
federal government’s preamble of 903. I’ll read the preamble. Let 
me just read it to you, quote, with respect to the question of 
energy. Page 142 of the free trade deal. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want the members, I want the member 
from Science and Technology to pay attention, and especially the 
member back there from . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — From Nipawin. Look, this is the federal 
government wording. This is not the text. I read the text. This is 
the federal government’s interpretation of the text. Here’s what it 
says — article 903 what I’m reading: 
 

Article 903 on export taxes . . . (this is the federal 
government) . . . restates the obligation of Chapter Four not 
to impose taxes or charges on exports unless the same tax is 
applied to energy consumed domestically. 

 
Then what the Premier is referring to, which is another issue: 
 

This article also provides that export restrictions not be 
designed to disrupt normal channels of 
 

supply or alter the product mix as between various types of 
specific energy goods exported to the other country. For 
example, if Canada in future decides to implement measures 
to limit the consumption of oil, it can reduce exports to the 
United States . . .  

 
This is what he’s talking about. I agree that that’s what he says. I 
have a question about that. 
 

. . . it can reduce exports to the United States . . . (but get this, 
Minister of Science and Technology) . . . proportional to the 
total supply of oil available in Canada. 

 
In other words, what we cut back to the Americans we must cut 
back to ourselves. My question to the Premier is this: let’s forget 
about the Americans having an energy supply crisis. What 
happens if we have an energy supply crisis, and we want to cut 
back to save our own Saskatchewan farmers and our own industry 
because of the oil and energy? You point to me a specific section 
that says that we’ve got the power to cut back more to ourselves, 
to save more for ourselves and not do the same thing to the 
Americans. Give me chapter and verse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s really interesting 
that when the hon. member was the deputy premier of the 
province, the premier of Alberta was Mr. . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well let me finish. Come on. I mean you want to 
holler a little bit. I’m just saying, when you were deputy premier 
and we were fighting the national energy program, there was a 
neighbour to the west who was the premier, Mr. Peter Lougheed. 
And Peter Lougheed fought the national energy program, and he 
fought it hard. And at the same time he said we should have 
liberalized trade interprovincially and internationally. And Mr. 
Peter Lougheed — and that province supports 85 per cent of the 
energy and the oil in this country — endorses the free trade 
agreement for the very reason of energy. 
 
Now who do you think the country is going to bet on, you or Peter 
Lougheed, when it comes to knowledge about the energy business 
and whether it’s going to be . . . And then he says, we’ll see, we’ll 
see. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The man from Riversdale says, well the 
national energy program was okay. He says, I fought it, I fought it 
a little bit alongside of Peter Lougheed, the former premier of 
Alberta. We really knew what we were doing. Peter Lougheed 
said, this is the greatest opportunity western Canadian energy ever 
had. We can have our own royalty structure, our own tax structure, 
and the federal government cannot apply the national energy 
program. And Mr. Lougheed says, it’s very good for energy. 
 
And you’re standing in your place and saying, no, it’s no good. I 
like the national energy program; I like what the   



 
June 23, 1988 

2489 
 

federal government used to be able to do; I like that kind of control 
and power. Well now look at, the national energy program hurt the 
West. It took 40 to $50 billion out of Saskatchewan and Alberta, 
and you think you like it. Hardly! 
 
There’s an awful lot of people in my riding of Estevan and all 
across southern Saskatchewan and Alberta and up the west side of 
this province who are in oil and gas, who endorse this agreement, 
who do not agree with you, who say, I don’t want another national 
energy program, and I want to deal with international trade 
contracts. When a man gives his word, he sticks by his word, and 
he won’t break them — and particularly, in terms of times of 
crisis, that he would make very sure that he honours the contracts 
between United States and Canada. 
 
And we can charge our own royalties, we can charge our own 
taxes, and we will not continue to argue for the national energy 
program. And the hon. member knows that when you get to 
energy, the former premier of Alberta, who has worked hard 
behind the scenes as well as after the agreement, says this is the 
best agreement that western Canada has ever seen in energy for 
access to international markets and demand, and its the kind of 
thing that we have. Sir, in the energy business I believe most 
people in this country would put his reputation up against yours 
any day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am going to move on 
because . . . I’m going to move on because the Premier . . . I want 
this noted by the minister of privatization. I want the minister of 
privatization to note that I have asked the Premier, now since 8 
o’clock or quarter to 8, to rebut my reading by another section 
anywhere. In the case of water, he wasn’t even aware of it. He 
wasn’t even aware, so don’t tell me about who go whipped. That’s 
neither here nor there. He’s going to give me an explanation some 
time down the road, and that’s fair enough. This is shocking, 
really. 
 
But I want to say a comment about the national energy plan 
because I think time does fly, and we do want to move on to these 
estimates. I want to make one point about the national energy plan 
to the Premier. I don’t need to explain to the Premier, but I tell you 
that we opposed the national energy plan side by side with Mr. 
Lougheed — for different reasons, but we opposed it. Mr. 
Lougheed and Mr. Blakeney both agreed to the national energy 
program in September of 1981, that famous champagne-clinking 
ceremony with Mr. Trudeau and Mr. Lougheed, but that’s neither 
here nor there for the moment. 
 
You say Mr. Lougheed is for this free trade deal on energy. 
You’re doggone right he’s for this free trade deal on energy. He’s 
for this free trade deal on energy, precisely for the same reasons 
that you’re for this free trade deal on energy — right — because it 
gives unlimited equal access to Saskatchewan and Alberta’s oil 
and natural gas to the Americans. That’s why you’re for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romanow: — And that’s my point. That’s why he’s for it. 
That’s my point. My point is that there is no capacity left in this 
free trade under circumstances of crisis, under circumstances of 
pride, to have a Canadian-first policy, to have a 
Saskatchewan-first policy. That’s my point, and that’s why you 
and other continentalists are for the free trade deal on energy. 
That’s why I say it’s a sell-out of Canada’s and Saskatchewan’s 
heritage, pure and simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now look, Mr. Chairman, I have one question, 
I have one more question on the free trade deal. I want to say, Mr. 
Chairman, one other thing to the . . . Who is that guy? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member from Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Who is he? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member from Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Wilkie? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The member from Wilkie. I’m not sure which 
one he is back there, but it’s the member from Wilkie in any event. 
 
I want to ask one other question on free trade. I mean, the Premier 
can come back on energy if he wants. I want to put a specific 
question to you, Mr. Premier. I want to put this specific question 
to you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, my question to the Premier, to show the expanse of 
this deal, I want to ask the Premier whether or not he agrees that 
on page 279 of the Canada-United States free trade deal . . . By the 
way, I want to preface my remarks again by the way I started 
under section 6 of the Act, the federal Act, the enabling legislation 
for this, plus the water provision. I remind you and the public 
about that. 
 
You say that the federal government’s got the power to implement 
anything that it has in any federal internationally negotiated free 
trade deal. Water now, apparently they’ve got the right to decide 
that; energy, they got the right to decide that. You can’t give me, 
you have not given me one section in rebuttal. I’ve given you 
chapter and verse here. 
 
Now my question is this: will you agree, on page 279 of the free 
trade deal, that there has been agreed between Mr. Mulroney and 
Mr. Reagan the establishment of something called a working 
group, whose job it is for the next five to seven years, among other 
things, to study new rules and disciplines regarding government 
subsidies, regarding unfair pricing, and regarding government 
subsidization? And moreover, do you furthermore agree with me 
that under the agriculture section of the free trade deal, there is 16 
pages of Canadian agriculture programs which are identified as 
subject to further consideration as being possibly programs where 
there’s unfair subsidization? Do you agree that to be the case? And 
do you furthermore agree that there is no definition of   



 
June 23, 1988 

2490 
 

subsidy anywhere, that any subsidy and unfair trading practice 
will be defined by a group of faceless bureaucrats? 
 
You, sir, were talking about power at the top. You, sir, are a party 
to an agreement — a U.S.-Canada agreement — where the power 
has been given to the top of bureaucrats and corporations to define 
what is a subsidy and what is not a subsidy. It’s not set out in this 
deal. I cite to you chapter and verse. Do you contest that 
interpretation? And if you do, I want you to give me a specific 
chapter and verse. Please tell me what that chapter and verse is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I will point out to the 
hon. member, with respect to international subsidies, we now have 
. . . As we do with free trade, as we do with Europeans, socialists 
or capitalists or all of them, agree that free trade is a good idea and 
this agreement is a good idea, despite what the NDP member says 
here. 
 
And, in fact, at the recent summit, all the seven leaders said to 
move the issue forward, and noting, among other things, the 
diversity of our agriculture situations: 
 

Our negotiations in Geneva must develop (hear this) a 
framework approach which includes short-term options in 
line with long-term goals concerning the reduction of all 
direct and indirect subsidies, and other measures affecting 
directly or indirectly agricultural trade world-wide. 

 
Mr. Chairman, I point out to . . . The hon. member asks if we are 
going to examine subsidies between the United States and Canada. 
Of course we’re going to examine subsidies in the United States 
and Canada We have encouraged all countries under GATT, as we 
have in terms of trade, to examine subsidies, to reduce subsidies, 
to work to reduce the subsidies, so that in fact we don’t take on the 
United States treasury or the European treasury. 
 
And the hon. member says, well is this true that you’re going to sit 
down with United States and you’re going to work towards 
reducing subsidies? Well yes, Mr. Chairman, we are going to sit 
down and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, the hon. 
member from Quill Lakes obviously doesn’t respect the legislature 
to the extent that most of us do. Mr. Chairman, would you ask the 
hon. member to co-operate, please. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would just say to the hon. member, we are 
anxious, sincerely, to reduce the subsidies internationally, between 
Americans and Canadians. And in the free trade agreement we 
have agreed to look at the subsidies — and they’re much higher in 
the United States than they are here — to reduce those subsidies 
so that we have an equal playing-field, a fair playing-field. 
 
I just read the section from the recent summit that says the same 
thing, that leaders agree we should reduce the subsidies 
world-wide and leaders agree we should move towards more 
liberalized trade. I just point to the hon. 
 

member, what is the alternative? Is the alternative to say, no, we’ll 
get together and we’ll increase subsidies, we’ll increase the value? 
Of course not. 
 
So I say to the hon. member, there’s three parts to the trade 
agreement. Yes, we’re going to reduce tariffs to zero after 10 
years; establish a new dispute settlement mechanism; and third, 
work together to harmonize the laws so that the countervail and 
anti-dumping and the subsidies are consistent with productivity 
and progress on both sides of the border. That’s what the free trade 
agreement is about. We’ve encouraged people all over the world 
to do that, and, in fact, we’ve got the endorsement of the seven 
leading countries of the world to do exactly that on a multilateral 
basis, as well as a bilateral basis with the United States. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’m just going to bring to 
members’ attention, I’ve got . . . Members on both sides of the 
House have been speaking out, and rather than call you to order, 
I’ve been allowing debate to take place and it’s been a good 
debate. So I’d just ask all members to be mindful of this, and not 
to really interfere, but let’s listen as the leaders have indicated to 
their own members to let the other member proceed. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I agree with 
you. I think it has been an excellent debate and I will urge my . . . I 
will urge my colleagues to honour your ruling. I’m sure the 
Premier will urge his colleagues to honour the ruling as well. 
 
I want to close off my involvement on this section. I think it’s 
been an excellent debate. From my point of view . . . The Premier 
may wish to give another response, but from my point of view it’s 
been excellent, because I want — I repeat — I want everybody to 
note, I have cited section by section to the propositions that I make 
about the free trade deal to support my view that this is more than 
a tariff reduction deal. 
 
The Premier says, what’s the alternative? I’ll tell you what the 
alternative is. It’s 1974, Mr. Premier, our paper, the one that you 
like so much. That’s the alternative. You take this and look at it 
and refine it and we’ll build up a good international trading policy. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I challenge the Premier to put out in writing to me, 
in detail, the chapters and the verse that contest my view that we 
have made energy equal access to the Americans, water equal 
access to the Americans. We have no control over investments. 
We have now set up a working group to look at subsidies; we 
don’t know the direction of which that goes, that Saskatchewan 
people have lost control by assigning that to the working group on 
subsidies. We have no longer the prospect of control over our 
business. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Chairman, as I close off this section, I’m sorry to 
use these words; that is a betrayal of Saskatchewan. I know he 
firmly believes in that vision of Saskatchewan and Canada, 
genuinely. I attach that motivation to him. But I tell him that future 
generations will not praise him for what he’s done. This is the 
beginning of the end of the Canada and the province that we love. 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2491 
 

I say to you that this side of the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan will do all that they can to stop, not the business of 
increasing trade — that’s not trade — but will stop an alignment 
which in effect seeks to make us the 51st state. We are a greater 
country, we are a greater province, and we’re going to develop 
that policy for the future for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to deal with another issue the Premier has a 
great deal of responsibility for, and that is the drug plan, or the 
demise of the drug plan, here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in doing that, I want to relate it to something very 
close to the opposition and to our caucus, and namely the 
Elphinstone constituency and the by-election that we just went 
through there very recently. 
 
(2045) 
 
I want to say to the Premier, first of all, that I have been sent here, 
I believe, with a message that I want to deliver to you tonight. And 
basically it’s this: that the people of Elphinstone were very, very 
disappointed in your changes to the drug plan. I think that became 
obvious as we knocked on doors. And I say this with a great deal 
of concern, that there were a large number of people who said, 
very clearly to us as we were canvassing, that they were concerned 
about the changes to the drug plan; that they couldn’t afford to put 
the money up front to buy the needed prescription drugs that they 
were being prescribed by their doctors who were qualified and 
trained, many of them in this province. 
 
But the bigger issue was the slight that you gave to them when you 
talked about the Elphinstone constituency, Mr. Premier. I want to 
quote to you, just for your reference, of what you said about the 
people of that constituency. And I quote: 
 

While crime is up in Regina, Elphinstone, it’s not because 
they are hungry, it’s not because they don’t have clothes on 
their backs, Devine said. It’s because it’s a life-style. It’s 
because they want drugs. It’s because they are trading them. 
It’s because of welfare abuse. 

 
Now, Mr. Premier, when we were canvassing in Elphinstone, 
leading up to the by-election and on election night, the reason that 
almost 80 per cent of the people in that constituency voted against 
you was, in part, because of the changes to the drug plan. But in 
part as well, it was the slur that you made against those people of 
Elphinstone — all of them — every one of them you included in 
that general statement. 
 
And my first question to you is not on the issue of the drug plan 
per se. I ask on behalf of the constituents for your apology to them 
before we start out in the estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the hon. member 
that I’ve talked to a lot of people in Regina and in Elphinstone and 
in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Estevan, and they advise me that 
they’re concerned about drug abuse among young people. Mr. 
Chairman, they advise me that they’re concerned about their 
families, they advise me that they are concerned about crime 
associated with drugs, and it tends to be in cities. And it’s a serious 
problem across Canada and across North America. 
 
I recently attended a PRIDE (Parent Resources Institute for Drug 
Education Inc.) conference in Ottawa, and as I’m sure the hon. 
member knows, the national headquarters for PRIDE which 
addresses drug abuse among young people is headquartered in 
Saskatoon, and their concern about the combination of drug and 
alcohol abuse is sincere and it’s widespread. We’ve had not only 
local, but national and international support — international 
support for the new Whitespruce drug rehabilitation centre 
dedicated to young people across Canada. It’s the first drug rehab 
centre we’ve got in all of the nation dedicated to young people. 
And I know that we have to address it here in the legislature; I 
know as parents we have to address it. 
 
People who obviously are raising children in urban and rural 
environments know that it’s a problem, and we also know, as we 
have seen recently, that crime is related to drug abuse, and we 
have to address it. And I’m concerned that we face it squarely and 
fairly — that you do and I do — and the hon. members know that 
it is a serious problem across North America and it deserves our 
attention, and it is most prevalent in our large and urban areas. 
 
Now I know the hon. member has the same kind of concerns, and 
I would only hope that he is prepared to work with me to address 
drug abuse among our young people particularly, and the threats to 
families, the threats to life-styles that are evident on the urban 
streets today, and that we have to look at that carefully together. 
And I will point out to the hon. member, the programs that we 
have need to be responsible, need to be associated with education 
and awareness. 
 
We’ve seen headlines in the paper recently where we find people 
who have been involved in drug abuse — prescription drug abuse. 
It’s something we need to address, and it takes education; it takes 
programs. And you’re going to see, as a result of research that 
we’ve been doing and others have been doing new technology that 
allows us to address the drug abuse problem as we provide 
prescription drugs to the public here which will be a very efficient 
system. It will result in no rebates at all. It will be effective, it will 
be at the lowest-cost system in Canada or, indeed, North 
American, and we can begin to address the abuse problem, which 
is significant — could run us close to a $100 million a year, which 
is a lot of money. 
 
We are asking the public, the medical profession, the pharmacist, 
the young people, PRIDE, SADD (Students Against Drunk 
Driving) organizations and others, SADAC (Saskatchewan 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission), that is involved with drug 
and alcohol abuse, to help us contribute to solutions to this very 
significant problem.   



 
June 23, 1988 

2492 
 

And it’s evident across not only Saskatchewan, but indeed, the rest 
of the country. 
 
So we’re prepared to listen. That’s why we have a new health care 
commission in the province of Saskatchewan, to help us with 
life-styles, help us with education, and deal with all of the things 
that we have to with respect to drug abuse and the use of drugs in 
society, not only on the street, but obviously those that are 
prescribed. And we’re prepared to do whatever we can in terms of 
new technology to make sure that we make inroads into that very 
serious problem, particularly with young people. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can see why the 
Premier is nervous on this issue. It’s fairly obvious that he’s 
insulted a large group of people. They voted against him en masse 
and now, tonight, I want to ask you one more time, and I want to 
quote the quote because it’s devastating to the people of that 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Chairman, he said: 
 

In fact while crime is up in Regina Elphinstone it’s not 
because they are hungry, it’s not because they don’t have 
clothes on their backs, Devine said. It’s because it’s a 
life-style . . .  

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. It’s not proper to use member’s names 
in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to repeat the quote 
and I’ll delete the Premier’s personal name and I’ll put in the 
Premier instead. 
 
But he said: 
 

. . . while crime is up in Regina Elphinstone, it’s not because 
they are hungry, it’s not because they don’t have clothes on 
their back, (the Premier said). It’s because it’s a life-style. It’s 
because they want drugs. It’s because they are trading them. 
It’s because of welfare abuse. 

 
On that pointed issue, Mr. Premier, I ask for your apology to the 
people of Elphinstone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have said, and statistics bear 
it out, that crime is up in urban areas. It’s up in Elphinstone. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Only in Elphinstone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s what I said. It’s up in Elphinstone, 
and it is. It’s up in Regina, and it is. It’s up in Saskatoon, it’s up 
across the country. And crime related to drugs is up. You’re afraid 
to face it. I’m saying to the hon. member, crime is up, associated 
with drugs — in high schools, on the streets, all over the place, in 
urban environments. And we have some responsibility to face it. 
 
So I believe . . . Mr. Chairman, I have said to the hon. member, 
and I say to these honourable people, that when it’s a problem, 
when it runs in the neighbourhood of hundreds of millions of 
dollars, I believe that we should 
 

address it. We are going to address it. We will provide a good 
prescription drug program, but at the same time we’re not going to 
forget the families and the children and the young people that are 
being abused by people who push drugs on them. Because it’s not 
right; it’s not fair. And I will continue to fight drug abuse in the 
city of Regina, the city of Saskatoon, and the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Premier, you refuse to deal with the 
issue at hand and that is the abuse that you, as Premier of the 
province, did to the people of Elphinstone. That’s the only abuse 
we’re dealing with here tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Premier, I want to tell you that the 
statistics show clearly that in the province of Saskatchewan, 35 per 
cent of the people who use prescription drugs are senior citizens. 
 
I would be willing to bet that in Elphinstone it has a higher age 
because of demographics, because they’re a mature community, 
that there would be a higher rate than 35 per cent. Probably close 
to 50 per cent of the prescription drugs in that constituency are 
senior citizens who go to their doctor with an ailment. The doctor 
prescribes a drug. They then go to a drug store and purchase the 
drug. How in that chain of events are those people drug pushers? 
 
The people on the doorstep were saying, they were saying, does 
the Premier think that I, a woman of 80, who have built this 
community, goes to a doctor, gets a prescription filled, then bags 
the sleeping pills and peddles them on the corner of Dewdney and 
Elphinstone street? 
 
That’s what you’re saying, Mr. Premier, can you not see how 
stupid your statement is? It’s ludicrous. And what I would like you 
to do tonight is apologize to those senior citizens, the working 
people, the people on welfare who you have abused with your 
comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You’re more interested in maintaining the 
bureaucracy than you are looking after families. And that’s the 
problem . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, no, no, don’t make 
fun of the fact that we have got serious problems with criminals, 
and by criminals, pushing drugs in the streets of Regina. That’s the 
case. And across the urban environment markets in this country, 
we’ve got serious problems with crime associated with drugs, and 
you’re making fun of it. You’re making fun of it. 
 
You say it’s not a problem. You talk to the principals in the high 
school, you talk to the young people, and they’ll tell you the 
number one challenge they face is crime related to drugs. And you 
say, oh, Mr. Premier, that’s not a problem. 
 
Well let me just say, I care about those children; I believe   



 
June 23, 1988 

2493 
 

you should care about those children. I don’t want to encourage 
the criminals that are pushing drugs in high schools. I don’t want 
to see prescription drugs traded on the streets. I don’t think you do. 
 
Well let’s just take . . . The hon. member wants to mention 
statistics and he wants to mention people. In 1981-82, the 
prescription drug program cost $33 million and the population was 
about a million people. In 1986-87, it was $84 million, and the 
forecast for ’87-88 was almost $100 million with the same 
population — the same population. 
 
At the same time, the RCMP and others, nationally and 
internationally, are saying there is more drugs and drug-related 
crime, and criminals pushing drugs on young people, than we’ve 
ever seen before. And you’re saying, Mr. Premier, don’t you 
address that; don’t you deal with those crimes. 
 
We’re saying, Mr. Chairman, that it is a problem. Research also 
shows there’s a problem with the over-use of drugs by senior 
citizens, the over-prescription of drugs particularly to senior 
citizens. Recent research shows in the province of Ontario they’re 
the most over-prescribed seniors any place in North America, in 
fact maybe the world. And you’re saying, well it’s not a problem 
in Elphinstone because we won a by-election. That’s not fair. It’s 
not fair to the people, it’s not fair to the families, and it’s not fair to 
those seniors who have been subjected to problems. 
 
What I’m saying is, I’m prepared to deal with it. I’m prepared to 
work with you to deal with it. And I’m prepared to take it on in 
Regina or Saskatoon, Moose Jaw or Estevan or any place else 
where we have to deal with it because it’s a number one crime, the 
number one challenge facing young people today. And I’m not 
going to deny it. I’m going to continue to work to help people over 
that problem. And I’m certainly going to do everything I can to 
contain criminals who push drugs on people, particularly young 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Premier, I have heard it all now. 
I’ve heard it all now. A person of your position, the Premier of the 
province, who embarrasses, insults, and puts a slur against the 
senior citizens of Elphinstone, not having the courage, not being 
man enough to stand up in this House and apologize for the abuse 
that you have created on the people of Elphinstone. I say to you 
that you should stand in your place and apologize for that 
statement. 
 
You will know full well that a large part of the drug problem in 
Elphinstone is directly linked to your government’s alcohol 
advertising. It’s directly related, and will be, to your new liquor 
Act. 
 
The prescription drugs that we are talking about, namely drugs to 
deal with heart conditions, the drugs that are needed for seniors to 
carry on their daily life, for you to say that people in that category 
are drug abusers simply cannot possibly be accurate. And I can’t 
believe you, Mr. Premier, when you continue in that line, even 
though I 
 

would be willing to bet that there were thousands of people in 
Elphinstone today, if they were listening to this debate, who would 
write you or phone you and tell you how out of line you are. 
 
(2100) 
 
And I want to say that the issue of prescription drugs being 
somehow combined with illicit use of illegal drugs in your attempt 
to defend your destruction of the drug plan is immoral. That’s 
what it is. To try to combine the two . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — To try to combine the use of hashish and 
marijuana and other illicit drugs, illegal drugs, and combine that, 
and say this is the same as penicillin or sleeping pills or heart 
condition pills and put them all together and class them as drugs is 
immoral and you shouldn’t be doing it. And I want to tell you that 
clear, that most of the people in the province would agree with 
that. 
 
And I want to ask you one more time before we leave this very, 
very serious charge that you made against the people of 
Elphinstone and give you one more opportunity to apologize to 
those people, if you would do that now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I point out to the hon. 
member that more and more research — and I’ll just quote here 
from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix that says, “Doctors killing with 
prescription drugs”, and you find that they’re showing that 
prescription drugs cause more injuries and deaths than all illegal 
drugs combined. 
 
Now this is research being done by physicians in North America 
and others who are saying it’s a significant problem. And the 
opposition is saying, I won a by-election in Elphinstone in a seat 
that has been NDP for 28 years, therefore prescription drugs or 
drug abuse is not a problem. I mean, the logic — I know they’re 
playing a little politics. 
 
But they should at least care enough to begin to address this 
situation. We know, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve seen prescription 
drug bills go from $38 million to almost $100 million, and we 
know that there is some abuse and we’re prepared to deal with it. 
 
And we know that we’re going to have a health care card that 
comes in for prescription drugs which means that there’s no 
rebates at all. It’ll be introduced in December — no rebates. 
Senior citizens will realize there’s no rebates. It’ll be the simplest, 
safest system there is in North America. We’re quite prepared to 
do that. 
 
But I’ll say again, Mr. Chairman, we are not prepared to give up 
and just let drugs run rampant in the streets of Canada or Regina 
or Saskatoon or any place in Saskatchewan for that matter. It’s a 
problem; we’re going to address it. 
 
If I could just . . . I’ll leave the hon. member this remark from the 
assistant commissioner of the RCMP. He said young people they 
catch with drugs today are saying this   



 
June 23, 1988 

2494 
 

to him, they’re saying, why should we tamper with black market 
drugs when we can get them: (1) government inspected; and (2) 
free. Now the young people know the system. The young people 
know the system. They know the system and they know that 
there’s abuse and seniors can be abused as well by the doctors, and 
you know that. And there’s research that goes on that says, it says 
there, you can have the double-doctoring and you can have 
significant problems with respect to drug abuse. We’re going to 
address it. You won’t address it. You’ll put your head in the sand 
and say: well we won a by-election, therefore drugs are fine; you 
can have drug abuse; it’s no big problem. 
 
I’ll only say to you, whether you won the by-election or not, I’m 
not going to give up on the kids or the medical profession or the 
seniors or anybody else. I’m going to help them. I’m going to 
address the problem of criminals and the criminal abuse of drugs 
in society, and I certainly will in Saskatchewan, whether you think 
it’s a good idea or not. In fact I’m quite sure SADAC and PRIDE, 
SADD organizations and others have endorsed what we’re doing 
with respect to awareness, life-styles and particularly with respect 
to the Whitespruce drug rehabilitation centre. We’re going to 
continue to carry on in that regard for the rest of the country, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I can hardly believe that the Premier 
continues on, I can hardly believe that the Premier continues on in 
this concept of not being able to differentiate between prescription 
drugs and illegal drugs, and trying to say to all of the people in the 
province who take medication that they are part of a drug problem 
in this province. 
 
He now includes the doctors. They’re part of this conspiracy that 
he’s fighting against. This Rambo who is now out to destroy the 
drug link that includes the doctor, the pharmacist, and the senior 
citizen — here’s the Premier of the province out to defend and 
destroy this drug link, this drug ring of the doctor who was trained 
at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, has a practice 
going in Regina; someone with a heart condition comes in and 
needs some drugs and he prescribes drugs. All of these people in 
this drug ring are now part of the conspiracy, according to the 
Premier of this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’re beyond belief. And I’ll tell you that in the 
province of Saskatchewan you’re becoming a joke on this issue of 
the drug plan. Why don’t you look at what’s happening in the 
by-elections, for example, in the by-elections. Just look at it for 
your own political benefit, if for no other reason. Because in 
changing the drug plan back to the way it was, you would be 
helping thousands of seniors, thousands of single parents, many of 
them women on low income who can’t afford to buy the necessary 
prescribed drugs or medication that they need and all the problems 
associated with that. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, that I cannot believe you when you 
say that you think that the doctors are somehow part of this 
conspiracy. I’d like you to explain that out to us, how that is all 
working? Are they being trained at the university, at the medical 
school, to do this? Are you saying that doctors who take an oath to 
take care of the people that help are now part of the conspiracy to 
 

peddle drugs along with the senior citizens in Elphinstone? 
 
This is what you’re saying. No one is arguing that there isn’t 
illegal drugs, that they aren’t being peddled around the province as 
they are across the world, but don’t try to defend your disaster 
with the drug plan by saying we changed the drug plan to stop the 
use of illegal drugs because that will not sell. It’s not logical. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, quit being — not untruthful, but 
dishonest — with the people then., Quit trying to confuse the issue 
by saying that these are illegal drugs that doctors are prescribing. 
That’s not what’s happening. It’s not what’s happening. 
 
It’s very clear that 35 per cent of the people in the province who 
use prescription drugs are seniors; 60 per cent of the people who 
use prescription drugs are women, many of them in the group of 
seniors or in single parent families, and they can’t afford them. 
That’s what they’re telling us. 
 
Now they may all be wrong. It could be. We may be wrong and 
you may be the only one that’s right on this issue in the end, but I 
say, don’t mistrust the people of the province so much that you 
won’t listen to their concerns. That’s what you’re doing. I mean, 
you have had people here in the legislature, you’ve had them here 
in the legislature. Julie Shepherd has been here several times to try 
to get her medication paid for because she doesn’t have enough 
money to afford the up front money to pay for the drug that she 
needs. It’s been prescribed for her daughter and for herself. How is 
she part of the conspiracy? Can you tell me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will just take the 
opportunity to read some of the research done for the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons about what doctors say. This is what 
doctors say. 
 

Inappropriate prescribing . . .  
 
Well please just let me . . . Mr. Chairman, when I give them some 
response in terms of research by the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, they . . . Just co-operate. You asked the question, what 
do doctors say? I’m going to tell you what doctors say in talking to 
doctors: 
 

Inappropriate prescribing, tabbed as the biggest disciplinary 
problem facing medical boards, is hurting or injuring people 
at alarming rates, according to Dr. Franklin Russell, medical 
director of Oregon workers’ compensation department. He 
presented his case to the Saskatchewan College of Physicians 
and Surgeons. He says 60 per cent of all the drug-related 
emergency room duties in the United States, and about 70 
per cent of all the drug-related deaths, are due to prescribed 
drugs. 

 
Prescribed drugs. This was presented to the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons at an educational seminar in Saskatoon by a medical 
professional, Mr. Chairman — by a medical professional. Mr. 
Chairman . . .  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2495 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Allow the Premier to make his 
point. Everyone has the opportunity to get involved in the debate. 
You can ask your questions from your feet. Allow the Premier to 
finish his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I point out, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. 
members that research that is shared internationally in North 
America . . . this is an American doctor talking about research that 
they’re doing on prescription drugs, aware of the kind of figures 
that we face here, who is saying that prescription drugs cause more 
injuries and deaths than illegal drugs combined, talking tot he 
College of Physicians and Surgeons in Saskatchewan, in 
Saskatoon, and is suggesting that we have to watch the use of 
prescription drugs. And he is pointing out, as does the assistant 
commissioner of the RCMP here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
saying, when they do their drug busts, they run into young people, 
and what do the young people say? The young people say, why 
should I use black market drugs when in a province like this I can 
get them: number one, government inspected; and number two, I 
can get them free? 
 
Well if we’re about to spend almost $100 million on free drugs . . . 
The hon. member says, well I just won a by-election; therefore 
there can’t be a problem. I’m saying to the hon. member, seniors 
want prescription drugs. They want a system without rebates. We 
cover seniors in institutions. We will have the finest drug 
prescription system anywhere in Canada. 
 
But that is not to say that we can’t stop addressing the drug abuse 
problem. We have to address that. Families want us to address it. 
The young people come . . . I think the last year at the PRIDE 
conference, we had 3,000 young people in the city of Saskatoon 
worried about drug abuse, wanting education, wanting training. 
And they’re saying the same things that the RCMP are saying, the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons are saying, and other doctors. 
The doctors are telling us, the medical profession is telling us, but 
you refuse to listen because you won a by-election. 
 
All right, all I’m saying is, you won the by-election, fair enough. I 
congratulated you already. We have a drug problem in society — 
abuse — and criminals involved. We have to address it. We will 
continue to address it and at the same time we’re going to have the 
finest prescription drug mechanism which will reduce abuse that 
you’ll find any place in North America, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Premier, I’ve been waiting to talk to you for 
a long time, sir, because I can tell you very clearly that senior 
citizens in Saskatoon Eastview are just as upset with you as senior 
citizens in Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — What many seniors in Saskatoon Eastview are 
seeing right now, Mr. Premier, is an incredible display of 
arrogance and insensitivity, and that’s why we took 70 per cent of 
the vote from senior citizens in Saskatoon 
 

Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Premier, when you made your comments 
about drug abuse and seniors being drug abusers, you offended a 
lot of people in Saskatoon Eastview as well, Many, many people 
raised the concern to me that they took offence. They spent many 
years building up this province, along comes a Premier who 
doesn’t understand Saskatchewan, who doesn’t understand our 
way of life, who doesn’t understand our health care system, then 
has the nerve to accuse senior citizens, our pioneers, who he likes 
to talk about as supporting, as abusing drugs. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, on behalf of the residents of Saskatoon 
Eastview, or the seniors of Saskatoon Eastview, I would like to 
ask you, and combine my question in the apology to the people 
from Regina Elphinstone, would you please, sir, skip the rhetoric 
about drug abuse — we all know it’s a serious problem. But 
please, sir, would you apologize to the seniors of Saskatoon 
Eastview and Regina Elphinstone for calling them drug abusers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will give the hon. member credit. At 
least he acknowledged there is a drug abuse problem. Now that’s 
an awful lot more than the member from Elphinstone did. I 
congratulate you, you have recognized it and acknowledged it, and 
senior citizens acknowledge it, and doctors acknowledge it, and 
moms and dads and parents acknowledge it. Everybody except the 
member from Elphinstone, who’s said, I won a by-election, 
therefore there is no drug problem. 
 
There is a drug problem, and seniors face it and other people face 
it, and we’re going to continue to address it because it’s the 
important thing to do. So we want to make sure that the right 
prescriptions are going to the right people at the right time, they’re 
not over-prescribed, so that it’s fair. So young people will be able 
to deal with it, we need education; we need the control on the 
supply side, and we see that at the borders; and we need to control 
it on the demand side, and that’s education starting right from 
grade 3 right on up through to high school. So it’s a combination 
of things that we all have to address, particularly young people.  
 
(2115) 
 
But obviously we’ve got problems in some cases with senior 
citizens; they admit themselves; the medical profession admits it. 
Why are you afraid to address it? I, at least, acknowledge and I 
congratulate you for saying, yes, there is a drug abuse problem in 
society, and yes, it is among the seniors, and yes, it is among 
young people and the adult population, and we need to do 
something about it. I’m glad to see you acknowledge it; that’s 
more than I can say for the member from Elphinstone who just 
said that, well, he won a by-election, therefore there’s no problem. 
There’s a problem; we need to address it in Eastview as well as 
Elphinstone as well as the whole province. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2496 
 

Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Premier, you admitted in this House tonight, 
and I’m sure that residents of Saskatoon Eastview, seniors of 
Saskatoon Eastview and Regina Elphinstone and elsewhere in the 
province will recognize what you said tonight, and that is that 
seniors are abusing drugs in this province. I want to know how 
you feel that by the cuts to the prescription drug program, where 
you’re forcing seniors in many cases — and I know this — to 
choose between needed medications and food, how your cuts to 
the prescription drug program is helping seniors and helping drug 
abuse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let me say a couple of 
things. Innocent seniors are victims of abuse — victims of abuse. 
And more and more medical people and seniors . . . Mr. 
Chairman, would you please ask them to just . . . This is a serious 
problem; please let’s review it as professionals. 
 
We have drug abuse in our society, and innocent people, children 
and seniors and others are victims of that abuse — some by 
criminals who are pushing it, some by careless physicians, and 
some because they’re perhaps under stress, and so forth. We have 
situations where innocent people are victims of drug abuse, young 
and old, and we need to address that. Now you’ve acknowledged 
it. 
 
Now you must acknowledge, therefore, it can happen to senior 
citizens. Research across this country and United States, Ontario, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, the U.S., says that seniors can be abused, 
innocent people — your mom, your dad, your grandparents, your 
aunts, your uncles — they can be abused innocently. Innocent 
people can be abused and become victims of drug abuse. 
 
What I’m saying to you is that we need to address that 
collectively. I know that because when we changed the drug 
system, the prescription drug system, and asked people to think 
about the drugs they used, the medical profession, professionals, 
doctors, those in nursing homes and others said, you know, it’s 
about time we started to think about how we used the drugs. And 
they do say that, and you know that. 
 
And you can go around the town and say, well I wish they were 
free, and I wish they were free, and the NDP would give them free 
— free drugs for everybody. I know that’s your policy. But listen. 
If you have a very serious problem, and if you have innocent 
people and innocent seniors who are victims of abuse, isn’t it time 
somebody had the courage to address that and protect your 
grandparents? Protect your parents, protect those seniors, those 
innocent people who could be victims of abuse. 
 
Now who is going to be responsible? Certainly it wouldn’t be 
those who would just give them all the free drugs they like. 
Somebody has to say, let’s start thinking about how we treat our 
grandparents. Let’s start to think about how we treat our young 
people. Let’s start to think about being responsible as a medical 
profession. 
 
All of those things, as well as crime on the streets, crime that is 
reported in the newspapers, crime that is reported world-wide, are 
things that we need to address. And just because you win a couple 
of by-elections 
 

doesn’t mean that drug abuse and innocent people who are victims 
are not still victims. We have to address that. You have to address 
it. And I think all of us together would be doing a very positive 
thing if we’d look after seniors, young people and others when it 
comes to some very serious problems. This side of the House will, 
and we will continue to support all efforts to protect people from 
drug abuse in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to move on to another 
topic. But before I do I’ll try to settle down the Premier a little bit. 
 
I’m not in the business of going around sort of involving or 
publicly declaring what I get involved in or try to give some 
patronage to, but I happen to be on the board of directors of 
PRIDE. And I have a mother who’s 83 years of age who needs 
medication. She relies on that medication from her doctor. She 
consults with the doctor, the doctor looks at the situation, 
prescribes for her. Pretty hard to know how she’s abusing it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who says she is? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh, the Premier says . . . The Premier, oh, he 
has to protect. It’s pretty hard to know how . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well that’s pretty hard. And by the way, the 
Premier lectures our people to quieten down. I’ll tell you to tell 
your people to quieten down. 
 
It’s pretty hard to know how they abuse it. Pretty hard to know 
how the doctors abuse it because I think the vast majority of the 
doctors do their job well, according to the Hippocratic oath. They 
do it professionally. They don’t do it criminally. 
 
There is a drug problem out there. My patronage or support of 
PRIDE confirms that view. But is the way to handle that problem 
a blanket change and revolution in the drug plan to punish people 
everywhere? 
 
Now you know, it’s a tragedy. In political terms, in political terms, 
for the Premier to say, well you won two by-elections. That’s the 
assumption that those people don’t understand his arguments. 
He’s going to keep barrelling ahead. They heard your arguments. 
You made them in Eastview and Elphinstone and they didn’t buy 
them. You’re still going to go ahead with that. Well I mean, that’s 
up to you. I guess we have to suffer for the next two years or three 
years. 
 
But I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, when this 
government get re-elected, we are going to put medicare and 
hospitalization back on its proper footing. We’re going to turn it 
right side up and we’re going to . . . (inaudible) . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to change the 
topic if I may, with the Premier’s consent and the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m sorry, do you want . . . do you want to get . . . 
you get into this. Go ahead. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2497 
 

Mr. Chairman, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster . . . I 
know all of us, our people are doing the same thing, and so are the 
Premier’s people, but the fact of the matter is, he’s kept it up since 
the afternoon. Now let’s, if we can, all of us try to concentrate on 
what we’re trying to do. 
 
I want to turn to the topic now, from free trade and health, I’d like 
to turn to the topic of economic development and privatization. 
I’m not going to make the speech again which I did in the 
opening, in the interests of time, with respect to the differences in 
the economic policies and development of Saskatchewan, other 
than to repeat that in my judgement the major beneficiaries of PC 
privatization thus far, by and large, have been big business and big 
business from outside the province of Saskatchewan. And in my 
many meetings with small-business people all across 
Saskatchewan, I tell you they’re very worried about that. 
 
You may not believe that business people speak to me, but I tell 
you they do. And I meet with them in luncheons and breakfast 
meetings, and there is a mixed feeling on privatization. Their 
worry is the Premier’s approach is so ideologically fixed and set in 
stone that there seems to be limited flexibility with respect to 
privatization. 
 
I don’t think much can be served, in the interests of moving on 
and hopefully getting these estimates finished this evening, in 
repeating the arguments. The Premier can come back to me with 
his version of development. But I have a couple of specific 
questions that I want to ask in this regard — at least one question, 
a couple of questions on one theme. 
 
I think it particularly disappointing that the PC privatization 
ideology, which I say has been so alien to our history and 
traditions as I’ve described it, generally has been imported from 
abroad. I don’t say this in any pejorative terms. I don’t care where 
it’s from. But it’s not a made in Saskatchewan policy. 
 
I want the Premier to give us some specific answers, because it is 
no secret — and I think the government has admitted this — that 
you, sir, have entered into a contract with the British banking firm 
of Rothschild’s for the consultant services of one Mr. Oliver 
Letwin. As I understand it, Mr. Oliver Letwin from Rothschild’s 
has been playing a major role in privatization in London, and he is 
on a contract basis to advise you how to privatize Saskatchewan’s 
public enterprise. 
 
My questions, Mr. Premier, to you are very specific, and I would 
appreciate specific answers. Will you confirm that there is a 
contract for professional services between your government, or 
agency of government, and Mr. Letwin to advise you on the 
matter of privatization . . . sorry, Rothschild’s banking firm on 
behalf of Mr. Letwin. 
 
Will you provide the details of the contract to the Assembly at this 
time, namely what are the terms of reference; what is he looking 
at; what privatization is he studying; what are his objectives; what 
are his time frames; what is the duration of his contract; and, as 
important, what is the cost to the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan for bringing Mr. Oliver Letwin in from London, 
England to Regina, Saskatchewan to 
 

advise you, sir, about privatization? Can you answer those specific 
questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that that 
information has been requested in orders for return and we’ve 
agreed to provide it. I don’t have it with me. I believe the minister 
responsible for Public Participation will have that information, 
along with the general objective of the contract with the 
Rothschild’s group. 
 
I can say generally speaking at the outset, that our recent, for 
example, power bond issue, I think series number five, was 
reviewed by the Rothschild’s people and examined. It’s very 
successful. People all over the province are participating, and it’s 
part and parcel of the philosophy that everybody should share in 
government. 
 
It’s very popular, as the hon. member knows, as is the 
recommendations by Mr. Letwin with respect to the Meadow 
Lake sawmill. I can say to the hon. member that I don’t think it’s 
ever happened before where all of the employees have bought the 
company, plus 10 tribal Indian bands have participated in 50 per 
cent of it. So it’s totally Saskatchewan owned by the people, with 
about a hundred million dollars of new investment from the 
private sector. 
 
And as we’ve seen with the SaskPower bonds, the conversion to 
Saskoil shares convertible is a very positive thing, and people 
seem to think it’s very positive. 
 
So the objectives of Mr. Letwin’s contract will be to allow as 
many people as possible in Saskatchewan to participate in Crown 
corporations and in utilities through bonds and shares all across 
the province, and that’s precisely the objective. And it’s in orders 
for return and we will be providing it, and maybe when the 
minister’s estimates are up, he’ll have it. I don’t have it with me. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I will accept the 
Premier’s comment and I don’t want to be combative when I say I 
ought not to, because I do believe, as Premier, in this particular 
major area — I don’t expect the Premier to understand every detail 
of government — that’s not reasonable. But in a privatization 
initiative which is major, an economic development, I would have 
hoped that the Premier could have given us the specific details or 
anticipated this question. Mr. Letwin, after all, has spoken to the 
Progressive Conservative annual Premier’s dinner and there 
obviously is a close relationship between the Premier and Mr. 
Letwin and Rothschild’s through that connection. But I’ll accept 
his assurance. 
 
But I do want to say to the Premier — I don’t mean this is any 
sense of mandates or dictates — but I do want to say that we will 
be looking to your minister of privatization, based on your words 
this evening, when his estimates come up, to have those answers. 
The transcript will show what those questions are and I do want to 
say — again, not sounding arrogant about this — we will not 
accept, Mr. Minister of privatization, an answer that says, it’s 
ordered for return, and we’ve got to wait for a year and a half, if 
ever, to get the answer. 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2498 
 

This is an important philosophical debate. Mr. Letwin and 
London, England, and Rothschild’s is at the core of it. And, Mr. 
Premier, I’ll be taking your words as at least an intent that your 
minister is to provide that information. 
 
May I ask one last question in this regard? I want to ask on this 
area of economic development and privatization, in the spirit of 
your comments, whether or not you will provide, if you can now 
— if not, will you instruct your minister when his estimates come 
up for privatization — to provide the full, contractual details of the 
Meadow Lake deal which you logged so much. 
 
For that matter, I don’t think we have anything on 
WESTBRIDGE. I asked my colleague . . . Do we have anything 
on WESTBRIDGE yet? I don’t think we do. The documents? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That privatization. Do we have the Sask 
Minerals documents? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We don’t have the Sask Minerals documents. 
What else do we not have? 
 
An Hon. Member: — We don’t have the SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation) deal. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — SMDC deal documents, either. 
 
Well again, Mr. Chairman, you can see the position of the 
opposition, and I really have to press the Premier because the 
ministers can take positions. It’s the Premier who can order, with 
authority, to say what should or shouldn’t be done. 
 
I’m going to ask the Premier: will you undertake — so that we can 
judge the benefits of privatization as you describe them — will 
you undertake tonight to make sure that when the minister of 
privatization’s estimates come up this time around in the session, 
that he will table the full details and documents of the 
WESTBRIDGE privatization, the Sask Minerals privatization, the 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) 
privatization — what other? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . also 
the privatization dealing with Meadow Lake. Those four in 
particular; there may be others, but I’ll ask those four. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that when the 
minister’s been asked for them, he said that they will come 
forward in due course as they’re all put together and wrapped up, 
and particularly in orders for return, they will be presented. 
 
I don’t have them here, and to say to the hon. member, I don’t 
have a contract memorized in my head and just at my fingertips 
with respect to what might . . . An individual minister might have 
a contract with an individual. I don’t have them. He will provide 
them through orders for return or in due course as these projects 
are completed and the research is finished. So I’m sure the hon. 
member 

knows that he will able to receive them in that fashion. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Premier. I want to 
ask you some questions about piratization Saskatchewan style. 
Your ministers have not been forthcoming with information; we 
haven’t got it. I think, Mr. Premier, the reason why we haven’t got 
this information is fairly obvious, because those agreements will 
not withstand the scrutiny of this legislature. That’s why we 
haven’t got them.  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Some seven months ago, Mr. Pirie, the 
British expert on piratization, came to Saskatchewan. One of the 
things that he said which I think offended people who thought 
about it was one of the ways that you piratize is that you sell assets 
for less than they’re worth, so that the people who buy them will 
realize a fairly immediate gain. I think thoughtful people 
everywhere are offended by that. They’re offended because it’s 
obvious that those with the money to buy them have quite an 
advantage over those that don’t, the sort of people who live in 
Regina Elphinstone and live in Regina Centre and in Regina 
Rosemont and in a whole lot of other ridings, Mr. Premier. 
 
I think they’re also offended by it because it is obvious that when 
you give away these assets — and that’s what you’re doing — you 
take assets out of the public sector and you no longer have the 
resources you need to deliver necessary public services. I think 
Saskatchewan people realize that when you sold the highway 
equipment, that there’s a direct relationship between that and the 
roads today, which ought to embarrass you. 
 
I think Saskatchewan people also realize that when you get rid of 
Saskoil and you get rid of SMDC for less than what they’re worth, 
there’s a direct relationship between that and your inability to 
provide basic health and education services. 
 
Mr. Premier that, at least, is piratization British style. Piratization 
Saskatchewan style is a lot more offensive than that, and I want to 
deal directly with WESTBRIDGE. It’s obvious there’s patronage 
involved in this in a major way. 
 
Mr. Premier, the annual report, the last annual report stated the 
profit of SaskCOMP at $3 million — $3.4 million. I added up the 
profit for the last six years and averaged it and it came to $3.1 
million. So this is a typical profit last year. 
 
Your annual report in the first note to the financial statements 
states that in return for transferring all of its assets to 
WESTBRIDGE, SaskCOMP got back $16.8 million worth of 
shares and notes. 
 
No sane person would sell a business which averages . . . which 
has a net income on the average over the last six years of $3 
million, for $16 million. No sane person would sell a business that 
lucrative for such a paltry sum. It’s obvious, Mr. Premier, that you 
skegged SaskCOMP to   



 
June 23, 1988 

2499 
 

this private corporation for a fraction of what it’s worth. 
 
And who makes up, who makes up WESTBRIDGE? Well it’s 
apparent that one of the companies which made up 
WESTBRIDGE was Mercury printers. Now I don’t like to defame 
people, and I don’t like to talk about people who aren’t in this 
Assembly, so I’m not; I am not going to, for the benefit of 
members opposite, repeat all of the controversies that Mercury 
printer has been in, but there’s been several of them. 
 
I want to ask members opposite to ask themselves this, as well. 
Mercury printers is a printing and publishing company. What does 
that have to contribute to a computer company? It’s pretty indirect. 
 
I’ll tell you what Mercury printer has to do with this. Mercury 
Printer is the people who were able to deliver the goods for the 
others from their pal, the Premier. That was the role they played. 
They could deliver the assets from the public of Saskatchewan at a 
fraction of their cost, and that’s what you’ve done. 
 
Mr. Premier, we have made these accusations in this Assembly, 
and you and your ministers have stood silent or been as evasive as 
you were tonight, and you’ve refused to give us any details on 
WESTBRIDGE. My questions, Mr. Premier, are: will you give us 
the details of this transaction. Will you tell us what the value of the 
assets were that Mercury printing transferred to WESTBRIDGE 
and what they got back in terms of shares. Will you tell us what 
the value of the assets of SaskTel transferred and what SaskTel got 
back in terms of shares and notes. And the same for Lease Corp. 
Will you give us those details so that we can evaluate this 
transaction, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I say to the hon. member 
that he knows that the public is very interested in having access to 
the Crown corporation and utilities through bonds and share 
offerings. He’s seen it in research; he’s seen it in Decima 
Research. We’ve asked people; you have, and you’ve talked to 
them. They want a share of SaskPower. They want to participate 
in these things, and they like that. They think it’s a good idea. I go 
back to my comments with respect to the former premier, Mr. 
Douglas, if he had thought of it. I would suggest that it is perfectly 
consistent with the co-operative movement; it’s perfectly 
consistent, frankly, with your philosophy that everybody should 
have a share in what’s going on; and it’s perfectly consistent with 
Saskatchewan people now, because 70 per cent of the people, for 
example, think that they should be able to participate in utilities. 
 
Over 70 per cent of the people think it was a good idea to make 
sure that we build a new paper mill, and in fact got our money out 
of PAPCO, and in fact can have a new project. They like that. 
 

Now with respect to things like power bonds, Saskoils, Meadow 
Lake Sawmill, Weyerhaeuser, SMDC-Eldorado, they support 
those things. They like their power bonds. They’re asking for 
SaskTel bonds. They’re going to ask for auto bonds. They want to 
participate. And with respect to WESTBRIDGE, we are going to 
be offering shares in this company, the one you say that is so good 
— it’s too good — we’re offering shares to the public. You and 
others will be able to participate and buy shares, and I will venture 
to say here tonight that you will see the public extremely interested 
in buying shares in WESTBRIDGE. It is growing. It’s a 
combination of new technologies. 
 
You’ve got computer technology, communication, laser printing, 
and all those companies work together in a merger to compete on 
the national and international market like they couldn’t before. 
And if you think it’s good, which I happen to think that it is, you 
can participate and you can buy all the shares that you like. That’s 
what people like about this. 
 
Now with respect to the . . . with the numbers that you want, again 
the Minister of Public Participation has . . . I don’t have them with 
me tonight, but he will be providing you in due course as he is 
everything else that is being provided through Public Participation. 
And you will receive them, but I don’t have them this evening. 
But I will say . . . You say, well how will we know whether it’s 
working or not? You’ll know when they’re offered for sale, if 
people buy them. 
 
And I venture to say, as you will with Weyerhaeuser, as you do 
with Saskoil, with SaskPower bonds and others, it will be 
extremely successful, a good buy for Saskatchewan people, a good 
buy for folks that want to participate in all kinds of economic 
opportunities, and good for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You know, Mr. Premier, you’re right. You’re 
going to sell the shares in that company. And you know when 
you’re going to do it? You’re going to do it when this session 
adjourns so that you’re not subject to public scrutiny. 
 
I know darn well when you’re going to do it. You’re going to do it 
in July or August or some time later when we’re not here to ask 
you hard questions. That’s when you’re going to do it, and that’s 
why you haven’t done it before this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, I have a specific question, and I 
don’t need your song and dance about how popular privatization 
is. I may say that the current member from The Battlefords may be 
some indication that your privatization in North Battleford wasn’t 
wildly popular. There’s a couple of members on this side of the 
House who may suggest something to you about the popularity of 
the Weyerhaeuser agreement. It doesn’t seem, Mr. Premier, that 
there’s a lot of evidence that those privatizations were terribly 
popular. They seem to have resulted in opposition members being 
elected. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier, is: will you undertake to give us the 
following information. What was the value of the   



 
June 23, 1988 

2500 
 

assets that Mercury Printer transferred, and what did it receive 
back in terms of shares and notes? What was the . . . Two, what 
was the value of the assets that SaskTel transferred, and what did 
SaskTel get back in terms of shares and notes? Thirdly, what was 
the value of the assets that Lease Corp. transferred to 
WESTBRIDGE. 
 
What was the value of the assets that Lease Corp. transferred to 
WESTBRIDGE? What did Lease Corp. get back for that in terms 
of shares and notes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, all I have before me this 
evening is the information is that when you file a prospectus and 
when the shares are offered to Canadians, Saskatchewan people, 
all that information has to be there, the properties have to valued. 
And it will be presented to the public, as well as to the members of 
the opposition. 
 
So when the House meets the next time, you’ll have full 
opportunity to go over it, as you did with Saskoil, as you have 
with the power bonds. We fully expect all of them to be viewed by 
accountants and lawyers, members of the legislature, as they have 
here and other parts of Canada, and indeed other parts of the 
world. 
 
So we know that they’re going to be public. There’s no sense of 
you being unduly upset that you won’t have access to it; you’ll be 
given access. You will be able to go over them all, as you have 
before. You went over Saskoil and you went over power bonds 
and you’ll go over Weyerhaeuser. You went over the 
Weyerhaeuser deal in some detail. All the public knows about it. 
 
So when the documents are ready, the Minister of Public 
Participation will present them. Certainly, when the prospectus is 
ready, all that normal information, there it goes out to the people 
who want to invest. It’s all open. 
 
I can say to the hon. member, through WESTBRIDGE we already 
have 50 new jobs — 50 new jobs that have been created; $6 
million of out-of-province contracts in just two months — two 
months and 50 new jobs as a result of this new company, with 
putting the technologies together to compete in the global village. 
 
And that’s exactly what we’d like to see here in Saskatchewan, 
people participating, making money, expanding, operating, 
everybody having shares, and, if you will, on a co-operative 
fashion so nobody’s left out. That’s precisely the kinds of things 
that I would think that you would be in favour of. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I have another 
dimension of your estimates that I would like to address this 
evening. Mr. Premier, you made a few comments this evening 
which I found very interesting, and I hope that you meant them. 
 
And I want to quote back to you what you said. You said to one of 
our members, when you chastised him on this side of the House, 
“I wish that that member would respect the legislature like most of 
us do.” That’s a direct quote that I took from you this evening. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I quote that back to you because what I 
 

am dealing with tonight shows very clearly that you and your 
government do not respect this legislature, and those are not my 
words, those will be the words of the Provincial Auditor. Mr. 
Premier, you are probably well familiar, you are probably well 
familiar with the Act, The Tabling of Documents Act, which states 
that documents required to be tabled must be prepared and 
forwarded to the minister or the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
within 90 days after the end of the period to which the document 
relates. Some of those are at the end of the fiscal year, others are, 
Mr. Premier, at the end of December or whenever. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have here a number of documents, and I could have 
brought many more. Some relate to you, sir, that you are 
responsible for; others relate to, of course, other ministers. You 
also said this evening, Mr. Premier, and I’m going to paraphrase, 
but I don’t think I will misquote you or misparaphrase. You said 
that we, referring to yourself, have an obligation to show 
leadership. You also said that we have an obligation to respect the 
laws of this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, in the opening statement of the auditor’s report he 
says this: 
 

Our parliamentary system of government is based on the 
principle of rule by law. The executive government 
(Executive Council and its appointed officials) is authorized 
to govern in accordance with laws passed by the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Mr. Premier, I say to you that you are not respecting the laws of 
this legislature; you have no respect for the laws of this legislature 
when your ministers and yourself, sir, do not table, do not table the 
reports when they are required to be tabled. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have here the Saskatchewan Beef Stabilization 
Board, of which you are responsible. It was tabled today, but the 
Provincial Auditor was finished with it last November 20 — last 
November 20. But that’s not the worst abuse. The Saskatchewan 
Cancer Foundation tabled on June 10, the day that we went into 
the Health estimates the Minister of Health tabled it, but Mr. Lutz 
got finished with it on August 14, 1987, a full 11 months prior to 
that. 
 
Mr. Premier, we can go on. Here is the Saskatchewan health 
prescription drug plan. Wouldn’t it have been nice, Mr. Premier, 
to have this report from 1986-87? Wouldn’t it have been nice to 
have this last year? Mr. Premier, the auditor was finished with that 
last year, June 26. It was tabled this year in June. Here is the 
Saskatchewan Health Research Board — exactly the same thing. 
The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission, Mr. 
Premier, was tabled on June 9; the auditor was finished with it on 
August 18. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission, the one that you talk about so much — you say that 
you have a real concern about alcohol abuse and yet this 
document, this document, which was finished on August 28 by the 
auditor, was only tabled today in the   



 
June 23, 1988 

2501 
 

legislature today. How hypocritical on your part. You say you’re 
so concerned, and yet you won’t give us the information, Mr. 
Premier. You won’t give us the information so that we can argue 
the points here. 
 
Mr. Premier, here’s another one, the liquor . . . Here is one, the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board Superannuation Commission, and 
Mr. Premier, this is the report for 1985. It was tabled today in the 
legislature — two and one-half years later, two and one-half years 
after it was supposed to have been tabled. And, Mr. Premier, we 
could go on and on. 
 
I don’t make that specific point, Mr. Premier. The Provincial 
Auditor has put down a scathing report on your government and 
your response to the accountability of the executive branch to the 
legislative branch in this province, a scathing attack. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, one of the biggest abusers of supply and 
information to the Provincial Auditor was the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. They refused, they simply 
refused to make information available to the Provincial Auditor; 
they virtually told him to get lost. They spent money, Mr. Premier, 
over $10 million which was not specifically authorized, not 
specifically authorized by this legislature, and the Provincial 
Auditor could not get the information that he needed in order to do 
his audit. He states that in his report. 
 
CIC, Crown investment corporation, refused to supply him with 
the minutes that were required until the Provincial Auditor 
personally had to go to the minister. 
 
Mr. Premier, there are dozens, simply dozens of examples of 
non-compliance with the statutes of this province in the tabling of 
documents. There are literally scores of examples of 
non-co-operation with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have a responsibility to make information 
available to this legislature so that the members here can analyse 
and criticize and do their job for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
unless that is done, the executive branch of government is simply 
running amok of the democratic principles in this country. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, before I go any further, is this: 
what have you done to instruct your ministers? It is not good 
enough, Mr. Premier, it’s not good enough for the Minister of 
Health to say that those were locked in his vault and he forgot 
about that, because we were told in public accounts that the Clerk 
sends a reminder to the minister when the reports are not tabled 
that those reports have not been tabled. 
 
I’m asking you, Mr. Premier, what have you done, or what are you 
doing, to make certain that your ministers and yourself, sir, are 
going to be tabling those documents on time, and what are you 
going to do to respect the laws laid down by the legislature? What 
are you going to do about that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I do acknowledge 
 

the minister raises . . . or the member opposite raises a valid 
criticism about not only this government but, frankly, 
governments generally. His observation that there has been late 
tabling is valid, and I have instructed my ministers as well as my 
staff to do a better job, frankly, of providing the tabling of reports 
in a more rapid fashion. 
 
It’s something that all governments try to do. We have done a fair 
amount of restructuring in government, as the hon. member 
knows, and some of the departments have changed, some have 
been combined. The property management corporation is a brand 
new situation that is managing several others, and it has been . . . I 
say it’s late, and shouldn’t be, but it’s been a little bit more 
complicated than it normally is when you don’t go through those 
kinds of structure. I point out to the hon. member that I am asking 
my ministers to do it more rapidly and to be more efficient. 
 
The hon. member also admits, and I believe that he’s aware of it, 
in the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, that it was a 
problem with their administration as well, and we’ve all 
experienced it. In some cases, I believe that you’ve acknowledged 
that it took in the neighbourhood of 12 months to table annual 
reports; other examples of 15 months, 21 months — in one case 
up to five years. But that was under your administration, and you 
didn’t like it and I don’t like it. We find out things that we can do. 
 
I acknowledge your remarks, and the Provincial Auditor has made 
a valid point. And my ministers have been asked to table their 
reports as quickly as possible, and I’ve asked my staff to do the 
same, so that in fact we can feel confident that the information is 
coming to the legislature as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, I appreciate those remarks but, Mr. 
Premier, you are dead wrong on some of the statements you made. 
Time will not permit me to get into any detail on this, but at the 
end of the auditor’s report it is very clear that the auditor’s report 
and Public Accounts were tabled in every year before the end of 
the fiscal year. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: on the auditor’s report 
specifically, the auditor says he hasn’t got sufficient staff to do his 
work. he is now over 15 months behind. He would like to see the 
report finished at the end of six months. I think it can be done, has 
been done in the past — if you look at the ending in Appendix II, 
was done many, many times in the past. 
 
I think if they want the information to be relevant, to help the 
members on this side of the House and that side of the House in 
public accounts, you need to make the resources available to the 
Provincial Auditor. You’ve got to make sure that he remains 
independent, that he can do his job, and Mr. Premier, you must 
instruct that the attitude of people, of agencies, particular of 
Crown Management and SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) must change. They must know that the 
Provincial Auditor has a job to do, and I hope, Mr. Premier, that 
you will, number one, make staff available to the Province Auditor 
so that he can do his job, get the information to us on time; and 
secondly, that you’ll instruct your staff, not just your ministers, but   



 
June 23, 1988 

2502 
 

instruct the staff that their attitude for the Provincial Auditor must 
change, and that they must co-operate with him in order for him to 
do his job. Will you do that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly will review 
whether the Provincial Auditor has sufficient staff. I believe that, 
as you know, we have pointed out to the Provincial Auditor that I 
believe virtually all the Crown corporations now are audited by the 
private sector, and as a result the work-load has been substantially 
reduced because you’re literally reviewing billions of dollars of 
activity. 
 
But I will raise it with my ministers and particularly the Minister 
of Finance and, as I’ve said to you, get them to do a better job of 
providing the reports on time, as I’m sure virtually every Premier 
has tried to do across Canada as well as in Saskatchewan. So we’ll 
give every attempt to respect the reviews of . . . and the 
suggestions of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I’d like 
to move to another area with the permission of the House. it may 
not seem like it to the members of the Assembly, or perhaps to the 
viewing public, but there is actually an order to the questioning as 
far as we’re concerned, at least as far as I’m concerned. 
 
The area that I’d like to move to is the question of the taxation 
fiscal policies and the impact of that on Saskatchewan people. Mr. 
Chairman, I’ll be brief on this. I don’t want to harangue the 
government, but I think it’s important to state the record. I think all 
of us remember the PC promises in 1982 and 1986 together with 
respect to tax reductions. The Premier said that he would cut the 
income tax by 10 per cent. He said that he would eliminate the 
sales tax. He said he would eliminate the provincial gas tax. Every 
one of those promises, as we know, Mr. Chairman, has been 
broken, and instead this government has imposed a pattern of 
steep, steep and unfair tax increases on Saskatchewan families. 
 
Those tax increases were unfair from the outset, and they have 
been continued. Elimination of the property improvement grants 
program; the flat tax which was instituted by the former minister 
of Finance; the infamous and still remembered sales tax on used 
cars; the 40 per cent increase on provincial sales tax, Mr. 
Chairman, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. That is a massive tax load 
that this government, since 1982, has imposed upon the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And on top of the tax increases, there’s another dimension to this. 
There’s a kind of a form of indirect taxation, and that is the utility 
rates and what’s been happening there. And like taxes, the utility 
rates have also been sky-rocketing and increasing. The huge, long 
list of increases to such things as licence fees, the rate increases — 
more than 230 of those increases, last year alone — I could 
document them if anybody challenges me; perhaps I should, but I 
again want to make my point and not take the time of the House to 
document them — but the facts are that there are 230 of these 
increases. It’s all added up. 

The taxes and utility rates are a crushing burden, an enormous 
hardship on Saskatchewan people. By our calculations, Mr. 
Chairman, since 1982, since this administration took office, the 
total increase on the average Saskatchewan family has been 
approximately $1,500 — $1,500 since 1982 — an increase, Mr. 
Chairman. That is indeed a shocking statistic. 
 
Compounding these unfair tax increases, with respect to the 
ordinary people, has been the other side of the coin — tax breaks 
for oil companies and very large corporations. I’m not talking 
about Saskatchewan corporations and Saskatchewan business, I’m 
talking about the pattern — the government hates to hear about it 
— but the Pocklington and the other nature of tax breaks and 
incentive programs I think, in a basically futile attempt, the big 
megaproject, those tax breaks and the other corporations in that 
category while the ordinary person pays that $1,500. That pattern 
means a pattern of unfairness. 
 
It’s meant that from 1983 to today, the increase in corporate 
income taxes has been 1 per cent, but the increase in personal 
income tax — the taxes you pay, Mr. Chairman — have gone up 
by 47 per cent, 1 per cent for the large corporations, 4 per cent for 
you. That’s not fair. 
 
This year, for every dollar Saskatchewan individuals and families 
pay in personal income tax, corporations are only paying 16 cents 
— 16 cents out of corporations for every dollar that income tax 
collects. Now I think that this government’s record can be 
summarized as follows: a tax shift onto the ordinary families, as 
I’ve documented; tax increases for ordinary families; utility 
increases of monumental size on ordinary families; a tax shift 
away from large resource corporations; a tax shift away . . . or I 
should say, onto the municipal corporations, who now have to go 
back tot he property owner for higher mill rates, in many 
instances; and/or a reduction of services. And to add insult to this 
injury, these unfair tax increases are being imposed at a time that 
the government is cutting important public services — health, 
dental plan, drug plan, education, etc. 
 
The net result is that today, Mr. Chairman, we have a cumulative 
operating deficit in the province of Saskatchewan of $3.7 billion. 
According to the government’s own record, the interest payments 
on that alone, Mr. Finance critic, is what? About $335 million a 
year — just the interest. 
 
(2200) 
 
I like to put it in these terms so that all the members can 
understand. If we ever balance our budget in Saskatchewan, we 
will need a surplus of $335 million in that year that we balance 
just to make the interest payments on the current cumulative debt 
for one year, without reducing the debt one penny. 
 
Can you imagine that? That’s a mountain of debt — $3.7 million. 
And I’m not talking about the Crown corporation side of the debt 
— that’s another aspect of the argument which we can get into and 
may very well get into. I’m talking about the debt which 
accumulates from taxes and   



 
June 23, 1988 

2503 
 

expenditures for things like hospitals, schools, and roads — not 
the Crown corporations’ side, not the Power corporation, not the 
potash corporation, not the Saskoil, not the SMDC or SaskTel’s. 
I’m talking about the cumulative debt on ordinary families. 
 
And on top of all of that, there have been cut-backs. There has 
been indeed a general lowering of standards. It’s been said in other 
jurisdictions, the question that voters should ask themselves is this: 
are you better off today in 1988 than you were in 1986 or 1982 or 
1980? And in any one of those yardsticks, the answer has to be 
clearly, no, we’re not. We have less disposable income, we have 
higher taxation, we have reduced services, and we have generally 
a declining level of poverty. 
 
Here’s the report, Mr. Chairman, which I think tells it all. One can 
dramatize it in other ways. This, Mr. Chairman, is the Poverty 
Profile 1988. It’s not my document, it’s the Department of 
National Health and Welfare. It is a report of the National Council 
of Welfare, under the auspices of the federal Department of Health 
and Welfare. 
 
Here is a statistic which is shocking, Mr. Chairman. We have, in 
Saskatchewan today, according to this document, which I think is 
pretty independent, 42,600 families in poverty. Under the guise of 
welfare reform, those in poverty have reduced social services 
assistance, and by the way, those numbers have virtually been at 
an all-time high. A government that was elected to reduce the 
social services numbers, the bitter irony is those numbers are 
probably higher than they ever were, including the Dirty Thirties. 
 
But the one that is really heart-breaking for families and for 
anybody who has compassion and concern about what’s 
happening, is the poverty report, with respect to children. In 
Saskatchewan there are 64,600 children under the age of 16 that 
are below the poverty line — 64,000 young kids, young boys and 
girls who are poverty. That is the second highest in all of Canada, 
Mr. Chairman. That is the state of affairs in 1988, that as I see it. 
 
But the tragedy on top of it all, not only the mismanagement and 
the fiscal bungling and the taxation and the broken promises, the 
broken trust, there’s another dimension of this thing which 
troubles me, and I want to ask the Premier the question in this 
regard. We’ve been looking through the estimates — this is what 
we’re talking about is estimates — generally, and I’m on the 
executive council of estimates — what we seem to see is this, that 
all during this while, where the taxes increases and the utilities 
increased but the services are cut back, there seems to be another 
game plan in mind by this government, and that game plan is that 
we are going to continue to suffer while the government, putting it 
bluntly, squirrels away, through the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation — perhaps through other sources — 
surpluses on a year-to-year basis so that, come election time, 
suddenly there will be money available for programs which the 
government hopes will re-elect him. 
 
This, the Minister of Finance, Mr. Premier, admitted to as the 
policy in his estimates yesterday. He, yesterday, said, when he was 
asked by my colleague the member from 
 

Quill Lakes, the Finance critic, and by my colleague the member 
from Regina Centre, that this was a stabilization program, if you 
can believe it. Four years of misery and one year of largess in a 
hope to get re-elected, and the Minister of Finance, this Minister of 
Finance, who missed his estimate by $800 million in his budget — 
he says this is a stabilization plan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this is a cruel and bitter hoax. I think the whole 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation needs to be 
investigated, and mark my words, Mr. Chairman, some day it will 
be thoroughly and completely investigated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We will be asking questions, of course, when 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation comes up 
during the estimates. I want to ask the Premier of that. 
 
But this is an ingenious device where a department — and I’m 
talking about Executive Council — where the department of 
Executive Council pays tot he property management corporation, 
another arm of government, for services presumably for the 
provision of property. And in there are substantial increases in 
what departments pay to the property management corporation, 
building up a fund for the rainy day — a re-election, hopefully, for 
them — slush fund, re-election day. That’s what’s happening. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — While they take the drugs from the old 
people. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And during this time, as my colleague says, 
they take the drugs from the senior citizens, and one could go 
through again. In the interests of time, I’m not going to make the 
point; I think it’s been made to the members now to excess 
perhaps. 
 
But it’s a serious problem which I don’t think can be said enough 
and strenuously enough. In fact, we’re going to pursue this double 
standard and this gimmick of the Premier’s — if there is one, 
because now I come to my question — as vigorously as we can in 
the months and the weeks and the years ahead. 
 
My question therefore to the Premier on this specific issue is this. I 
would like the Premier to answer specifically please, these specific 
questions: is it true, and do you support and confirm your Minister 
of Finance’s admission, that the property management corporation 
among others, is in fact inflating and getting additional funds in 
order to serve, as the Minister of Finance has described it, as a 
stabilization fund — for sources in that so-called stabilization fund 
to be used at some time in the future? Will you confirm that that is 
the policy of this government? 
 
And my second question is, since you’re a part of this policy, not 
only as the Premier but in your department as Executive Council, 
and this is Executive Council estimates — I ask you this 
specifically; under your Executive Council estimates, I see for 
’88-89, payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation of $917,200, just a little under a million — to be fair 
to the   



 
June 23, 1988 

2504 
 

Premier, it’s slightly down from 1987-88, but it was at 922,000 at 
that time, but anyway, I refer to 1988 — can the Premier provide a 
detailed explanation of this payment from his own department of 
Executive Council of $917,000? What exactly are you spending 
this money for, and what are you getting for it? I’ll ask those 
specific questions and ask the Premier to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I think the hon. member will at least allow 
me, without too upset, a very brief response with respect to taxes 
before I address the two specific questions.  
 
I would just point out to the hon. member, because he touched on 
taxes, that for taxpayers with a total annual income of $20,000, 
that we are the second lowest in all of Canada for families. 
Saskatchewan has the second lowest overall tax bill for lower 
income families. And that includes — I want the hon. member and 
certainly the public to know that it includes income tax, health 
premiums, retail sales tax, gasoline tax, car insurance, telephone 
rates, home heating, electricity. And you add it all up, in the 
province of Saskatchewan, if you’re making $20,000 with a 
family of four, two kids, mom, dad — $2,620. That’s the second 
lowest in Canada. 
 
Now if you move to a higher income family of, say, 40,000, we’re 
the second lowest as well. And we find that only the province of 
Alberta is lower in either case. When you look at car insurance, 
health premiums, retail sales tax, all of those things, Saskatchewan 
is number two when it comes to the taxation bill in all of Canada. 
 
I want to point that out to the hon. member so that, in fact, they’re 
aware that even when you get into the $60,000 category — and we 
don’t charge for health care, there’s no premiums involved — that 
we’re the third lowest in the entire nation. And again I point out 
that includes utilities and health care, retail sales tax, as well as 
gasoline tax. 
 
I also want to point out to the hon. member that the average family 
personal income tax in Saskatchewan is only about 65 per cent of 
the health care costs, and you won’t find that in other jurisdictions. 
We have the second highest per capita health spending in all of 
Canada — not sixth, not seventh, it’s not eighth, as it was when 
we took over . . . I believe it was sixth — it is now number two. 
Saskatchewan has no health premiums, as there are in other 
provinces. we’ve got the lowest car insurance in all of Canada; the 
second lowest telephone rates in the nation; the second lowest 
home heating costs in Canada; no flat tax for low income people; 
no sales tax on clothing below $300; provincial sales tax credit for 
low income people; seniors’ tax credit of $200; $200 spousal tax 
reduction; a $200 dependent child tax reduction; second lowest 
provincial taxes for low and middle income families in all of 
Canada, as I’ve pointed out; and the third lowest income tax for 
even the higher rates of income for those in the 60,000 area; and 
we’ve got the third lowest university tuition fees in western 
Canada, and the second lowest technical institution fees in all of 
Canada. 
 
Now I point that out to the hon. member, while we have the best 
employment record in western Canada, number 
 

two in the entire nation, 18,000 more jobs this month than last 
month, and the second lowest tax rate in all of Canada, the nation, 
at a time when every single provincial government, and indeed 
federal government, in this country has a deficit. 
 
And the hon. member says, well for Heaven’s sakes, you haven’t 
balanced the budget in recent years, you have a deficit, and your 
taxes are out of line. I’ll say to the hon. member: we have the 
second lowest tax rate, we have many tax breaks that we have 
brought in — we’re certainly comparable to other jurisdictions — 
and the best employment rate and new job creation in all of 
western Canada, and number two across the nation. I point that out 
so the hon. member knows, as a matter of fact, in comparisons to 
other jurisdictions during these times that we’re quite competitive 
and very, very reasonable. 
 
With respect to the property management corporation, I will not 
acknowledge that there is a stabilization fund that the hon. 
member alludes to. I would certainly want to confirm that with the 
Minister of Finance. I believe he was talking about the Liquor 
Board fund, which has been in existence for some time. And if he 
wants to know what we spend our money on with respect to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, the major 
components of our estimated expenditures are: for mail, $178,000; 
the Ottawa office is $70,000; the Legislative Building offices, 
$665,400; and the SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) building, $3,800. I believe that will be 
fairly close to the estimate of $922,000 that the property 
management corporation receives from my jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to move on to another 
area, and it may very well be my last, or next to last. But before I 
do, I must — this is one of the dangers, but I think it’s one of the 
advantages of debating in a democracy because we exchange our 
views — I must make a response to the Premier. 
 
The Premier says we’ve come a long way. And we sure have 
come a long way. I have in front of me here a summary, an 
historical record summary of the revenue expenditure basis of 
Saskatchewan prepared by the province of Saskatchewan — their 
budget address, economic and financial position papers of 
November 4, 1987. It’s not right up to date, obviously, but it’s 
November 4, 1987. I’ll be prepared to table it over to the Premier. 
It’s dated and attached with the various documents — you can see 
it there. 
 
And what does it tell us? When the Premier says we’ve come a 
long way, we have come a very long way. We’ve moved from the 
lowest per capita debt of any province in Canada to the highest per 
capita debt of any province in Canada. That’s the reality. You 
know something, Mr. Chairman, and I invite the Premier to deny 
this, the operating cumulative total debt in Saskatchewan at $3.7 
billion is higher than all of the deficits of all of the governments 
since the confederation entry by Saskatchewan since 1905, 
wrapped up together, by a long shot. When Tommy Douglas 
inherited the government in 1944 of Billy Patterson’s, he had what 
he thought was a mountain of debt. It is nothing compared to   



 
June 23, 1988 

2505 
 

$3.7 billion. We’ve come a long way, all right. We’ve got now 
that debt. 
 
And you add the Crown corporations side of the debt and you’re 
looking at 11.6 billion cumulative, not 3.7 billion, Mr. Chairman, 
or approximately $12 billion debt. These aren’t my figures; I don’t 
pull them out of the air. These are the figures right here form July 
’86 from your own budget — from their own budget. In fact, the 
Minister of Finance was unable to answer — the record shows that 
— these questions when they were put to him. And I must say, 
surprisingly. I’m not here to try to score cheap political points 
about the divisions within the Premier and the Minister of Finance, 
but I tell you, the Minister of Finance said there was a stabilization 
fund, and the Premier tonight, in effect, pulls the rug under form 
the Minister of Finance, says there is no stabilization fund, 
notwithstanding that the record shows that it’s the case. That, Mr. 
Chairman, is in fact an unacceptable position to be in. It is 
unacceptable for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Premier has not given me a detailed answer as to how 
that $917,000, by the Executive Council, goes over to the property 
management corporation. He has not given me the answer to that 
specifically. I don’t believe you have. I’m not going to ask you to 
repeat it. Will you undertake to provide for me, in writing, the 
detailed breakdown, just so that we define it, Mr. Premier, within 
the month? Can we do that? You have officials to do that. The 
Premier is nodding his head in assent. Let the record show that he 
agrees that that is to be the case. 
 
(2215) 
 
I simply want to close off, before I move on to this other area, that 
in my judgement, members of the Legislative Assembly, the crisis, 
fiscally — in some ways not totally under the circumstances of 
men and women, but in most ways under the direct circumstances 
of men and women — has produced a mountain of debt which is 
going to saddle the future generations of Saskatchewan and 
Canadian people. I tell you, if there is anything that makes the 
philosophy of co-operation and the mixed economy working in 
partnership necessary, it is our movement, because we’re all going 
to have to work hard to get out of this debt situation created by this 
Premier and this government in 1990-91. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Premier, I have . . . Actually I have 
three segments here, two of which will not take long. I don’t 
suspect; one might, but not too long. And I don’t know about you, 
how long you can continue on. It’s 10 o’clock, but let’s try for a 
little while in any event, and for sure the bulk of the estimates are 
likely to be done, if not all of them, no matter what happens. 
 
I have a couple of what I call speciality questions which I should 
put to you. Mr. Premier, these can be handled very quickly and 
very specifically. Will you assure, will you undertake to assure 
Saskatchewan people — this deals with Principal Trust — that 
Saskatchewan people who lost much money, as a result of failures 
of regulation that is shown now in the Code inquiry, that they will 
receive 

no less than what their Alberta counterparts might get as a result of 
any terms of final settlement flowing from the Code inquiry and 
the Alberta decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member goes 
on and on and on about several things, then he asks a specific 
question, and I’ll give him a specific answer with respect to 
Principal Trust. We will review all the findings of the inquiry in 
Alberta and we will have to make the judgement at that time. 
 
It’s pretty difficult for me to speculate on what might be in that 
final report, what kind of money might be available and to who 
and to how much and where. I’ll review it. I’ll certainly be 
prepared to look at it very closely and share my observations with 
the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have another what I call 
speciality question, and I want to emphasize for the record that this 
a question purely for information. 
 
Mr. Premier, much discussion has taken place in the city of Moose 
Jaw, as I think you’re familiar, in regard to a proposed casino. 
Opinion on the casino, as you probably know, is divided in Moose 
Jaw, with both the proponents of the casino and the opponents 
anxious to know what your government intends to do. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: do you plan to make or to propose 
legislative changes to enable the casino to be established in Moose 
Jaw? I do not advocate that position, but I want to know what your 
intentions are. Will you please indicate when the city of Moose 
Jaw and the people of Moose Jaw can be told what your 
government intends to do in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the proposal that has been 
forwarded by the city of Moose Jaw has been before cabinet and 
caucus, and it’s going back to priorities and planning, and we will 
be making the appropriate decisions with respect to the proposal 
from Moose Jaw.  
 
And I can’t add any more than that until we’re prepared to put in 
detail what we’re prepared to do with respect to co-operating on 
their economic development package. And I can only say that 
when we’re prepared to respond we’ll certainly advise Moose Jaw 
and the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Just one follow-up question in this regard — 
we’re getting phone calls in the Leader of the Opposition’s office 
from both sides on this issue, letters, lots; you probably are too, 
maybe more — people want to know what the decision is. And I 
want to ask you, sir, whether or not it is your intention to wait until 
after the civic elections in October before making a decision, or 
can we expect to have that decision before the civic elections. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can say that the decision will be relatively 
soon. Certainly we don’t want to delay it any more than just to 
give it a very good review. I will say that there are obviously a 
couple of concerns that I have and others have with respect to 
some of their proposals, and I have been approached by lots of 
people, and particularly the clergy, on some of the items, and I 
certainly respect their views. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2506 
 

I will say that, at the same time I understand the need for 
economic development and particularly tourism expansion in the 
city of Moose Jaw, and we’re going to explore those possibilities. 
And I will just get the decision and the proposals and the things 
that we can do back to the people of Moose Jaw as quickly as 
possible, certainly before any civic election, and certainly, I would 
say, in the next few weeks. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, another speciality question, if I 
may put it that way, before I come to my last topic of what I 
would think is substance . . . All of these are important questions, 
but more in the broader policy area. What I’m going to do, Mr. 
Premier, is read into the record, very briefly, a letter which I’ll 
direct to you, and if you’ll give me an undertaking to answer this 
letter, I’ll be satisfied. It says: 
 

Dear Mr. Premier: I’m writing with respect to the Committee 
of Finance examination of the budget estimates of the 
Executive Council (which we’re doing tonight) to request 
that you provide, in writing, certain information about the 
1988-89 estimates for your department. I would therefore ask 
that you provide the following: 
 
1. The name, position, title, and salary of each employee and 

any change in salary over the last 18 months; 
 
2. The name of any person on a personal services contract 

with the department, the purpose and term of the contract 
and the remuneration being paid; 

 
3. For each out-of-province trip undertaken in 1987-88 and 

paid for by the department, the destination, purpose, name 
of each person taking the trip and total trip cost for each 
such person; 

 
4. The amount budgeted to be spent on out-of-province travel 

in 1988-89; 
 
5. The nature and cost of any public opinion polling paid for 

entirely and in part by the department in 1987-88 and the 
amount budgeted on such services for 1988-89. 

 
I should stop here, Mr. Chairman, and say, parenthetically, we 
should have asked then copies of those polls too, but I know that’s 
probably putting the Premier in an impossible position. And 
finally: 
 

6. The nature and the cost of any media consulting or 
advisory services paid entirely or in part by the department 
in 1987-88 and the amount budgeted on such services for 
1988-89. I believe that (your departmental officials) you 
and your departmental officials will have this information 
readily accessible and should appreciate your sending it to 
me as quickly as possible. 

 
Signed by myself. 
 

Now the reason that I read it in the record and the reason that I 
deliver this letter to you is, I think we can save time in these 
estimates, rather than me asking you and you getting up and your 
officials providing the answers, if you provide them to me in 
writing. 
 
If the page would deliver this to the hon. the Premier, if he could 
take a look at it and give me a commitment, and I’m going to put a 
time frame on it — within a month — to give those answers, I’ll 
be happy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that we normally 
provide this kind of information, and I will be glad to provide it as 
quickly as I can to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Premier. Now I have one last area that I wish to canvas. I don’t 
expect it to be lengthy, but it is an important area, and it deals with 
kind of the fourth area, in general terms, that I raised in my outline 
at the beginning — free trade, economic development and 
taxation, fiscal policy — all of which we’ve covered in the 
question of social consensus-building within the province. 
 
And I want to extend it, Mr. Premier, slightly beyond the province 
into the context of nationhood in Canada. If your caucus is 
prepared to listen to this, and you, I want to discuss briefly with 
you the question of the Meech Lake accord and the question of the 
French language situation as it pertains to the province of 
Saskatchewan, and also to ask some specific questions about the 
Meech Lake accord and beyond, if I may put it that way. 
 
Now let me say, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman, that in my 
judgement, Meech Lake accord, in tandem with the free trade deal, 
represents one of those significant milestones in the direction and 
the future of Canada. And there is, Mr. Chairman, as I see it — 
make no mistake about it — a fundamental contradiction in 
visions, if I may put it that way. of Canada, represented by the 
1982 accord and the Meech Lake accord of 1987-88. 
 
In 1982 the vision was, roughly stated, that the emphasis would be 
given to individual people through the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms, those charter of Rights and Freedoms being the 
buttresses against excessive government intervention or actions. 
Buried in that Charter of Rights and Freedoms was a specific 
guarantee on French-English languages. 
 
The Premier points out in one of his earlier remarks, and correctly 
so, that the province of Quebec did not accept that. I want to 
remind the House that the province of Quebec did not accept that, 
and the province of Quebec at that time would never have 
accepted it, because the province of Quebec was under the 
governance of a separatist party committed to break up Canada, 
pure and simple. 
 
The charter of rights has, however, this vision of individual liberty 
nestled into it. The Meech Lake accord goes in a different 
direction. The Meech Lake accord doesn’t touch the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms, it’s correct to say, but the Meech Lake 
accord adds to the accord of 1982 something called the distinct 
society,   



 
June 23, 1988 

2507 
 

called Quebec, and the duty of the rest of Canada to promote and 
to preserve that distinct society. A laudable objective, one, I want 
to hasten to add, that I support in general terms. 
 
But you will see, Mr. Chairman, following my analysis carefully, 
that there is a basic fundamental contradiction. On the one hand, 
the charter of rights as it was up to 1982, grounded and was based 
in individual freedoms. The Meech Lake accord now adds a 
collective right, the right of Quebec on a geographic basis to be 
recognized as a distinctive society. And you have automatically a 
conflict. Which of those two visions succeeds, the individual 
rights vision of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms or the 
collective rights based on a geographic basis of Quebec? 
 
And when it comes for the politicians to interpret, when it comes 
to the Supreme Court to interpret, for a very long time the tug of 
war will be, the tussle will be, which trumps the other, the 
individual right or the collective right. If the collective right 
trumps the individual right in its interpretation, then one can see 
the evolution and the development of a set of speciality laws for 
the province of Quebec based on the distinct society, based on the 
collectivity, which will trump individual rights. 
 
Thus the concern of women’s groups, in Quebec and outside of 
Quebec, that their individual rights are going to be defeated, if I 
may put it that way, or trumped. Thus the concern of other 
collectivities, like the Indians and the Metis and the Inuit, who 
don’t see their rights incorporated in the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the Premier this question very 
specifically, if I can. My question to you, sir, is this: it is an 
acknowledged fact that the Meech Lake accord is controversial. I 
think it’s an acknowledged fact that Meech lake, in the 
controversy, generates a health debate about the future and the 
nature of Canada, albeit the passions are aroused on all sides. I 
strongly support the need to get Quebec onside, there is no doubt 
about that. We cannot have the moral acceptance of Quebec to 
Meech Lake. They’re into the constitution now; they don’t need 
Meech Lake to be in the constitution; they’re bound by the 
constitution with or without Meech lake. I accept the moral 
binding. 
 
(2230) 
 
But we have a segment of people and individuals who are left 
outside of this agreement. It may sound lawyerish to the hon. 
member, but it is also speaking to the fundamental fabric of this 
country. My question to the Premier is this: why not get a political 
accord now, while Meech lake is going through the system of 
being ratified, which accord now comes to terms with the 
questions of the Indian and native issues, the question of the 
northern provinces, and the questions which are outstanding with 
respect to women’s rights as a political accord. It could come in as 
a second phase, if you want, but to do this concurrently at this 
time. Will you give me that answer, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Here, here! 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, a couple or three very 
brief observations. I am glad the hon. member and, in fact, his 
party has endorsed the Meech lake accord and it’s passed this 
legislature. And notwithstanding some of the comments and 
concerns that the hon. member has, it has passed. I don’t recall 
whether he voted for it or not, but he says that he endorses it. 
 
I will say that the Meech Lake accord is significant progress in the 
building of Canada. What was a failure in ’82 to bring Quebec into 
and, as he puts it, morally on and sign on in terms of the Canadian 
constitution, we have now overcome because we have 10 premiers 
— had 10 premiers — and the Prime Minister agree that this 
accord could be an amendment to the constitution which 
recognized all the provinces on an equal footing. 
 
I point out that my best legal counsel and the best people that we 
can talk to say that this has no impact at all on individual rights, 
whether it’s women’s rights or native rights or other rights. And 
the best legal counsel I have suggests that. 
 
Secondly, I will also say to the hon. member that once you open 
up the accord for changes and/or amendments, then you run the 
risk of not having it done at all. If you want to look at a moral or 
political agreement that you can attach on to it, I’m not really so 
sure what it would mean. It would say that your rights have not 
been touched, or your rights are the same as they were before the 
accord; I mean, all you’re doing is begging the question. If legally 
the rights have not been changed, then they have not been 
changed. 
 
And the best legal counsel that I have — and the hon. member 
doesn’t buy that — says that the rights have not been changed, and 
as the hon. member puts it, they have not been trumped by 
anything else that’s in the accord. 
 
Let me finally say to the hon. member, while he says that maybe 
we could make changes, I simply say, as the Premier of Quebec 
says, and most of the Premiers, and I believe rally, now, all but 
one will say: let’s pass this accord, have Quebec part of the 
country. And if you want to amend the constitution at a later date, 
with respect to senate reform or anything else, that’s possible. We 
have amended the constitution before, but don’t jeopardize this 
very historic opportunity. Don’t’ wreck it when we have a change 
to put the whole country together. 
 
People have asked over and over again, what does Quebec want? 
We know exactly what they want. It’s there. All premiers have 
agreed, all provinces have agreed, and the Prime Minister’s 
agreed, and we can have them part of the constitution if we pass 
this. If you want to amend the constitution after that, certainly 
we’ve amended it before. 
 
I would say finally, Mr. Chairman, that finally, finally under this 
accord, Saskatchewan has the same veto power as Quebec and 
Ontario, and it’s about time we had the same sorts of strength as 
they do it in the major provinces. So I can say to the hon. member 
this is very significant, and it is progress, and it is historic, and in 
my view it’s in the right direction. 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2508 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, we will obviously await 
developments on this. And I want to move more specifically to the 
question of French language, in the context of Meech Lake, and as 
it relates to Saskatchewan, with a few questions, not too many 
comments. But I do think a little bit of background is important. 
 
In mid-April, as we know, I think the second Bill that was tabled 
in this House was Bill 2 or Bill 3, with respect to French 
languages. This was the government’s response to the Mercure 
case. At that time the Minister of Justice objected to the spending 
of $15 million — cost of translation — although the Premier — 
and I do have the clippings here to verify them — in lengthy 
interviews especially for out-of-province newspapers, said the 
province could spend hundreds of millions. Well, I’ll show you 
this right away. The Premier shakes his head. 
 
A few days later, the Minister of Justice then said that cost was not 
an issue. A few days later, in a lengthy interview, I think it was the 
Leader-Post, but it might have been The Globe and Mail — and 
this prompted, by the way, an attack on a journalist, so there might 
be some dispute by the Minister of Justice — the Premier said that 
Saskatchewan would be bilingual within 15 years. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Ten. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And . . . well, it could have been 10. The 
Deputy Premier says 10. It could be 10 years. 
 
I want to ask the Premier the question: is it official policy of your 
government that Saskatchewan will be officially bilingual, and are 
you . . . is that your official policy, within 10 or 15 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I believe I know the quotes 
that the hon. member has. One was from The Globe and Mail, and 
one was from some place else. It said, Mr. Chairman, that it would 
take — and I can give it to you, or paraphrase it. I said it would 
take a great deal of money, in the neighbourhood of indeed 
hundreds of millions of dollars, to provide sufficient education 
here in the province of Saskatchewan for us to become bilingual, 
and certainly for our children to become bilingual across the 
province. As the hon. member knows, many areas of the province 
do not have access to French education, certainly not immersion; 
some have core, but many don’t have either. 
 
I said that I don’t have that kind of money and the province 
doesn’t have that kind of money. But I acknowledged it would 
take that kind of money, and it would have to come from the 
federal government. 
 
At the same time I was asked, well, will this province be bilingual 
with respect to providing the laws and the legislature in both 
official languages? And I said, yes. And they said, well how fast? I 
said, within 10 to 15 years we will have the full capacity to 
translate the laws that are effective today, the efficient or the 
significant laws and statutes of this province will be in both 
languages, and as we pass the laws, it will be in both languages. 
And I said, I don’t think we can do it all at once. I know we won’t 
be speaking in both languages all at once; it’ll take some 
 

time, and obviously it will. 
 
Now the federal government has responded, as have the people of 
Saskatchewan. They said you have passed the right legislation 
here. Ninety-seven per cent of us speak English, about 3 per cent 
French. It’s going to take us some time to become bilingual. It’s 
going to take time for this institution to pass laws in both 
languages and have that translation capacity. And the federal 
government has responded and said, in terms of education, we will 
help you in education, distance education, language institutes and 
all those kinds of things, and that’s where the answer lies, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Education of our young people. My children speak French. They 
have access to French immersion, and more and more children in 
both rural and urban want the same opportunity. That will take 
considerable federal money and co-operation from the province, 
and we certainly are prepared to co-operate in that fashion. 
 
It won’t be overnight; it’ll take some time, and we are quite 
prepared to co-operate and play our part. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hour is late and this 
really is an important issue. I am talking out loud now to myself; 
I’m tempted to pursue it. I don’t know whether there is a mood 
here tonight or at some other time, but I have here in front of me a 
pamphlet by a person called Myrna Petersen, authorized by the 
Regina Elphinstone Progressive Conservative Association. She 
was the candidate against my colleague in Regina Elphinstone. 
 
And what I find interesting about this pamphlet is the full page on 
one side, which is, in effect, an argument to garner votes based on 
a position of what can only be charitably characterized as a 
anti-Fransaskois position.  
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Not true? Well, I mean the hon. member says 
it’s not true. You can take a look at the pamphlet. I mean, you 
probably engineered the pamphlet, so you know the situation. I 
don’t want to exacerbate the thing. I don’t think helps anybody to 
read Ms. Petersen’s comments and the same comments that took 
place, albeit a little more guardedly, in Saskatoon Eastview, I think 
that were . . . taking place . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon 
me? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the hon. member says let 
it all out. I actually think I have let it all out today, and I think the 
Premier has done too. We’ve had a pretty good debate on the 
issues. 
 
The point that I want to get to the Premier is this: I want to know a 
specific answer. I want to know this: will bilingualism come to 
Saskatchewan, in your judgement, if you’re Premier, and if so, in 
what time frame, in the light of the Meech Lake commitments that 
you so strongly endorse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I have already gone over the 
things that have taken place in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
responded to the Supreme Court   



 
June 23, 1988 

2509 
 

decision. We said that there will be both languages in the courts, 
there will be both languages in the legislature, and we will 
translate the statutes of this legislature into both languages. And 
we’ve said that we will do that. 
 
We also said and agreed with the French-speaking community that 
there’s no point in spending $25 million, or $15 million, or even 
$5 million translating all the laws of the past. We can translate 
those into the future. But we will not become bilingual until our 
children can learn to speak both languages, and that takes time and 
money. 
 
So yes, you will find that we will have the capacity in both 
languages in this House and in the courts, and obviously in the 
statutes. And that will take some technology, it will take some 
research, it will take some equipment, and it takes some money. 
And that will happen. 
 
And with respect to Saskatchewan becoming bilingual, it will take 
time and education. Now right now 97 per cent of us speak 
English. It will take some time before we all learn to speak French, 
and in some cases many of the adults will never learn to speak 
French, in my lifetime or yours. Now the children will, and over 
time, as they want to, we will provide them with access to both 
languages and probably other languages. 
 
And we find now that language institutes are encouraging people 
to speak in the language that we trade in. And you’re finding 
increased demand and interest in a languages like Spanish, 
Japanese, Chinese, and others because of the global village. Mr. 
Chairman, I believe that you will see over time this province will 
be bilingual, will be trilingual, and we’ll be able to use many 
languages. Certainly this legislature and the major statutes of a 
significant importance will be in both French and English in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I think I cannot go any further 
with the Premier in this regard because the answers are, in my 
mind — I say this with respect to the person, I think the answers 
are . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Nonsensical. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I won’t say nonsensical, but I will say they are 
guarded and confused, to the extent that the Premier knows what 
the nature of this country is. He is the one who was arguing about 
Quebec getting into confederation by Meech Lake. He’s the one 
who’s the proponent of that, the strong proponent of that. I am for 
Quebec into confederation under appropriate circumstances and 
conditions for all of Canada. 
 
But Meech lake launches a certain direction. he knows those 
obligations, he’s a believer in those obligations, he has an 
obligation in the context of Saskatchewan to do the right job. But I 
clearly can’t make any further headway in this regard. 
 
I do want to ask . . . I’m sorry; I didn’t mean to mislead anybody 
here. I do have one other very important question I want to ask 
before I close off. Mr. Premier, you will know that there is, in my 
judgement, a lot of controversy in Saskatchewan about Bill 60, 
which is the Sunday shopping hours Bill, the mad dogs Bill, and 
the 

ward system Bill. I don’t criticize here the chairman’s ruling about 
keeping these three subjects together, but I think that this is rather 
unusual in the Saskatchewan context. Nevertheless, these three are 
riding together, and they’re being pushed ahead by your Minister 
of municipal affairs. We cannot make any headway with your 
Minister of municipal affairs. 
 
The Premier will know that there is a coalition against open 
Sunday shopping. It’s headed by the Rev. Bill Portman, who is 
well-known to the members of this Assembly, and is well-known 
and a respected leader in the community at large. He writes to you, 
sir, under the date of June 8, 1988. He says that, “We suggest an 
all-party committee be struck to allow public opinion to be heard.” 
 
(2245) 
 
He says that there should be an option, that there is an attack on 
the quality of life in families by unlimited Sunday shopping. I 
think, by the way, quite an argument can be made — I welcome 
the return of the Minister of Urban Affairs — quite an argument 
can be made about the impact of Sunday shopping, unlimited 
Sunday shopping, in rural Saskatchewan especially, but 
everywhere, coupled with The Liquor Act amendments, which 
open up the liquor . . . the arguments and the impacts that that has 
on family. And I’m prompted to raise this, not to re-open the 
debate, because you’re the one who was telling me about the NDP 
way and how you were motivated about getting into politics 
because you didn’t want to be associated with a party where things 
were being done from the top — a few elite people from the top. 
 
Well here’s a chance to put your words to the test. The people, 
through these letters and coalitions, they don’t want your 
imposition from the top by your minister or by you on wide open 
Sunday shopping. They don’t want that. They don’t want the 
liquor Act. They’re asking you to stop and to kill this bill. 
 
The ward system’s another example. The municipal councils, they 
say look, don’t be arrogant, don’t be out of touch. I think that it’s 
pretty obvious that the government is out of touch now. I think it’s 
run its course as a government, no vitality and bulldozing through, 
that’s my view. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is: since your minister won’t 
budge — you’ve changed the position of the Minister of Finance 
on stabilization — how about doing a real good thing for 
Saskatchewan in a Saskatchewan way. I don’t want to say in a 
sense of leadership but — well maybe I should — how about 
showing some leadership tonight. let’s do something positive for 
the small-business people in rural Saskatchewan and elsewhere. 
Tell us that this Bill is dead. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that a lot of people 
in Regina and Saskatoon would be very interested in knowing that 
the NDP will knot allow you to shop at Superstore on Sunday. 
And I would . . . I just want to make   



 
June 23, 1988 

2510 
 

it very clear, there’s lots of folks that you think that you might 
represent will now know that you would stop shopping on Sunday 
or evenings. And I just . . . it’s nice to know that you finally laid it 
out there. Because you know that families, a lot of families, shop 
on Sunday and they are . . . Mr. Chairman, I ask the hon. members 
to just please let me finish my remarks. 
 
The second thing I’d like to say, Mr. Chairman, is that, so that the 
hon. member makes it very clear and he knows, the Premier of 
Quebec endorses the Saskatchewan position on Meech Lake, and 
he endorses our position on language. Now the NDP might not, 
and the NDP might not in Quebec, and the NDP might not here, 
but the Premier of Quebec endorses freer trade and free trade with 
the United States. The Premier of Quebec endorses Meech Lake, 
and he endorses freer trade and free trade with the United States. 
The Premier of Quebec endorses Meech Lake, and he endorses the 
language position taken by the province of Saskatchewan. And yet 
he says the NDP in his province are against it as well, and the 
NDP are against it here. The NDP are against people shopping on 
Sundays in Regina and Saskatoon, and the people in Regina and 
Saskatoon tell me they want to shop. 
 
The NDP say, well, for Heaven’s sakes, they’re for small business, 
and I can’t find small businesses and entrepreneurs who think that 
their party is the NDP. Now you can go all across the country and 
we can talk to businesses and entrepreneurs. They support free 
trade and the NDP doesn’t. Nine out of 10 support free trade, and 
the NDP doesn’t; why would small business be interested in 
supporting the NDP? 
 
I’ll only say that, with respect to shopping, Mr. Chairman, that we 
know — we know. The combinations of things that people want 
access to, they want to be able to do things with their family, both 
rural and urban. We respect people’s views; that’s why the 
Minister of Urban Affairs has been going across the province 
talking to people in all jurisdictions, rural and urban. 
 
And I will say, Mr. Chairman, before I take my place, that he says 
the same thing in the rural as he does the urban, the same thing in 
towns as he does in villages, as he does in cities. And that’s 
important because people get to know that you might say one 
thing some place else, as you do. You’re saying, well, it’s fine, 
we’ll have Sunday shopping here for the folks in Regina North, 
but then when you go out of town you say, oh no, we won’t have 
any Sunday shopping. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I think you have to say the same thing in 
town and out of town. We have said that we are prepared to look 
at open shopping, and if municipalities, rural or urban, want to say 
no, that’s their prerogative. They want that jurisdiction, and 
certainly we’re prepared to share it with them. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Somebody’s going to have to have the last 
work here. I don’t know if I’m going to have it, but I’m going to 
make a response. I asked the question about whether you would 
withdraw Bill 60. I am assuming . . . no. I’m assuming the 
implication in that answer is that he is not going to withdraw it. 
 
He said to me that he doesn’t know a business man anywhere who 
supports our position. Well I’ll tell you, 
 

we have got stacks of letters, but I’ll just read you one. Mr. Jack 
Klein, it’s addressed to, it’s dated May 31, Hague, Saskatchewan. 
It says: 
 

Sir: (probably a copy wasn’t sent to you) 
 
It has taken considerable effort on your part, plus much 
natural ability, to enable you to become undoubtedly the 
most insensitive Minister of urban Affairs in Saskatchewan 
history (writes the letter writer, Mr. H. Epp). Your version of 
fair play (listen to this, Mr. Premier, this is what you’re 
arguing for) in the business world is tantamount to the 
Edmonton Oilers coming to play our local pee wees without 
any referees or officials, with no intermissions, no time 
periods, no limit to the number of players allowed on the ice, 
no offsides, no penalties, no suspensions. Is it really possible 
you have no idea who gets clobbered? 

 
That’s a beautiful paragraph; that summarizes the argument. And 
then he writes, by closing: 
 

As another merchant down the street has stated: “There isn’t 
a self-respecting storekeeper in Saskatchewan who will ever 
vote PC again.” He could be right. (Mr. Epp said.) 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, that’s signed, Mr. Epp. And 
there are letters, we could read them all over. 
 
There are hundreds of small storekeepers and small-business men. 
They come to us. I’m not going to argue whether or not they talk 
to us or not. That’s the reality. I just wanted to rebut the Premier, 
to put that on file. 
 
I want to make one last point as I close. I tell the Premier, and he 
says Premier Bourassa likes his language policy. Well, bully for 
Premier Bourassa. And it’s a great thing that Premier Bourassa is 
your ally. Good to you. Premier Bourassa likes your Bill because 
exactly what you’re doing to the French minority here, he’s doing 
to the English minority in Quebec. That’s why he likes it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You’re the odd couple, the two of you. You’re 
the odd couple. But leave that aside. 
 
I say to you, sir, as I close off these estimates, I started off the way 
— and I close off the way I started off — by this man’s letter, this 
Mr. Epp’s letter. This tells you everything you want to know about 
the differences. 
 
You want to have Sunday shopping, and you say I’m going to say 
something in rural Saskatchewan different from urban 
Saskatchewan. No, I’m going to say the same thing as I did since 
January, both places, and I’ll say this again. Sunday shopping: this 
offends a common pause day in Saskatchewan. This is our 
tradition for rest for workers and for the day of religion and for 
rest. That’s what Sunday is. It’s not in the United States, by the 
way. It’s wide open in the United States. That’s what’s coming   



 
June 23, 1988 

2511 
 

here. 
 
Free trade is linking us to the United States. That’s why free trade 
will, amongst other things, not only in terms of energy to water, 
the things we issued. We’ll do the same thing with respect to the 
small business. Sunday is going to force competition with the 
superstars. Mr. Premier, that’s like bringing in the Edmonton 
Oilers to fight against the pee-wees, and you say, compete out 
there. That’s the argument that you say — competition. That’s not 
competition, that’s a law of the jungle. This is the time for 
co-operation. You’re for privatization; I say that’s for large 
corporations. It’s all a party of the philosophy, and it’s all part of 
the overall image. Your taxes are on the small people; they’re no 
on the large corporations. Your policy is to cut back on health 
care. Your policy is to cut back on the dental plan. Your policy is 
to have this kind of a perverted, upside-down vision of a made in 
Saskatchewan program and a made in Saskatchewan government 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I say this as I close, Mr. Chairman — I tell this Premier and this 
government and the people of the province of Saskatchewan: we 
are going to do all that we can from now until 1990 to prevent this 
step backwards. We’re going to do all that we can to prevent the 
dismantlement of Saskatchewan and Canada that we dearly love, 
that we so dearly, dearly love. 
 
We’re going to work with the small-business people and the 
working people and farmers to build a brand-new vision for the 
1990s. It’s not going to hook us to the Americans, it’s going to 
hook us tot he world, Mr. Chairman. I guarantee the people of this 
province, there is hope. Don’t give up hope — there is a brighter 
new tomorrow, and we’re going to give it to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And with that, Mr. Chairman, I call it 10 
o’clock. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:55 p.m. 
 


