


















































April 11, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 11, 1988 
 

447 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. It’s with great 
pleasure that I introduce to the Assembly 22 students who are 
here from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology). The name of the class is English as a Second 
Language, and that, I guess, describes what they’re doing. I 
look forward to meeting the students as I always do after these 
proceedings. I look forward to listening to your impressions of 
what you see today. I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 11 students 
and two teachers from the adult basic education class in 
Melville, Saskatchewan in my constituency. They are seated in 
your gallery. They’re here today with Darlene Lanceday and 
Trudy Hutchinson. I will be meeting with them following 
question period. I would ask the members to welcome them 
here today, and we encourage them to continue their education 
during question period today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to take this occasion to introduce to members a familiar 
face that I’m sure all hon. members of this House know as a 
previous member of the legislature, one of my predecessors in 
the constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who is seated 
behind the bar. I would like you to welcome Mr. Roy Nelson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Hog Slaughtering Plant for Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, you may well know the 
name of Peter Pocklington who came to Saskatchewan with a 
lot of big promises. In exchange for those promises you opened 
the provincial treasury to him. One of those promises was that 
he would undertake to build a hog slaughtering plant in this 
province. Mr. Minister, can you tell this House how far along 
that particular project is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have now a new 
bacon processing plant in the community of North Battleford, 
or in The Battlefords, that processes Canadian pork into bacon 
which is packaged and particularly marketed into the United 
States. We have provided the normal incentives, Mr. Speaker, 
to anybody who will 
 

increase processing and manufacturing in the province. 
 
With respect to further killing capacity, it depends on the 
numbers. And as the Saskatchewan hog marketing board and 
other packers know, as the numbers increase, then we may look 
at additional packing facilities. And if that follows, then we can, 
Mr. Speaker, look forward to more packing facilities in the 
province. We want to make sure that we don’t have more 
packing facilities than you do hogs, and it’s a balance of 
bringing them in. We now have expanded facilities at 
Intercontinental Packers, a new bacon plant in North Battleford, 
and we look forward to expansions in other packing plants, Mr. 
Speaker, as numbers warrant. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, in 
the story from The Western Producer out of Edmonton points 
out that Pocklington’s promise to build a slaughter plant has 
come to nothing because there are not enough hogs. In 1985 
your intention was, through Sedco, to finance $21 million of the 
$36 million operation through loans and grants. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, can you tell this House how much of that 
money has been paid to Gainers, and how much of it was 
designated for a pork slaughtering plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the industrial incentive 
package that we have for people who will increase processing 
and manufacturing — in the case of Gainers in North 
Battleford, was for the bacon plant. And that’s what it’s used 
for, and in fact the plant is built and there are, I believe, in the 
neighbourhood of 100-and-some people, local people, in North 
Battleford employed there. 
 
The NDP said we wouldn’t build it, it wouldn’t be built, but it’s 
there and it’s operating. They also said we wouldn’t have new 
recreational vehicle manufacturing; it’s there and it’s up, with 
industrial grants. They said we wouldn’t build an upgrader, and 
it’s being built in the city of Regina. They said we wouldn’t 
build a paper mill, but it’s going to be opened in August, Mr. 
Speaker. Yes, we’re continuing to build, manufacture, and 
process here, Mr. Speaker, because it helps us be more 
prosperous and provides jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
you had a $25 per hog cash advance and it was supposed to 
increase hog production. Now a simple question, Mr. Premier. 
Maybe you can answer this one without so much rhetoric. Can 
you tell this House how much tax credit has been used in this 
program so far, and how long do you intend to continue that 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. 
member that the hog population has increased rapidly in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and beef on feed has increased 
rapidly as well, Mr. Speaker. In fact, we’re going against the 
Canadian average. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The Premier is having   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

448 
 

difficulty answering the question. If we have interruptions, and 
sometimes it’s from one side and sometimes it’s from both, but 
the bottom is that it’s difficult hearing the Premier at times. So 
let him answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the young 
people that are in the gallery, I want to thank you because the 
opposition always and most often in this House talks as I’m on 
my feet. When I’m on my feet they’re supposed to listen, and 
often they speak from their seat and get into trouble over there. 
And I appreciate . . . see here they go again. Mr. Speaker, here 
they go again. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, that hog numbers and beef numbers are 
up in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re going against the 
flow nationally. We’re encouraged by the results that we see, 
and, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to provide appropriate 
incentives to balance the livestock industry with the grain sector 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, in 
the Western Producer article it states that the Economic 
Development minister, Larry Shaben, said it was possible that 
Gainers will not be building a new slaughter plant in southern 
Albert if hog production doesn’t warrant it. And I might add 
that hog prices are down low, and the projection for this year is 
they will maintain that low price. But he says that Pocklington 
will get the benefit of the government’s $67 million anyway. 
 
Now my question is to you, Mr. Premier. This is your friend, a 
peer of the free enterprise system and how it works. Does he 
take government money for breaking his promises and he never 
delivers, while preaching the evils of a controlled market-place? 
Do you agree with that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we often encourage people 
to invest in the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s how you 
build upgraders and paper mills and processing plants and 
expansion in various kinds of manufacturing and processing. 
We have turbines being manufactured in Saskatoon by the 
Japanese — first time ever in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Cable and wire in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker; you work with the 
co-operative sector and the private sector, Mr. Speaker, so that 
you can build here; you just don’t beat on them or try to push 
them away. We will continue to co-operate with the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker, in joint ventures, encouraging them to 
build here in Saskatchewan as opposed to Manitoba or Alberta 
or down East because here’s where we want to have processing 
and value added to our raw and processed products. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the 
price of hogs is down in this province. You have given 
Pocklington $21 million, which you will fail to say how much 
or what it was earmarked for. You have 
 

a new livestock incentive program in your budget that’s going 
to give up to $8 million for corporations. Is that your idea of 
how the hog industry in this province should be built on 
corporate entities rather than on individual farm production 
units? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers that the hon. 
member uses are not accurate, and I don’t want anybody that’s 
watching this or listening to it to think that he has his numbers 
accurate. Secondly, he will have to admit the cash advances and 
the tax breaks and the other economic opportunities and 
incentives we provided for the livestock industry are head and 
shoulders above anything that a previous administration, 
particularly the NDP, has ever done in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Third, Mr. Speaker, we are not just running out, 
Mr. Speaker, and saying that we are going to have to take over 
farms, or nationalize packing plants, or kick them out of the 
province. I remind the NDP member opposite, we had a 
packing plant in North Battleford, and when the NDP came in 
they kicked it right out of the province, Mr. Speaker. They 
nationalized the other one, Mr. Speaker, that was in here and 
took control of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building them, creating them, allowing 
them to come in here. We’re not nationalizing them and kicking 
them out like the radical socialists you see sitting on the other 
side . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! 
 

Renovations to SaskPower Offices 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On page 425 of Hansard, about a third 
of the way down, under Hon. Mr. Berntson, where it says, “Mr. 
Speaker, I will take notice . . .” 
 
That was in response to a question from the member for Regina 
North West, a very urgent and compelling question — a very 
urgent and compelling question dealing with renovations on the 
12th floor of SaskPower in the area where Don Stankov, 
chairman of the board of SaskPower, and George Hill, president 
of SaskPower have their offices; and the question was as to the 
cost of the renovations and the extravagance of the renovations, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to answer that question because it was such a 
compelling question, and so this is my first opportunity, since 
today is Monday, Mr. Speaker, and I thought I would answer it 
now. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was a renovation on the 12th floor of 
the SaskPower building and that renovation was to provide 
space for more people. Now you might ask: why would you 
want to provide space for more people when in total we have 27 
per cent fewer people working   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

449 
 

at SaskPower than in 1982. Well it has to do with a 
consolidation of space requirements, Mr. Speaker, and as 
contracts come up outside the building, we’re bringing them 
back into the building. 
 
So with respect to the 12th floor of the SaskPower building, 
there was a renovation that cost about $13,000. The net effect of 
that renovation, Mr. Speaker, was that the chairman’s office 
was reduced to 483 square feet from 591 square feet . . . that’s a 
25 per cent reduction. The president’s office was reduced, Mr. 
Speaker, was reduced . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
The hon. member is answering a question of which he did 
indeed take notice, but he has taken already a considerable 
length of time. He has taken a considerable length of time, and I 
ask him to finish the answer to his question now. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Would the member for Regina North 
please be seated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I apologize for the time required to 
answer the question. I think it’s because of the interruptions 
from members opposite. But the president’s office was 752 
square feet, and it has been reduced to 376 square feet — half 
the size, Mr. Speaker. And in addition, the president no longer 
has a bathroom. He now has to go out into the hall with the rest 
of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — If I may, Mr. Speaker, I have a 
supplementary question to the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I’m assuming then that the 
$13,000 is part of the furniture that’s in there, including the oak 
table and the bar. In the annual report of SaskPower Mr. Hill 
says, and I must quote this, that he has asked all employees, that 
he’s asked the employees to ask these questions of themselves, 
that whenever there’s a spending of over $10 involved, and I 
quote, “Is it necessary to spend this money, and if the answer is 
yes, can it be deferred?” 
 
Do you think this expenditure of $13,000, which is far greater 
than $10, could have been deferred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose . . . and let me 
tell you this, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know where that member gets 
his information, but the suggestion of a bar in the executive 
offices of Power is totally, completely, and absolutely false, and 
that member ought not to get away with that. That’s point 
number one. 
 
Point number two, as it relates to discretionary spending, 
$13,000 to save I don’t know how much, because of the 
consolidation of the space, Mr. Speaker. It was a board decision 
to do this renovation. I think it was the right decision. I support 
it; it is responsible, and a $36 million profit in the annual report 
indicates that it was responsible. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Legislation on Minority Language Rights 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice, and it has to do with his 
proposed language legislation. The minister will know that 
there is considerable doubt and controversy about several 
aspects of the government’s proposal, including the degree of 
consultation that occurred with Saskatchewan’s francophone 
community . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I’m afraid that . . . I certainly 
can’t hear him; perhaps other members can. But I can’t hear the 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and because of that I’ll 
give him an opportunity to start over if he so wishes. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because this subject 
is serious . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now, you know, we’ve 
just asked the hon. members to allow the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to state his question in a way that can 
be heard, and already they’re not allowing that. So may I ask 
them again? 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a serious 
subject and I would like the minister to hear the question 
clearly. It refers to the proposed legislation on minority 
language rights, and I was referring to the doubt that exists, Mr. 
Minister, about a number of the aspects of this proposal, 
including the degree of consultation that occurred in detail with 
Saskatchewan’s francophone community before the 
government’s Bill was introduced, and also including the actual 
financial cost of the government’s proposal compared to the 
specific alternatives requested by Saskatchewan’s francophone 
community. 
 
And I want to ask the minister if he would give us his specific 
commitment before the Bill is proceeded with in this House. 
Will the minister table, in detail, a full description of that 
consultative process so that we can see, in detail, what it 
entailed? And secondly, a full description, item by item, of the 
government’s cost analysis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In response to the hon. member’s 
question, Mr. Speaker, let’s deal first with the question of 
consultation. I have personally met with the francophone 
community of Saskatchewan on four occasions. I met with them 
in Prince Albert, along with the Premier; I met with in Regina 
— I met with them in Regina about three or four days prior to 
that Bill being introduced as first reading. I discussed with the 
individuals from the francophone community what we intended 
to do with the legislation. We listened to their observations and 
we took a decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there’s one thing to say, will you consult? And we will 
consult and we have consulted. But there’s another thing to say 
that what their position is will be adopted, and that’s for the 
government to take that position. We will listen to what they 
say and then we will respond. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

450 
 

With regards to the cost and the question of cost, I can advise 
the hon. member that we . . . the officials in my department 
have gone through this. They looked at the province of 
Manitoba. Manitoba has gone through this process, and it’s very 
difficult to distinguish in the Manitoba experience the exact cost 
of this. Now there is a minimum cost in Manitoba of 8 million 
and a maximum cost of 25 million, and that’s because 
Manitoba, in the process, reorganized their way of drafting 
legislation. 
 
The best information I have available, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Department of Justice, given the fact that there are 7,000 pages 
of legislation in this province, well in excess of 7,000 pages of 
regulations, and then various types of services that might arise 
out of that if the francophone community would wish; clearly, 
that, in our view, would cost in excess of $15 million — $15 
million, Mr. Speaker, I might say that is difficult to come up 
with these days. And that is one of the problems, obviously, that 
we face with regard to the speed by which we might pursue this 
particular situation. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I hope the minister 
would consider specifically the suggestion that I’ve put to him, 
of providing the House and the people of Saskatchewan with 
the details of these matters in writing, because I think that 
would be helpful to any rational analysis of this discussion. 
 
If I could, Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a supplementary 
to the Premier on this same subject. The Premier has said that 
he wants and intends to be more generous in future than the 
present draft Bill allows on the question of language rights. I 
wonder, in his meeting later this week with Premier Bourassa, 
will the Premier of Saskatchewan be raising the possibility of 
changes in Quebec’s Bill 101 as one way of encouraging and 
prompting a more generous approach to minority language 
rights in both Quebec and Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can only speak for 
Saskatchewan, and will not want to, and would not speak for 
the province of Quebec. 
 
Under Saskatchewan’s jurisdiction we can move towards 
bilingual, a bilingual province at a pace that will be different 
than other jurisdictions because we have 97 per cent, or about 
that, of this population that speaks English or English 
non-French, and about three per cent, mother tongue, that is 
French. 
 
In Quebec, it’s obviously different than that. In New Brunswick 
it’s about 40 per cent French speaking and 60 per cent 
non-French speaking. And the rate at which we move across the 
country towards bilingualism will be different. And what we’ve 
said here, and I will say to the Premier of Quebec, that this is 
Saskatchewan, as indeed he will have to manage Quebec, and I 
won’t tell him what to do with Quebec. You will find that it’s 
under provincial jurisdiction as it is here. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
will say the same thing to any premier who wants to talk about 
his jurisdiction, whether it’s Ontario or whether it’s British 
Columbia or Newfoundland or Nova Scotia. 
 
So under — if I could just add to this — finally, Mr. Speaker, 
under the whole concept of a constitutional 
 

change that would endorse the Meech Lake constitutional 
amendment, what we’ve said is that we will make sure that this 
country recognizes minorities, and we will, and we do. But how 
you recognize that and the speed at which you recognize that 
may be different in Nova Scotia with respect to French 
speaking people or New Brunswick or Quebec than it is in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I believe other premiers 
recognize that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would like to just make this comment that, 
you know, I know ministers have a great deal they could say 
about any particular question, and I know that it’s information 
that we’d all like to hear. However, I would like to ask you to 
kind of judge the length of your answers. 
 

Rafferty Dam Project 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Deputy Premier, the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and it 
concerns the Rafferty dam project. 
 
Mr. Minister, on the CBC radio this morning, the director of the 
inland waters branch, Mr. Bob Halliday, said that it will be 
some months before approval is given for the construction to 
begin on the Rafferty or Alameda dam project by the federal 
government — licences which are required, which are required 
under the law of this land to be granted. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can enlighten this House as to 
when can you expect a decision from those federal counterparts, 
and why is it that George Hill, the president of SaskPower, has 
publicly announced that the construction on the project has 
already commenced. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The construction on the — what do 
you call those little dams? — coffer-dams has in fact 
commenced, Mr. Speaker. These don’t become part of the 
ultimate structure, Mr. Speaker; they are there only to facilitate 
construction in the event that approval is finally given. And by 
the way, Mr. Speaker, we anticipate approval of the project 
sooner rather than later, as suggested by the member opposite. 
 
The reason for the coffer-dams is because, Mr. Speaker, if the 
dam site is not in a condition to get on with construction 
immediately that approval is given, that the project delay for 
over a year, because of the time frames that roll into this thing, 
would cost significantly, Mr. Speaker. So we are spending, I 
guess, maybe — and don’t hold me to this, but I would say 
around $200,000 to save millions of dollars in that eventuality, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
obvious from the answer of the Deputy Premier that he doesn’t 
know when approval is going to be given, and when he throws 
out a number around $200,000 that once again he’s proven his 
ignorance on the subject; he doesn’t know how much it’s going 
to cost. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if approval is not given, will you — if   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

451 
 

it is not given by the federal government, will you tell us now, 
will you tell us what the cost of the construction will be, and 
also what the cost of tearing down will be, and the cost of 
mitigation of the tearing down will be if approval is not given, 
which you’ve admitted is a possibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I, this very morning — I 
believe it was about 8:13 if you want to deal in precise terms — 
I talked with the federal Minister of Environment, one Tom 
McMillan, from his office in Charlottetown, and as a result of 
that conversation I have a very high degree of confidence that 
approval will be forthcoming, Mr. Speaker, as soon as the issue 
of water quality is dealt with to the satisfaction of the federal 
department. And so, since that member, Mr. Speaker, is so 
concerned about the preciseness of the detail, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to take notice of this question so I can get absolute, 
concise . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think at this time I’d 
just like to make this comment, that unfortunately I have seen in 
the past and now, as a matter of fact, where a minister will 
comment on a question at some length and then say he’ll take 
notice of it. I’m not sure if that’s the way we want to take 
notice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously we’re not 
going to get any kind of straight answer out of the Deputy 
Premier, so I’ll address a new question, this time to the Premier 
of the province. 
 
Mr. Premier, your government seems to be hell-bent, hell or hot 
water, to complete this project, yet you’ve heard your Deputy 
Premier here say today that approval for the project will be 
short coming, will come in a very short period of time. 
 
Will you now undertake to the people of this province to do the 
reasonable thing and to wait, and to wait until that approval is 
either approved or rejected until you spend more taxpayers’ 
money on your political boondoggle in your own riding. Will 
you undertake to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when somebody says to the 
Premier, it’s a political boondoggle, it takes a while to respond 
to that. So if you’ll bear with me, I would like to tell the hon. 
member that if he gets away with asking about political 
boondoggles, I’ll get to explain to him that in southern 
Saskatchewan water conservation is very, very important. And 
you may not recognize that in Regina Rosemont, but you should 
just go outside the city any place in southern Saskatchewan and 
ask any member of the community whether they think that 
water conservation would be a very good idea. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you notice that he speaks from his seat. He 
won’t listen to the truth. He won’t listen to the facts. I want to 
tell him that the people of Saskatchewan are 
 

proud of Diefenbaker Lake and Gardiner Dam, proud of water 
conservation, proud of the fact that in Moose Jaw and Regina 
you can get access to that water — good, clean drinking water 
year round, as a result of the things that we’re doing. And he 
stands in his place and says Saskatchewan people should not be 
able to conserve water in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say to him, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people 
will look forward to this dam. They look forward to water 
conservation. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we intend to build Rafferty 
and Alameda dam for the benefit of the entire population of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Ms. Atkinson. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although the 
budget that we’re considering sets out the government financial 
plan for the current year, the ’88-89 fiscal year to be exact, it’s 
important to note that a budget reflects more than contemporary 
conditions and influences. 
 
For example, a budget can reflect future priorities. It can plan to 
spend funds this year even if there is to be no tangible results 
until some future time. A budget will almost certainly reflect 
the past. As an example, if a government has a surplus from the 
previous year, that surplus can be rolled over to a current year’s 
budget even if the conditions surrounding a current year’s 
budget suggest falling revenues and a need to raise taxes, or to 
reduce expenditures — a surplus could help to cushion that 
impact. 
 
And of course this year’s budget is a poor example to describe 
the fact that budgets can reflect the past. Saskatchewan has not 
had a budget surplus since 1982. Saskatchewan has instead 
experienced deficits. Every year we’ve experienced deficits. 
Every year since 1982 the PC government has spent more than 
it’s raised, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the government entered the 
current budget year with a total accumulated deficit of $3.4 
billion — $3.4 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this budget reflects that deficit, and drastically so. One of 
the expenditures provided for in the current budget is for 
servicing the public debt, and this amounts to $329,499,500. 
And this millstone, Mr. Speaker, clearly illustrates that a current 
year’s budget can be affected, and drastically so, by more than 
contemporary conditions. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

452 
 

And so as we debate this particular budget, and as we attempt to 
bring light on this subject for the people of Saskatchewan, it is 
important to keep in mind that this budget, in all or the little that 
it offers, is heavily influenced by the immediate past and the PC 
government’s decision making during that time. 
 
Now before I deal with the government record, a government 
record that has resulted in a massive debt and in the current 
budget, let me put this government’s record of fiscal 
management in some historical context. I think, for the people 
of Saskatchewan to pass judgement on this budget and this 
government’s actions, they should first appreciate how this 
government compares to others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the years since 1946 and until 1983 there have 
been only two years in which governments of Saskatchewan 
have incurred deficits — two years, Mr. Speaker, two years out 
of 36. Except for the years 1961 and ’62, when there were small 
deficits due to extremely unfavourable economic conditions, 
there have not been any deficits — 34 years, Mr. Speaker, of no 
deficits. I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that this enviable 
record was achieved primarily by CCF and NDP governments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I think that I would be less than 
fair if I did not point out that during the Liberal administration 
from 1963-71 there were also no deficits. You will note, Mr. 
Speaker, that I did not mention PC governments. Saskatchewan 
did not have any PC governments during this time. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan might well ask: is it a 
coincidence that we had virtually no deficits during this period? 
Perhaps a review of the more recent history of the years of PC 
government will provide some answer to that question. 
 
Earlier I indicated that the PCs have run up a deficit in each and 
every year of their administration. After 20 years of CCF, 
Liberal, and NDP governments and no deficits, we have a PC 
government and deficits every year. I leave it to the people of 
Saskatchewan to judge: is this a matter of historical 
coincidence, or is it a testament to the PC government’s 
mismanagement, waste, and utter incompetence? 
 
Now the government members will say, it’s not our fault. They 
will say, it’s our misfortune to be governing at a time that the 
economy is faltering. They will say, it’s the world economic 
conditions. They will say, it’s the trade barriers; it’s the tariffs. 
They will say just about anything. Mr. Speaker, to avoid saying 
that they might be responsible for any part of this massive debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, they will even go so far as 
to say that it’s the NDP’s fault. 
 
Now let’s look at these claims. How realistic are these claims? 
How realistic is it to say it’s no fault of the PC government that 
the PC government has saddled the 
 

people of Saskatchewan with debt every year, every single year 
of their administration? Are the PCs asking the people of 
Saskatchewan to believe that we have not had tough times 
before? 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan know that’s not true. They 
remember other times when times were tough. They remember 
other times when wheat prices were depressed. They even 
remember Pierre Elliott Trudeau, some many years ago in the 
midst of an agricultural crisis and falling prices in 
Saskatchewan; they remember him asking, why should I sell 
your wheat? 
 
And they remember when oil prices, Mr. Speaker, were 
considerably less than they are today — considerably less — 
but they do not remember deficit after deficit. They remember 
instead surplus after surplus. They also remember fiscally 
competent governments, and they do not remember the type of 
mismanagement, the type of waste, the incompetence, the 
misspending that they have seen with this government. 
 
They also do not remember the extent of patronage and the 
strong smell of corruption that they associate with this PC 
government. And the people of Saskatchewan do not 
understand how an NDP government, which had 11 years of 
surplus, 11 years of competent fiscal management, should 
somehow be responsible for six years of PC deficits. Well the 
PCs may believe that, Mr. Speaker, but the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t. In fact, they now believe very little when 
this government has anything to say about budgets and deficits. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan do recognize, however, the 
considerable, if dubious, achievements of the Premier and his 
ministers of Finance. Never before have we been deeper in debt. 
Never before have we been so highly taxed. These are no small 
achievements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let it not be said that, when it comes to mismanagement 
and incompetence and waste, the PC government does things by 
half measure. That government mismanages and wastes by the 
full measure, Mr. Speaker, without restraint. You know, there 
should be a special award, a Will Klein award, a Jean Drapeau 
award, for the PC government, to recognize them for their 
all-time fiscal irresponsibility and incompetence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Of course the PC government has 
already earned their own special place in history, Mr. Speaker. 
At a time that the oil companies were enjoying among the 
highest prices for their oil, this PC government decided that it 
would be in the public interest to give these companies a tax 
break. 
 
Now one would think that, having among the highest prices 
ever for their product, the oil companies wouldn’t need more of 
an incentive to look for oil. Well what I forgot was that when it 
comes to logic, this PC government knows none. It has its own 
peculiar reasoning. They decided that high prices just wasn’t 
enough for the oil companies; tax breaks were needed. 
 
I would think, Mr. Speaker, that future students of 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

453 
 

economics and financial management will puzzle over that 
decision for many years to come. Why, they will ask, did the 
PC government give the oil companies a tax break at a time that 
the oil companies were in the best shape ever to pay those 
taxes? Why, indeed? 
 
Now the PCs will say, of course, that it was to stimulate oil 
production, to create jobs, especially in the constituency of the 
Premier and other senior cabinet ministers. But people will ask: 
are high prices not incentive enough to drill for oil? People will 
also ask: where are the jobs today? They know that this very 
stupid decision has so far cost the taxpayers almost $2 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. They know that a large part of the current deficit 
is the result of that stupidity. They know that the deficit would 
only be half of what it is today, because of that decision alone. 
 
So I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the past can influence the 
present. Were it not for the PC government’s decision on taxes, 
tax breaks for oil companies, today’s budget, as last year’s, 
could contain a lot less bad news for the people of this province. 
It would contain a lot less bad news about health, about 
education, about agriculture and, I would suggest, a lot less bad 
news for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now of course the government will point out that they are 
increasing taxes on oil in this year’s budget, and so they are, 
Mr. Speaker. But when you look at it, you realize that it’s a 
mere pittance in comparison with what we’ve lost — a drop in 
the barrel, as it were. When it comes to taxing oil companies, 
this government is a day late and a nearly $2 billion short. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot, however, blame all of the deficit on 
that peculiar bit of fiscal folly. Beyond the spectacular, there 
remains a long list of examples of fiscal irresponsibility. 
Consider if you will, Mr. Speaker, the largest political 
bureaucracy ever. And yes, we do pay a price for all the 
additional political hacks that this government and Premier 
seems to find so necessary. And yes, we do pay a price for the 
annual get-togethers of this group in expensive locations. 
 
Consider if you will, Mr. Speaker, government advertising that 
is now costing the taxpayers $20 million per year. And yes, we 
do pay for all that vague advertising telling us how good the 
Mulroney-Reagan trade deal is for us all. And yes, we do pay 
for George Hill, the president of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, telling us what a good job he thinks he’s doing for 
us all. 
 
Consider if you will, Mr. Speaker, patronage. Yes, we do pay a 
price for George Hill and Paul Schoenhals and Gordon Dirks, 
and many others. Consider, if you will, Mr. Speaker, office 
space. Yes, we do pay for all that empty office space. And yes, 
we will pay $12 million for expensive office space that isn’t 
needed in the Ramada Renaissance Hotel in Regina. 
 
Consider if you will, Mr. Speaker, incompetence. Yes, we did 
pay $25,000 U.S. for an airplane that we don’t have. And no, 
we didn’t get to kick the tires, and no, we didn’t get to spin the 
propeller. And yes, we will pay $370,000 and more for the 
rental of one-half of an office building after selling the whole 
building for $280,000. 

An Hon. Member: — Half is better than none. They could 
have given it away. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well my friend says, half is better than 
none because they could have given it away. Well I’ll leave that 
to the government to explain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Consider if you will, Mr. Speaker, economic development. I’m 
sorry, you should consider the gifts to their big business friends. 
Yes, we will pay for the millions they’ve showered on Peter 
Pocklington. Yes, we will pay for no end of bad decisions and 
more largesse resulting from a rush to privatize everything in 
sight. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on and on, and I don’t have 
the time today to list all of their bad decisions. I don’t have the 
time to list every example of waste and incompetence and 
mismanagement. But I would like to tell you that what you see 
is not the whole story. What we see, I would submit, is simply 
the tip of the iceberg. If the PC government is adept at anything, 
it’s hiding and obfuscating their waste and incompetence. 
 
Consider if you will, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this government 
has set new records for the late tabling of the Public Accounts. 
Now that’s the record of public spending where usually one 
finds the latest examples of waste and incompetence. 
 
The point that I’ve been trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
year’s budget is influenced more than by this year’s economy 
and current conditions. It is heavily influenced by the 
accumulated deficits of the PC government. Those deficits are 
the result of their stupidity, the result of their incompetence, the 
result of their wastefulness, the result of their mismanagement. 
 
So when the people of Saskatchewan examine the budget and 
wish for more, or less, I suppose, in the case of taxes, they 
should bear in mind the reasons for budgetary predicaments. 
They should understand that if it were not for the PC 
government deficits, the government would have more options 
than it has now to ensure that services would be adequate. 
 
Were it not for the PC deficits and their sad priorities, there 
could be money to restore the prescription drug plan. There 
could be funds to restore the children’s dental program. There 
could be money to provide for adequate funding of our 
hospitals to reduce long, long waiting lists. There would be 
money to provide adequate funding for our education system 
and the future of our children. There would be money to deal 
with the agricultural crisis as opposed to simply washing our 
hands of that crisis. 
 
The government, I would submit, would also have more options 
with respect to personal taxes. Personal taxes are at an all-time 
high in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Personal taxes have 
doubled, doubled since this government came to power. And as 
the people complete their tax returns, they should ask 
themselves, does it have to be this way; does it have to be this 
much? I would say no, Mr. Speaker, a resounding no is their 
answer. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

454 
 

The people of Saskatchewan are paying and paying dearly for 
this government’s bungling, and that’s why their taxes are so 
high. And the people get less for what they pay. And that’s 
why, every time that they have dealings with government and 
they set out to renew a licence or to pay some fees, they find 
those fees have increased. They’ll find a list of over 200 small 
tax increases here and there, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s a licence 
for an auctioneer that’s increased by 25 per cent, or whether it’s 
taxes for the courts. The new fee to commence court action is 
now $50 as opposed to $25, an increase of 100 per cent; 
whether it’s to file a notice of appeal, and an increase of 100 per 
cent. The list just goes on and on and on and on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. There just seems to be no end when it comes to taxing 
Saskatchewan people. School bus registration fees, from $25 to 
$48, an increase of 92 per cent, and the list just goes on and on 
and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s just simply no end, no end when it comes to tax 
increases, when it comes to hitting the people of Saskatchewan 
with increases here and there. And this is just the small stuff, 
Mr. Speaker. This doesn’t deal with the flat tax which they 
didn’t have in 1982; it doesn’t deal with the low level, 
relatively, of income taxes and personal taxes that they had in 
1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion that’s before 
us to support the budget. To support the PC government, to 
support the government motion would be to support years of PC 
stupidity, years of PC government incompetence, years of PC 
government waste, years of PC government mismanagement. 
The people of Saskatchewan can no longer support that, and I 
no longer support that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want 
to take this opportunity to say a few words with respect to the 
budget. Obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be endorsing it. 
 
I want to say at the outset that my remarks today are going to be 
on two major things. One will be on the whole question of 
providing sufficient revenue and sufficient moneys for not only 
health and not only education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but on the 
question of those that are disadvantaged in society, the lower 
income people, students, farmers, homeowners, families, people 
who are ill, people who are disabled — that category, Mr. 
Speaker, because this budget addresses them in a fashion, and 
in a fair fashion, that we have not seen in previous 
administrations in this province. 
 
Secondly, I’m going to touch on the whole question of creating 
economic opportunity and wealth. One of the major things that 
we’re going to do is provide for diversification, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that means that we’re going to have to be 
promoting more trade and freer trade. 
 
And I want to table here today some research that we have with 
respect to free trade, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that in fact the 
members of the opposition who have been asking — 
particularly the Leader of the NDP and the 
 

member from Riversdale have asked for research on trade and 
on free trade — and I’m going to present some in the legislature 
today so that, in fact, that he can be aware of the facts that have 
been going on here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to point out then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that one of the 
reasons that we have been able to take the Health budget from 
$700 million up to $1.2 billion, and almost double Health 
expenditures, is the fact that we have been able to capture 
revenue and dollars from the resource sector that weren’t there 
before. And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that our 
government policies have resulted in 725 million more in net 
revenue in the oil industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker; an additional 
$1.6 billion in investment; 6,600 more wells drilled; and 32,000 
additional person-years of direct and indirect employment as a 
result of our oil policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what I’m saying is, almost a billion dollars in additional 
revenue coming into the province of Saskatchewan as a result 
of us working with the oil industry to encourage the investment 
here, so that we can have 6,000 more wells drilled in the 
province of Saskatchewan pumping the oil so, in fact, that we 
can collect the revenues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s 
extremely important, because under the old NDP policy they 
were drying up and going away. People did not want to invest 
here; they’d go to Alberta or they’d go to Texas or they’d go to 
some place else. And under our royalty structure, which is one 
of the highest in North America, we have encouraged the oil 
revenue to stay here, and revenues to go up almost a billion 
dollars more than what they would have been under the NDP. 
 
That money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can be used now for health 
and education which is extremely important, and as you know, 
and I do want to reiterate, when we took office the Health 
budget was 700 million something; today it’s almost double that 
at 1.2-$1.3 billion, and that expenditure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
good part, in good part came from the oil and the energy sector, 
and we have allowed that to grow here in the province as a 
result of us co-operating with the energy sector. 
 
Let me make a second point. I believe that it’s relevant today, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the Leader of the Opposition was 
on radio or television saying that we have had no co-operation 
from the oil patch at all in generating revenue and economic 
opportunity; therefore, people in Regina and Saskatoon should 
obviously support the NDP because we haven’t generated any 
economic activity associated with energy. 
 
I want to remind the member from Riversdale, and I just ask 
him, and to the public that is watching: has he ever stood in his 
place any place in the province and talked about the new Regina 
co-op Saskatchewan NewGrade upgrader? Has he ever 
mentioned that? 
 
This is the largest single project in the history of Saskatchewan, 
let alone the history of Regina, linked to energy — their 
confidence in our energy policy being built right here in 
downtown Regina for the whole province, and indeed the whole 
country to see. Did he ever mention that? 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

455 
 

I want the people of Regina Elphinstone, the people of Regina 
Rosemont, the people of Regina South, the people of Saskatoon 
and the people of Estevan to recognize — in the Queen city of 
this province, energy is number one; energy is key. NewGrade, 
a combination of the federal government, the provincial 
government and Federated Co-op, putting together the largest 
single project in the history of this city and the history of this 
province, and did the NDP ever mention it? Not one word, and 
you talk about energy policy. 
 
Why would they be ashamed to mention the co-op? Why would 
they be ashamed to mention the provincial government? Why 
would they be afraid that the provincial government got the 
federal government to come in here to build the largest project 
in the history of the whole province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale never acknowledges 
success. He never acknowledges building. We’ve got more 
revenue, more money, more natural gas in more towns, on more 
farms, and the largest single project in the province’s history, in 
right downtown Regina, and it’s never mentioned by the NDP 
— not a boo, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now that upgrader will generate revenue for decades and 
decades into the future to provide money for health and 
education, and without it we wouldn’t have the kind of money 
that almost doubles the Health budget in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We take it from $700 million to 1.2 
billion because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re building, not 
buying — building. Now I make that point. 
 
I want to also add that the natural gas distribution system that 
we provide here, $350 million — and I want the people of 
Regina and Saskatoon to recognize — all the folks in the 
province of Saskatchewan that want access to energy, natural 
gas in this province, now can have it as a result of our 
government saying, we will have a distribution mechanism that 
takes it to the farm, takes it to the North, takes it to the East, 
South, West, the entire province. Communities, towns and 
villages and farmers have access to the lowest-priced energy 
you’ll find in North America. 
 
Now that’s energy policy that encourages economic 
opportunity, that creates processing, hog barns, welding, local 
industry, and business initiatives, because we have taken the 
initiative to take the energy out of the ground and provide it to 
the people. 
 
Everybody’s in favour of it. Do you ever hear the NDP 
acknowledging that? Never, just complain, complain, complain. 
They say, cut, cut, cut, cut. They don’t recognize that the Health 
budget went from 700 million to 1.2 billion, natural gas across 
the province, an upgrader in the city of Regina, and more 
revenue coming from oil than in the history of the province. 
What do they say? Cut, cut, cut. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the home owners in Elphinstone, in 
Regina — here in this city of Regina, and in Eastview in 
Saskatoon — know that energy is important. Resources are 
important. That’s why we build together with the Co-op, with 
the private sector, with government itself, and we are building, 
the government, a rural gas distribution system in this province 
second to none any place in North America. 
 
I make that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because on the radio 
this morning, and on television, the Leader of the NDP said 
there is no money for health because they’ve given it all away 
to the oil patch. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come back and look at the 
revenue, look at the Co-op upgrader, look at the rural gas, look 
at the whole picture. You’ve never seen so much money and 
investment and resources coming into the city of Regina in the 
history of Regina, ever, as a result of energy policy — only 
energy policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now I will say, we like to build. We are 
not buying our power from Manitoba just because they’re NDP. 
We built the Nipawin power project, we’re going to build the 
Shand Power project, using our own water, using our own coal, 
so Saskatchewan people can have the jobs and economic 
opportunity here, and it saves us a $150 million. Now we’re 
going to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The NDP wanted us to buy the power and 
electricity from the Manitoba people as long as they were NDP. 
If the government changes, it would be the farthest thing from 
their mind. We know that. We understand the politics of that. 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want you to know, using 
Saskatchewan coal, using Saskatchewan water, is very good for 
Saskatchewan people. We should be building our resources 
here, and we’re going to continue to build here because we have 
$150 million more for health and education that wouldn’t be 
here otherwise. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the NDP 
stood in his place, and their member from Rosemont today and 
said, you’d have all this money for health, a billion dollars, if 
you weren’t building this water project in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now I want to just remind them as I did in question period. 
Everyone in Saskatchewan, even those in Prince Albert and 
north, understand the drought and the fear of the lack of water 
in southern Saskatchewan, and we’ve understood it for years. 
 
Premiers of this province for the decades over decades, going 
back to Tommy Douglas, for Heaven’s sake, said: we should 
conserve water. And premiers here, and members of parliament 
and the . . . the only prime minister we had, Mr. Diefenbaker, 
from Saskatchewan, recognized that we should be conserving 
water in the   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

456 
 

province of Saskatchewan, and put his chin out, and his neck 
and he had the courage to say, we are going to provide 
Diefenbaker Lake and Gardiner Dam, which was non-partisan. 
We got all parties to agree in southern Saskatchewan. We got 
the CCF and the Liberals and the Tories together to build and 
conserve water. 
 
Not today; the CCF are gone, we know that, but the party that’s 
left is the NDP, and they will not acknowledge the need for 
water conservation, or building a dam, or building a power 
project. And you can go any place you want across southern 
Saskatchewan today and they’ll tell you, water shortage is 
serious business — if we should be conserving water when we 
can, so we can have it not only year round but year after year 
after year, as we do now. 
 
If you’re from Moose Jaw, you get access to that beautiful 
drinking water — comes from Diefenbaker Lake — because 
we’ve been able to do that and manage. In southern 
Saskatchewan we need the same. 
 
I say to the member from Riversdale, he stood and he said to 
the people of Saskatchewan today, because of energy 
give-aways there’s no money for health care. Because of a 
project that’s going to conserve water, there’s no money for 
health care. 
 
I want the people of Elphinstone and the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview to recognize the truth. The truth is we’ve got more 
money coming in from energy in the history of our province 
ever. Just look at the upgrader in Regina — a magnificent 
illustration of us building here for the people of Regina. And 
the same applies to water conservation and power projects using 
our water in Nipawin, and our coal in Estevan, and conserving 
water with Rafferty and Alameda. 
 
If there’s a man or woman in Regina or Saskatoon, in this 
province, that doesn’t believe we should be building here, 
building the power projects, conserving the water, building the 
upgraders, doing these kinds of things, I would be surprised. 
I’ve talked to thousands and tens of thousands of them and they 
say, build in Saskatchewan. Processing, manufacturing, 
diversification — let us be more independent; let us stand on 
our own two feet. 
 
Well I raise that because I’m sure there will be the similar kinds 
of nonsensical statements coming out of the mouth of the 
Leader of the Opposition which don’t make any sense. They 
don’t add up. 
 
The health budget is almost doubled and we’ve got more money 
than ever from resources and we’re building the largest energy 
project. How many times do we have to say that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to get the NDP to just acknowledge the truth, just even 
say there’s an upgrader in Regina. Just say it once. Stand up and 
say, we have an upgrader in Regina. If one of them would just 
acknowledge this 600 and $700 million project. People in their 
riding can look out there and see it, Mr. Speaker, but they will 
not acknowledge it. It shows how insecure they are, Mr. 
Speaker. They are so insecure, they can’t even acknowledge the 
largest project in the history of Regina. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to take this chance and this opportunity to remind the 
public — the NDP are 
 

afraid to mention it; I’m not afraid to mention it, and I will 
continue to remind Saskatchewan people of the building we’re 
doing for decades to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with building — that is 
building paper mills and bacon processing plants, 
manufacturing wire and cable, power projects, upgraders — we 
generate revenue. The key to generating the revenue, Mr. 
Speaker, is diversification. And diversification means you add 
more processing and value added, and you export it all over the 
world. 
 
I want to present today some research, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
I will leave with the House, that documents the value of free 
trade to the province of Saskatchewan. And I’m going to read 
you some excerpts from this document. And a considerable 
amount of research and time and effort has gone into this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But this is sent to the Minister of Industry, 
Trade and Commerce in Ottawa and it’s from a Saskatchewan 
cabinet minister. I’ll just read the covering letter: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan is very concerned 
that it has every opportunity to encourage the federal 
government to adopt the recommendations in this report. 

 
We invite (and I’m just quoting the letter) senior 
representatives of the federal government to discuss these 
procedures with us in Regina to ensure that they work 
effectively and with as few complications as possible. The 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan could also be 
discussed for any clarification required. 

 
And it’s forwarded to a federal minister from the provincial 
minister. 
 
Now I want to point out, and I’ll read some of the research, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and then I’ll be prepared to table it. Because 
the leader of the NDP and the member from Riversdale has 
been asking for research and documented evidence of the value 
of free trade to the province of Saskatchewan. He’s been asking 
for it. Okay. We go back and we introduce . . . I’ll just talk 
about the introduction of the research: 
 

Since the national tariff protects many inefficient 
manufacturing industries in central Canada which market 
goods at higher prices than would be the case if the goods 
were imported duty free, we noted (that as far back as the) 
Western Economic Opportunities Conference, that the 
tariff structure has caused consumers in the western 
provinces to subsidize that inefficient production by a net 
transfer of some $200 million per year to central Canada 
($200 million). (This submission shows that the transfer is 
substantially more than this). 

 
The four western provinces called for a wide range of new 
policy initiatives that would result in more upgrading, (Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, more upgrading) resource processing and 
other high value-added activities in the West. The high 
tariff and non-tariff   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

457 
 

barriers, imposed by Canada’s trading partners on 
processed and semi-processed natural resources were cited 
as being major deterrents to such industrial expansion. 

 
And what that essentially says in one sentence is that the tariffs 
have reduced the possibility for western Canada to get into 
processing and manufacturing and diversification. 
 
Now Saskatchewan, like other western provinces, recognizes 
that Canada’s trade and commercial policies are of great 
importance to our economic development process. It is for this 
reason that Saskatchewan has consistently pushed for an 
opportunity to have a meaningful input and dialogue with the 
federal government in the preparation of the Canadian position 
with respect to tariffs and trade. It is also for this reason that 
Saskatchewan adopted a serious and comprehensive approach 
to the preparation of the provincial position here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

A draft Saskatchewan position paper on the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade subject (has been) 
reviewed and discussed by cabinet planning committee. 
This paper being presented (here) is the result of a long 
process of analysis and discussion — a process that was 
taken very seriously given the importance of the need of 
the subject matter. 

 
I want to go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and point out that . . . in 
page 6 of the report: 
 

Saskatchewan is generally recognized as one of Canada’s 
disadvantaged provinces (as a result of high tariffs). 
Employment opportunities have grown at slow or negative 
rates; incomes have been depressed in Canadian terms. 
The province’s fiscal capacity has, over the long (haul), 
been below the national average (as a result of higher 
tariffs and tariff constraints). 

 
I want to also add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that: 
 

On a per capita basis, exports are much more important for 
Saskatchewan than for the total Canadian picture. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy is very heavily dependent on 
success in exporting. (Going back as far as) 1971, the 
estimated $963 million of Saskatchewan products found 
their way into foreign markets; in 1972 the level was (1 
point . . . 1100 million). This export performance 
accounted for roughly 5.5 per cent and 5.8 per cent 
respectively of the national performance in those years. 
Canadian exports per capita in 1972 were $894 while the 
same figure for Saskatchewan was $1,243. 

 
Documenting as far back as the early ’70s. Mr. Speaker, the fact 
that our living depended on us having export . . . access to 
export markets. Foreign trade barriers — I just want to make a 
couple of points. 
 

Sizeable foreign tariffs exist on processed goods exported 
from Saskatchewan. 

 
And I make this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because: 
 

Tariff rates of Canada’s major trading partners for 
Saskatchewan’s major export categories (agriculture 
products, minerals, forest products, iron and steel) . . . 

 
. . . find that the tariffs are the highest on the processed goods as 
opposed to the raw material. So we find 

 
. . . tariffs are almost non-existent for raw (materials) and 
forest product exports. In sharp contrast, high tariffs exist 
on the export of agricultural products and light farm 
machinery produced in Saskatchewan, two very large 
markets where Saskatchewan products have high tariff 
rates. 

 
So it points on in some detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that to be 
involved in processing and manufacturing we should be 
removing the tariffs. I want to add: 
 

Saskatchewan, like every other province, received 
protection for domestic industry. However, Saskatchewan 
(the report points out) does not benefit as much from the 
Canadian tariff structure as do many other provinces. In 
fact, existing tariffs result in substantial income transfer 
from Saskatchewan to other (parts of Canada). 

 
And I quote here on page 15: 
 

Of course Saskatchewan imports many products other than 
just food items (as well). One of the large categories is 
consumer (goods). Table 6 lists many consumer products 
purchased in Saskatchewan. Tariffs on consumer products 
raise consumer prices (here in Saskatchewan) above those 
at which they would otherwise be available. Many of the 
items listed have tariffs of more than 20 per cent (here in 
the province of Saskatchewan). 
 
The Canadian tariff structure presents other costs to the 
Saskatchewan economy than just consumer products. No 
attempt is made here to evaluate the additional costs to 
Saskatchewan manufacturers and processors because of 
the application of tariffs on machinery and materials (that 
must be present). 
 
When considering the total protection received by 
Saskatchewan processors and manufacturers the picture 
does not change. Table 7 indicates that Saskatchewan 
manufacturers and processors receive about $39 million 
protection on about 88 per cent of the total value of 
manufactured (goods). 

 
Other parts of the country receive many times that kind of 
protection. 
 

This is evidence that the Canadian tariff structure does not 
take into account the needs of the   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

458 
 

Saskatchewan economy and in fact is, in general, a 
hindrance to the development of manufacturing, and 
processing industries in (the province of) Saskatchewan. 

 
Well again I point out, Mr. Speaker, the research documents in 
considerable detail that manufacturing and processing in the 
province of Saskatchewan means that we have to move towards 
a free trade arena between our major trading partners. And I 
quote; this is on page 18: 
 

The temporary use of trade barriers for the purpose of 
creating price stability is not inconsistent with our 
philosophy, (our philosophy) that free trade is superior to 
no trade, and that the province favours reduced trade 
barriers, both in exports and imports. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
I say here, and I read the document carefully: 
 

Our philosophy that free trade is superior (in this 
document — it’s well documented) and that the province 
favours reduced trade barriers, both in exports and in 
imports. 

 
I make the point very clear, Mr. Speaker, because that’s what’s 
in the documents. If I could, I will go to briefly what the cost 
benefits are to us as a result of free trade. 
 

The Canadian tariff structure creates an annual cost for 
Saskatchewan consumers of more than $119 million. 
 
The Canadian tariff structure raises the cost of machinery 
and materials used by Saskatchewan manufacturers and 
processors . . . 

 
An estimate that we have not been able to make, but it’s in the 
process of being made. 
 

The Canadian tariff structure creates an annual benefit 
(some of it unnecessary) for Saskatchewan manufacturers 
and processors of $39.8 million. 

 
And the report proves that it’s to central Canadian 
manufacturers and processors. 
 

The foreign tariffs and levies create an average annual cost 
to Saskatchewan of $50 million (alone, Mr. Speaker, to the 
grains and oilseeds sector — 50 million alone) to grain and 
oilseeds. 
 
Thus (Mr. Speaker) the net costs of tariffs and levies to the 
Saskatchewan economy is easily in excess of $130 million 
a year. 

 
Page 20, if I could just summarize, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
because the members opposite wanted some research — here it 
is. 
 

The net cost of tariffs and levies to the Saskatchewan 
economy is easily in excess of $130 million annually (Mr. 
Deputy Speaker). 

Well if I could go to the conclusions, Mr. Speaker. Page 22. I 
want you to listen carefully to the summary because I believe 
that it will be important to the members opposite. 
 
Point number one on page 22: 
 

Saskatchewan is interested in seeing the major trading 
countries move towards free trade (— move towards free 
trade). Saskatchewan would not endorse general increases 
or maintenance of protection, either at home or abroad. 
 

That’s in the summary. It says that our philosophy is free trade, 
we want to move towards free trade, and that we would not 
endorse general increases or maintenance of protection, either at 
home or abroad. 
 
I go on to point number two. 
 

Extensive trade liberalization at the international and 
domestic levels, such as will be recommended below, 
could result in savings to the Saskatchewan economy of 
more than $130 million annually (Mr. Deputy Speaker) 
and to the grain industry, more than $50 million annually; 
to consumers, $80 million annually . . . 

 
And this is on page 23. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I point out specifically on page 23, section 3(c): 
 

The reduction of United States tariffs on processed and 
manufactured forest, minerals and agriculture products 
would assist the Saskatchewan economy. 

 
And obviously it’s been documented in . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
So we have recommendations here on page 25: 
 

. . . that we should eliminate, reduce tariff or non-tariff 
barriers; we should eliminate or reduce tariff or non-tariff 
barriers on a wide range of consumer (goods), products 
and manufactured goods eliminate or reduce United States 
barriers on processed manufactured forest, mineral, and 
agriculture products. 

 
And it’s highly recommended and documented. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this research was done for planning and 
priorities, out of cabinet. It was done with a great deal of care. 
It’s been well documented; it’s tabled. The research, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was done under the guidance of, and published 
under the guidance of, the leader of the NDP Party who was the 
deputy premier of Saskatchewan in 1974, and submitted to the 
federal government when he said he believed in free trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just add a 
little bit of research. In 1974, if you look at those   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

459 
 

numbers of $130 million annual saving as a result of lower 
tariffs and less protectionism, documented by the NDP planning 
and priority — this means the premier, the deputy premier, 
cabinet ministers that did this research, had their very best 
people do it, submitted it under the letter, and the letter is to the 
Hon. Alastair Gillespie, signed by Kim Thorson, who was the 
member of Estevan and the cabinet minister responsible for 
trade, sent November 1974, said, this is the position of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I just took the numbers, Mr. Speaker, and took the inflation rate 
from 1974. What it means today, 1987 dollars, is that free trade, 
according to NDP research, is worth $335 million a year net 
benefit to the province of Saskatchewan — 335 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap 
this up. I’m going to wrap this up, Mr. Speaker, on one point, 
on one point. I want the public of Canada, not just 
Saskatchewan, to go back and examine every single solitary 
thing the leader of the NDP, the man from Riversdale, ever said 
on any one particular issue, because he’s been on every side of 
every issue that ever was. 
 
He stands here today and he says he’s against free trade, he’s 
against the free trade with the United States. And he’ll take this 
document and say, well I didn’t see the free trade deal. I mean, 
you can’t weasel out of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This talks about the United States, it talks about Europeans, it 
talks about GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), 
and it says, the province of Saskatchewan is for lower tariffs, 
freer trade, and would never be for protectionism. Now how 
would it be against an example of free trade? I don’t think the 
public will let him off the hook. This is his — this is the man 
from Riversdale’s research. 
 
Now today he’s against free trade because we’re doing it. He’s 
against creating economic opportunity because we’re doing it. 
He’s against upgraders because we’re doing it. He’s against the 
Shand power project because we’re building it. He’s against 
water projects because we are doing it, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t 
like the fact that we have almost doubled the health care budget, 
because he didn’t do it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they talk out of both sides of their mouth, 
I’ve said on more than one occasion. The CCF Party had some 
heart and some soul. They knew the people, and particularly the 
rural people, and they stood for and stuck up for low-income 
people, disabled people, students and seniors and many others. 
They did not exploit them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What you see opposite over here are people who are now the 
NDP Party, who are so far from the CCF Party. We have 
replaced the CCF in rural Saskatchewan and will continue to 
replace them in urban Saskatchewan, because we believe in 
helping people, not using them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition says that 
they defend the poor, but the opposition — and I’m not going to 
speak long on it — they got caught buying votes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and they said, not only did they acknowledge it, but 
it’s okay as long as they’re poor. Now can you imagine a 
statement like that? You wouldn’t get that out of a CCFer, but 
you might get it out of an NDPer. 
 
They say, Mr. Speaker, they’re for students. The students don’t 
have much money. They say for the students . . . 18,000 
students wanted to write their exams and the NDP voted against 
them. The CCF wouldn’t have done that. The CCF would have 
been on behalf of the students and the families of this province. 
But the NDP said no, I’m for those radicals that want to strike 
at exam times. 
 
Whose side are you on — students, low income people? I didn’t 
see many wealthy students when I went to university, and I 
don’t expect there’s many now. But they would put them out of 
their summer work; they wouldn’t be able to write their exams. 
They voted against that legislation. I want people in Regina and 
Saskatoon to ask: is it a good idea to join with the NDP and not 
allow 18,000 students and their families to have access to 
exams? No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, they say they defend the 
poor, the low income, low-income farmers, low-income home 
owners. I won’t dwell on it. But obviously we have a law firm, 
Mr. Speaker, a law firm in this province, and the law firm is 
Mitchell, Taylor, Romanow and Ching. It’s a partnership, a 
partnership, a law partnership in this province that forecloses on 
home owners and forecloses on farmers. And they do it to make 
money. And when people are hurting and down and out because 
of high interest rates, that law firm of Mitchell, Taylor, 
Romanow and Ching goes out and forecloses on them on behalf 
of the Bank of Nova Scotia. 
 
Do you think a CCFer would do that? I don’t think so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I don’t think you’d get CCFers running around 
and saying, this law firm under the leadership of the NDP is 
going to foreclose. They say they’re for the poor. They say 
they’re for the poor; they say they’re for students. But, Mr. 
Speaker, you can’t trust them. 
 
They say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they say, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
for children; they want to defend children. They’ve already said 
in the front page of the paper, they would provide new kinds of 
rights for homosexual people, which means they would 
encourage the adoption of children to homosexual couples. 
 
They say they’re for families. They say they’ll stick up for 
families and real families, but they would pass legislation, as 
they did in Manitoba, that is not pro-family. They say that 
they’re protecting the defenceless child, but they would pass 
abortion on demand in clinics like they have in Winnipeg. They 
would say that. 
 
Well the CCF were a party of the people — of families, of 
children, of low income, of students, of farmers, of home   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

460 
 

owners. And every one of the things that I’ve just mentioned, 
they have gone against it. 
 
It’s so obvious when they stand up and say they’re against free 
trade and publish documents and gave them to the federal 
government, that said they were in favour of free trade. They 
cannot be trusted, Mr. Speaker, they cannot be trusted. And 
until the people see through that — I guess they are going to — 
they’re going to continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to listen to 
some of those people tell them stories and say that buying votes 
is okay, foreclosing on farmers is okay. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t list all the things that are in 
this budget, but if you look pre-1982, and now 1988, you will 
find pension legislation for seniors, you will find a heritage 
program for seniors, you will find funding up for seniors. For 
low-income people we have protected their mortgage. We 
create welfare reform to provide them with opportunities to 
work. You’ll see building at universities and schools and 
hospitals and nursing homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The man from Riversdale says that he supports senior citizens. 
He is the man who said, not one new bed for five years in this 
province would he build. Half a decade he didn’t build one new 
nursing home facility — not one. And he stands there and goes 
to the poor and the senior citizens across the province, and, I’m 
for you, he said. He had his chance, he had his chance. He’s 
telling them about as much truth as he did in this document. He 
denies it. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want the public to know, 10 
years ago, 10 years ago I didn’t know anything about politics. 
Some would say that I might not know anything about politics 
today, but I’ll say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 10 years ago, 10 years 
ago I wondered what was going on in Saskatchewan that was 
holding people down. What was the problem? Why weren’t we 
building and growing and taking a leadership position all across 
this country and indeed the world. And I couldn’t find it; it 
wasn’t in research. 
 
Somebody said, well, Grant, it’s in politics. So I looked there. I 
didn’t realize at that time the wool that these people would pull 
over the eyes of folks for decades — for decades. The 
unfairness, the hypocrisy. It’s pathetic, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
absolutely a shame and it’s a sham. The people of this country 
should never ever, ever vote NDP again because of their record 
and their hypocrisy. And as long as I’m anywhere near this 
place, Mr. Speaker, I will be taking them on because I intend to 
vote for this budget 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
entering the budget debate. I’m particularly pleased, it’s the first 
opportunity I’ve had to follow the Premier in a speech. It’s the 
first opportunity I’ve had to share some thoughts on his lack of 
credibility and indeed, Mr. Speaker, his lack of honesty. When 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I don’t think that this House is 
accustomed to accusing individual members of 
 

lack of honesty or dishonesty. I ask the hon. member to 
withdraw and apologize. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I apologize for my choice of words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — And I’d also ask you to withdraw. 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I withdraw those words, Mr. Speaker. My 
apologies to the Premier for my indiscretion in words that were 
brought on when in the speech we just heard, we heard the 
person speaking say, if one member of the opposition would 
stand up, just one member would stand up and acknowledge 
here that we have an upgrader . . . and he went on and mumbled 
some things. 
 
I want to take you to Hansard, March 24, 18 days ago, when I 
said in this House, right here: 
 

There was a job creation program in Regina and it was the 
oil upgrader. It created a good number of jobs . . . 

 
And I go on and talk about the upgrader at some length. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what prompted the remarks that I just 
withdrew. There is a lack of credibility in speech after speech 
from government members. They mislead us intentionally. If 
they don’t mislead us intentionally, then it’s because they aren’t 
paying attention to what is going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member in his 
enthusiasm, I know, has . . . and he’s partly corrected it, I 
acknowledge, but I’d just like to draw to your attention we also 
consider unparliamentary, indicating that anybody has 
deliberately misled the House. And I’d like to draw that to your 
attention. And I recognize that in your following comments you 
partially tried to correct yourself, but in the future you’ll have to 
formally withdraw and apologize for remarks of that nature. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you for your ruling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I think we should allow 
the hon. member to proceed. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Of course we can 
draw one conclusion from all of that, and that is that it’s 
unintentional and therefore the government members don’t have 
a grip on what is really going on. 
 
There was some discussion about the member for Riversdale, 
the Leader of the Opposition, and his support of the 
co-operative movement, Mr. Speaker. I want to acknowledge 
and thank the Leader of the Opposition for his ongoing and 
continued support, speech after speech after speech. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition speaks of the three distinct 
sectors of our economy: the private sector, which has been 
around since time immemorial and is doing a good job; the 
public sector, in other words, Crown corporations; and a third 
and distinct and unique sector of our economy, which is co-ops 
and co-operative development. And speech after speech, the 
Leader of the   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

461 
 

Opposition talks of it. Indeed it’s a pleasure to hear him because 
he has a vision of the three engines of growth in our society 
helping us in Saskatchewan become what we can be. 
 
And what have we got here? We are going to be, in this session, 
reviewing the department of co-operation and co-operative 
development for the final time. Why? Because the government 
has chosen to ignore co-ops and co-operative development. 
They reorganized co-ops and co-operative development, that 
once proud department, they’ve reorganized it, put it in with 
tourism and small business, and co-ops was the third and 
distinctly junior portion of that portfolio. 
 
(1530) 
 
Within months of doing that they had another reorganization. 
And nowhere, Mr. Speaker, do we find co-ops or co-operative 
development anywhere in a government department. So for that 
reason there will be no co-ops or co-operative development for 
us to review. Therefore, no thrust in co-operative development, 
nothing being spearheaded by the government. And I think 
that’s a real shame. 
 
There really is a lot of things that we could be doing in terms of 
co-operative development. We have need for housing, not only 
in the cities, but in rural Saskatchewan, and housing co-ops are 
a logical alternative for a great many people. We could have 
employment co-ops, we could have farming co-ops, day care 
co-ops, and the lists of types of co-ops goes on and on, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the fact is this government has chosen to turn its backs on 
co-ops, and that’s really not just to their detriment; it affects all 
of us throughout Saskatchewan, and it’s really, really a shame 
that the government does not recognize the important 
contribution that co-ops could play in our province. 
 
I want to turn briefly to highways, and we had an 
announcement there’s an additional $10 million for highway 
and road upgrading. But I want to point out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that of the projects listed . . . There was some 30 
construction grading projects that the Minister of Highways 
listed. Of those 30 projects, eight of them, a full eight are 
simply reannouncements of projects from last year. 
 
Of the surfacing projects, 11 are simply nothing more than 
reannouncements of projects that the Minister of Highways, 
who’s the same minister, announced last year. The total number 
of kilometres of Saskatchewan roads and highways that is going 
to be worked on this year is down some 85 kilometres. 
 
So on one hand we have the Minister of Highways saying, oh 
we’re expanding the Department of Highway’s budget. He also 
assures us that we’re getting the best possible value from the 
public tendering system, and I have no reason to dispute that. I 
think that the cost of building roads and highways is very 
similar this year to what it was last year and the year before. 
 
So where is this extra money? Clearly it’s not going into 
 

the roads. We’ve got a total of 85 kilometres less, and that out 
of an approximate 1,000 kilometres of highways that are going 
to be worked on this year. Clearly the highways are being 
ignored despite the rhetoric of the Minister of Highways. 
 
The third area that I want to get into before I talk about the 
provincial budget deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company which has just issued 
its annual report. And I note with a great concern that for the 
first time ever, Saskatchewan Transportation Company, our bus 
system, our Saskatchewan bus system owes more money that 
it’s worth. It has an accumulated deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
of 14 million-and-some dollars, and yet it has assets of about 12 
and one-half million dollars, so clearly it’s . . . here it is, 
$14,625,000 deficit. 
 
This is the same bus company that when the members opposite 
formed the government in 1982, STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) had an accumulated surplus of 
$1,307,000. They have turned around a $1,307,000 surplus, and 
created a $14,625,000 deficit — all that in about six years. It 
really must have taken some creative financing. And at the 
same time, they’ve gone from 81 motor coaches or buses, with 
an average life, an average age of 4.8 years in 1981 or ’82, 
they’ve gone from 81 buses down to 62 buses. The average age 
of the buses now is 10.1 years. So we have an ageing fleet, and 
we have a fleet that is 25 per cent smaller today than it was 
some six years ago. 
 
When you sell off your assets, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would 
seem to me that that should be used to buy down your deficit. 
What we have is a government that chose to sell off the buses 
and . . . I’m sorry, I’m at a loss to explain where all of that 
money went. 
 
Now I want to point out one thing. I did a little bit of research to 
find out what is happening in the bus industry. So I thought, 
well, what’s another major carrier. And I find Greyhound, of 
course, is a major carrier. Greyhound since 1982 has made a 
profit every single year. STC since 1982 has had a deficit every 
single year — has lost money every single year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What kind of management do they have? 
 
Mr. Trew: — My colleague asks what kind of management 
they have in STC, and indeed the people of Saskatchewan are 
wondering and the people that are serviced on STC routes are 
very much wondering that very same question: what kind of 
management is it that would allow that to happen? 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the budget, and 
specifically I want to talk about the deficit projections that the 
Conservative government has come in with. And I want to point 
out, just to start, that in 1982, when they formed the 
government, there was a $139 million accumulated surplus 
budget — $139 million. Well in 1982 they turned that around. 
They projected that it would have a $219 million — remember 
this, member from Kindersley? — “manageable deficit.” 
Manageable deficit — nice words on the slippery slope. That 
turned   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

462 
 

into a $227 million actual deficit. In 1983 they projected a $317 
million deficit; that turned into a $331 million. 
 
And every year it gets worse and worse. In 1986 they projected 
a $389 million deficit. It keeps getting bigger and bigger. What 
was the actual, Mr. Deputy Speaker? One billion, two hundred 
and thirty-five million dollars. In total, in total, the projected 
deficit that the Conservative Finance minister, successive 
Finance ministers have brought in, they’ve projected a total of 
$2.06 billion in deficits. What has the actual deficits been? 
Three billion, three hundred and twenty-four million dollars to 
date. That’s not counting this year. 
 
In 1988 they’re projecting a $328 million deficit. But recognize, 
there’s been a 62 per cent variance between what they project, 
and it’s always 62 per cent or more worse. So what is it going to 
be — a half a billion dollars this year? It’s a question that we 
will be watching very closely. 
 
I want to bring it into perspective, Mr. Deputy Speaker. From 
1947 to 1981, in 34 years the total deficits — total in those 34 
years — totalled $6 million — $6 million. In seven years, seven 
Tory years, the total deficits have now reached $3.652 billion. 
Or stated another way, the deficit now in six years is some 608 
times bigger than all the previous deficits in Saskatchewan’s 
history — 608 times bigger, and that in six years. It’s mind 
boggling numbers, Mr. Speaker, but the point is we’re faced 
with a very, very incompetent government, and I see nothing in 
this budget to change my view on that, and I’m sure that the 
people of Saskatchewan, certainly the people of Regina North, 
see nothing in it either. 
 
I want to point out, New Democrats had introduced some 26 
surplus budgets when we were in office. We left an 
accumulated surplus of $139 million, which, translated to: 
what’s it mean for me as an individual? Every individual in this 
province can say, it meant for me there was $139 sitting, tucked 
away and invested in my future — $139 million in assets. 
 
The PC government has left us with a debt of $3,700 per 
person, and that’s something we have to ask ourselves, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are we better off now than we were in 1982? 
Well let’s look at the history of it. In 1982 we had no flat tax. 
Today we have a 2 per cent flat tax on top of our regular 
personal income taxes. 
 
In 1982 we had a 5 per cent E&H tax which the members 
opposite promised they would eliminate. Well they eliminated 
that 5 per cent E&H tax; now it’s 7 per cent. Hardly an 
elimination; they just increased it. 
 
Personal income taxes have risen. From 1982 till today they’ve 
risen 103 per cent. Corporate income tax has risen a mere 10 
per cent in that same time frame. And I’d be honest if I say to 
the people of Saskatchewan that we campaigned on fairness of 
the tax system — we campaigned on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We stick by what we said prior to the previous election, and I’m 
sure we’ll have more to say on that before the next election rolls 
around. 
 
The government members opposite promised to do away 
 

with the gas tax. We all remember the brave words: as long as 
there’s a Progressive Conservative government, we’ll never 
have a gas tax for any citizen in Saskatchewan. And what have 
we got now? 7 cents a litre. And I trust that virtually everyone 
has filled out the gas tax forms, and I very much suspect that 
everyone who fills it out remembers that promise that there 
would be no gas tax. 
 
They also remember the promise that the Conservative 
government was the one that was going to eliminate red tape 
and do away with needless form filling and that sort of thing. 
Well what they’ve done — this gas tax rebate program has been 
the biggest single job creation program that members opposite 
have been able to come up with. I estimate it has created some 
1500 person-years of unpaid employment when you figure the 
time it takes to gather up the gas tax receipts, find your 
calculator and a pen, dig out the form, figure it all out, follow 
your complicated formula, then post the application — 1500 
person-years of employment. 
 
To the list of broken promises, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can add 
a promise of a competent and a caring and a business-like 
government. The government members opposite are a tad 
business-like, but unfortunately they’re following the wrong 
business leads. They’re following Principal Trust, Pioneer 
Trust, First Investors and Supercart International, simply to 
name a few. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1985 I spoke to over 500 people in 
Regina North at the nominating convention for the New 
Democratic Party. At that time I was speaking partly about the 
phenomenally rising number of bankruptcies that we were 
facing in Saskatchewan, and I pointed out then that 
bankruptcies had quadrupled in the three years since the 
Conservatives took office, from 1982 to 1985 — quadrupled. 
 
And I thought at that time that, you know, that new record of 
higher number of bankruptcies than ever before, I thought that 
surely had to be the absolute limit. We’ve seen the number of 
bankruptcies nearly double since then — nearly double since 
then. It continues to spiral. 
 
We’re not talking simply nameless individuals or nameless 
companies that are going bankrupt. We’re talking about a 
significant and seemingly ever-growing number of people who 
have their hopes, their aspirations, their visions for the future, 
all of them being shattered — in a large part due to the 
incompetence of the members of the government. I think it’s a 
shame. It’s terrible that we have people of Saskatchewan 
struggling hard, trying to make things work, and at every corner 
they’re met with more government red tape, more taxation, 
more road blocks, and less help — and it’s a shame. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan turn from a “have” 
province — a “have” province — to today it is a “have not” 
province, which means we qualify for some equalization 
payments, some extra equalization payments from the federal 
government. In 1986-87 that totalled $146 million. Last year it 
totalled $300 million. That was $115 million more than the 
provincial treasury people in Finance department had estimated 
it would be. That $115 million extra is the only thing that 
enabled the   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

463 
 

Minister of Finance to come in close to his projection of what 
the deficit was going to be. And what do we see? Next year we 
see the equalization payment going to $360 million. So we’ve 
seen it grow from $146 to $360 million, as the rest of Canada 
progresses economically, and relatively we fall farther and 
farther behind. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke a little bit earlier about personal 
income taxes having risen 103 per cent. In dollars, what that 
means is in 1982 personal income taxes accounted for $409 
million of Saskatchewan’s revenue. This year, it’s projected to 
go to $831 million — 103 per cent increase, or a $422 million 
increase. And at the same time, government members opposite 
reduced the royalties that we collected from the oil industry a 
total of $1.7 billion. 
 
Small wonder that people don’t trust this government; they 
don’t trust this budget. There’s nothing in it for job creation; 
there’s only tax increases, only increases on the ordinary 
people. 
 
Corporate income tax went up, from 1982 to 1987, a total of 
$13 million. There’s two points I wish to make about corporate 
taxation. One, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is corporations do not pay 
the flat tax. The flat tax which was meant so that . . . we were 
told was brought in so that everyone would pay a certain 
guaranteed minimum amount of money, and yet corporations 
don’t pay the flat tax. 
 
And people of Saskatchewan, the people I’m talking to are 
asking me, is that fair? And they’re saying, no it’s not fair. It’s 
not what they thought was coming in even when it was 
announced with all the hoop-la about the flat tax and how this 
was tax reform. It just isn’t what they thought. 
 
Second point I wish to make about corporations and taxes is 
that in this latest budget, the budget we are debating right now, 
oil and gas companies benefit from yet another reduction of 1 
per cent in their royalties that they are expected to pay to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In dollars, what this means is in 1982 the province of 
Saskatchewan collected $700 million from the oil industry — 
$700 million. In 1988, according to the budget projections from 
the Minister of Finance, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, 
he is projecting this year that the oil royalties will be $311 
million — $700 million in 1982, $311 million this year. 
 
Clearly the government is a government of big business and not 
of ordinary people, not of regular people, certainly not of the 
people that we on this side of the House purport to represent, 
and indeed I think we’re certainly doing our very best to 
represent them. 
 
This government is using people in the worst possible way. 
Ordinary people will make their views known. It’s unfortunate 
that the by-elections are in Saskatoon Eastview and Regina 
Elphinstone. I would much rather if there was one in Regina 
Wascana; then we’d have somebody on this side of the House, 
instead of listening to 
 

the chirping going on from that current member. 
 
May 4, the people of Saskatchewan are going to pass 
judgement, and I only hope that the government will listen, will 
pay some attention to the message that comes through. And it 
will come through, and it will come through loud and clear. 
 
What we have got here is personal tax hikes. We’ve got a flat 
tax that has increased by 25 per cent — it’s now 2 per cent of 
income. What that means for a family with an income of 
$25,000 is that today they’re paying an additional $500 that 
four years ago they weren’t paying — 500 additional dollars of 
personal taxes this government is grabbing, and it’s a shame. 
 
Yet we also see a reduction in the corporate tax rate, and we see 
a reduction in royalty rates — all this from this government. 
And then, get this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance 
has the gall and the audacity to stand up and say, ah, but we 
need some more tax reform. Tax reform, that’s what we need. 
Well putting the members of the government in charge of tax 
reform is something like putting the fox in charge of the 
chicken coop, or putting the wolf in charge of the sheep. And 
the people of Saskatchewan know it, and they just will not buy 
any of what they’re saying in terms of tax reform. They don’t 
trust the government, and rightly so. All the tax reform that we 
have had to date has simply been hurting us. 
 
So what have we got? We’ve got hospitals that are forced to run 
ads showing operating rooms that are barren — no equipment at 
all — trying to get people to make donations, trying to instill in 
them that if they don’t make additional donations when they 
need that hospital, it may not be there. They may not have the 
equipment, they may not have the people to handle it. That’s 
what we’ve had, and it’s only since 1982 that we’ve had the 
spectre of hospitals having to go out and actively try and 
fund-raise — actively trying to get some money — only since 
’82. 
 
We’ve got waiting lists in excess of 15,000 people between 
Saskatoon and Regina, a waiting list of 15,000 or more waiting 
to get into hospital beds. It’s not just 15,000 nameless people. 
It’s fathers and mothers and sons and daughters and 
grandparents of people of Saskatchewan — 15,000 families are 
affected, not just 15,000 individuals. The families know that the 
wait is there. It’s causing a great deal of hardship and a great 
deal of uncertainty amongst the people of Saskatchewan, and 
frankly, they think there’s got to be a better way. They’d love to 
return to the days when the waiting list, when it got above 3,000 
people, we got very concerned and started spending some extra 
money in getting those waiting lists reduced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve also in this budget got no money 
for changes to the prescription drug plan. The government 
introduced some changes last year. There’s been much to-do in 
the past week about members of the opposition using the 
prescription drug plan for political, partisan purposes. 
 
I just want to state something for the record. I took an 
individual member of . . . someone from my constituency, a 
constituent’s case to the Minister of Health and to the   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

464 
 

Minister of Social Services. Both promised, we will look into it; 
we will look after this situation. A 59-year-old woman with a 
total income of $480 a month — and do you know what they 
were able to tell me? Sorry, there’s nothing we can do. That’s 
the kind of help that they’re able to give. And they say, oh well, 
give us the individual’s name and we’ll help. Well if they can’t 
help a 59-year-old woman that has drug bills . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Her drug bill was roughly in the 
neighbourhood of $350 per month, and they couldn’t come 
through with any help for her. If they can’t help that person, I 
don’t know who in the world they can help. 
 
We see no money in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 
children’s dental plan. We see the number of children that are 
covered being reduced, as they’ve lopped off two years of 
coverage. We see a continuing erosion of the children’s dental 
plan, and it is a shame. We see a continuation of the 7 cent per 
litre gas tax. We see insurance rates on vehicles rising. 
 
The only good news, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we have not 
seen the $25 per vehicle that cabinet met and discussed about. 
They were going to implement April 1 a $25 per vehicle 
increase at the time that the registration was completed. We 
were able to get the government to back down on that, simply 
by blowing the whistle on it and having a press conference. And 
the government was embarrassed by it and they said, well, we 
won’t do that; that was never our intention all along. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members, and particularly the Minister 
of Finance, is clearly devoid of cash and even more clearly 
devoid of ideas. And what we would like is for them to get out 
of the way, get on with it, so that we could get on with doing 
the job of governing Saskatchewan. It’s a job that needs to be 
done and should be done, but it should be done in a competent 
and a caring fashion. 
 
Clearly the budget portrays none of the good things that 
Saskatchewan is about. It doesn’t talk of job creation. It doesn’t 
talk of any expanded kilometres of highway and road repairs. It 
ignores the co-operative sector. In the Crowns we continue to 
see a government that doesn’t believe in Crown corporations, 
and hence is determined to manage them into the ground. And 
that’s the only thing . . . that’s the most positive way I can 
describe what this government is doing with the Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have enjoyed sharing my thoughts on 
this confused Conservative budget. I will be unable to support 
the budget and I will be continuing to speak out against it at 
every opportunity. I’m indeed happy and honoured to have been 
able to stand up and speak out for the people of Regina North 
and for the people of Saskatchewan, against this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to say that it’s indeed a pleasure for me to enter into the debate 
this afternoon on this our 1988 budget speech. 
 
I’m pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this budget is one 
which I believe can command the respect and 
 

support, not only of my constituents, but of voters across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When I joined in the throne speech debate, I stated that the 
record of this government in the field of health care is a proud 
one and I specifically mentioned some of the initiatives 
undertaken in the constituency of Pelly. The government has 
reinforced that record of commitment with this budget. 
 
An increase in health care spending of 6.2 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a clear and unquestionable demonstration that this 
government is prepared to use the greatest resources possible to 
ensure the quality and availability of health care for its citizens. 
 
I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that people would take the time to 
examine the health budget with some care. There’s a good deal 
of information contained in the documents that can be used to 
start the process of consideration leading up to submissions to 
the task force on health care that is to be struck. 
 
For example, it is, I think, notable that the expenditures on 
long-term health care exceed those for medicare payments. And 
that fact is very important when one considers that our 
population is ageing rapidly. 
 
I would also like to commend the government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for addressing the question of the municipal business 
tax. If one wants to characterize this budget, I think it can be 
well characterized as a small-business budget. It’s a 
small-business budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addressing that 
onerous business tax to the tune of $10 million. It’s a 
small-business budget in its commitment to the venture capital 
corporation concept. It’s a small-business budget in its 
provision for an entrepreneurial institute, and it’s a 
small-business budget in its efforts to develop and expand our 
tourism sector. It’s also a small-business budget in its Buy 
Saskatchewan program, and the many businesses that that 
program has not only assisted, but actually been responsible for 
their establishment. 
 
And it’s a small-business budget in its orientation to 
commitment and content, Mr. Deputy Speaker. From the 
extension of the small-business tax holiday to continued 
commitment to deficit reduction, this government has proven 
that it does listen to small business and that it can and will work 
with small business to ensure the future prosperity of this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition likes to 
talk about small business and how his party would like to work 
with them. But what is the record? What are the facts? The first 
fact is that the folks across the floor see small business as a tool 
for their political purposes rather than an institution that is 
responsible for the greater part of the jobs in this province. 
 
The members opposite do things like the member from The 
Battlefords — threatening small business. How many 
small-business people in North Battleford are sorry today that 
they are represented by a man who would attend their chamber 
of commerce meeting with the purpose of placing ultimatums 
on the table, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

465 
 

(1600) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is the Leader of the Opposition 
who has said that private enterprise is a loser’s game, that 
government intervention should be the primary tool of 
economic growth. He’s so committed to extremes of 
government intervention that he can look to this government’s 
record of public sector involvement and call it “nothing,” Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
He calls hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars of 
government investment in natural gas distribution, in the 
underground cable program, in the private line telephone 
service program, in the creation of Sask Water, in the 
construction of the Nipawin power project, the construction of 
Rafferty, Alameda, and Shand, the building of the upgrader, the 
support of Saskatoon high-tech companies, and on and on and 
on — he calls all of this government involvement “nothing,” 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
How much would he then call “something,” Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Does the government really have to do it all? Can he 
not see the folly of his own past practice of buying instead of 
building, of demanding that government be the be-all and 
end-all of economic policy? That approach has proven itself 
unworkable, and the gentleman ought to have the sense to admit 
that and accept that fact. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a role for government, a 
role as the servant and not the master; a role as a facilitator and 
not the ultimate arbitrator of literally everything. There is a role 
for government, and that role is exemplified by this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
From the construction of hospitals and schools, to the incentive 
for diversification, to full partnership in such things as the 
upgrader, the role is there. And the NDP should be ashamed to 
say that the government is not involved. Indeed, many would 
argue that it remains too involved. 
 
But the key point, Mr. Speaker, is that we cannot wear these 
ideological blinkers that the NDP have welded to their eyes. We 
cannot be wed to the idea that unless the government owns it, 
it’s no good. We must be flexible to use government where it is 
appropriate and to work with the private sector to benefit 
everybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues the building of this 
province. This budget maintains the best commitment to health 
care in Canada. This budget expands the opportunities for our 
young people, both through enhanced support for education and 
the economic development it embodies. This budget is one that 
I am proud to support, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I congratulate 
the Minister of Finance on a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t anticipate that 
the member from Pelly would keep his remarks to such a brief 
period of time. It’s obviously he does not have much to say 
about a budget, and I think he 
 

reflects the fact that there’s not too much to say about this 
budget when we speak of support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m certainly happy to be able to enter into this 
debate this afternoon, particularly after the Premier of this 
province has spoken. I’m happy to be able to get into the debate 
to try to clear up some of the half truths and the misconceptions 
and the deliberate misconceptions put forward by the Premier of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I find that 
unparliamentary. I’d ask the member to . . . casting reflections 
on the Premier. I would ask the member to retract that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address myself to 
that comment. Whether we like it or not, and some of us don’t, 
the member for Estevan ran for office and was elected as 
Premier. His conduct of the affairs of the province and his 
personal conduct are proper matters for reflection in this 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t listening with great 
care, quite frankly, at that point in time, I didn’t catch 
everything that was said. But, Mr. Speaker, reflections on the 
way the Premier conducts himself as Premier and reflections on 
his personal qualities are a proper subject for discussion in this 
Legislative Assembly. He is, after all, the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I understood your ruling to 
be that the use by the hon. member of untruthfulness and stuff 
like that is unparliamentary language, and half truths and this 
type of thing is unparliamentary language. And I think the 
books clearly state that as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think it’s 
only appropriate that members of this House recognize what is 
unparliamentary language and refrain from using it. And I think 
that’s quite frankly what you’re ruling it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Page 104, paragraph 319, item 
(3): 
 

In the House of Commons a Member will not be permitted 
by the Speaker to indulge in any reflections on the House 
itself as a political institution; or to impute to any Member 
or Members unworthy motives for their actions in a 
particular case; or to use any profane or indecent language; 
or to question the acknowledged and undoubted powers of 
the House . . . 

 
I ask the member to withdraw his statement. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the statement that you 
consider unparliamentary. I made two statements, both of which 
I have heard time and time again used in this House — half 
truth or deliberate misrepresentation. Which would you like me 
to withdraw? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Both. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

466 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge your ruling. I 
challenge your ruling on this. That’s an outrage. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member once 
more to apologize. The member is challenging the Speaker’s 
Chair. I would ask him to apologize. There’s no debate. There’s 
no debate. There’s no debate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw the remarks I 
made, under protest. I would ask you to check your ruling and 
to have it verified by the officials of this Assembly, and 
particularly the precedence therefor. I will therefore withdraw it 
in order to be able to exercise my right to speak in this 
Assembly. They are withdrawn; you may take it as withdrawn. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. There is no opportunity to 
challenge a ruling from the Chair. If the member refuses to 
withdraw the statements, he will have to be named and remove 
himself from the House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — With all due respect, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with all due respect, unless you have . . . suffering 
from congenital deafness, I withdrew my . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member once 
more for an unequivocal . . . unequivocally to withdraw his 
remarks and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — As I said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll 
withdraw my remarks. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I asked the member to apologize to 
the House. I’ll give him one more chance. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Out of due respect for the institution of this 
House, I will put forward an apology at this time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, not often in the history of parliamentary 
democracy, not often do we see a deliberate attempt to muzzle a 
member of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — What we have seen consistently to date, what 
we have seen consistently is attempts to muzzle, deliberate 
opposition, and deliberate characterization of individual 
members in this House, through technicalities, through the use 
of rulings which are unprecedented . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Regina Rosemont was asked by the Chair to apologize for 
unparliamentary language and to withdraw his comments. He 
reluctantly did that after about three or four times, only then to 
stand up and accuse, in so many words, the Speaker of 
muzzling the opposition. That is a blatant disregard and 
contempt for this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a blatant 
disregard and contempt for this institution, and I would suggest 
that you ask that member once again to withdraw those 
comments in the interests of this institution and to act like a 
grown-up. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m not sure whether that constituted a 
point of order or whatever. The member from Regina Rosemont 
. . . surely the rules are not so strict that the 
 

member from Regina Rosemont cannot comment on whether or 
not rulings taken as correct might inhibit the proper conduct of 
this Assembly. That’s all he was saying. That’s all he was 
saying. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that he was simply reflecting on 
whether or not the rulings, which he took as correct, for which 
he admitted and apologized . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the 
member from Maple Creek will have a moment to throw these 
pearls of wisdom on the floor when I’m finished. I’d ask you to 
let me finish. 
 
The member from Regina Rosemont was simply reflecting on 
whether or not that ruling was in the best interests of the 
Assembly and promoted debate. That is not out of order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to 
govern themselves to the tradition of this House and try and get 
on with the debate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As 
I had previously indicated, I was pleased to speak after the 
Premier, to clear up the misconceptions put forward in the 
words of the Premier, to deal with some of those things which 
may be construed by others outside this House as half truths and 
untruths, to deal with questions of substance as opposed to the 
kind of political rhetoric we heard from the supposed leader of 
this province, the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased to be able to stand after that, because as the Premier 
said and as the member from Pelly said and as other members 
of the House have said, the question of the budget is a question 
of political priorities. It’s a question of choice. It’s a question of 
deciding who shall count in this society and who shall not count 
in this society, who shall take precedence and who shall be left 
behind, who shall be first and who shall be last in the eyes of 
the government opposite. 
 
And it’s clear, it is clear from the words of the Premier and it is 
clear in the facts and figures put out, the alleged facts and 
figures put out in the budget, of where the priorities and where 
the choices and where the precedences of this government lie. 
 
It is clear as day to the people of Saskatchewan, as it has been 
clear as day since 1982 and was reflected by the popular vote 
results in 1986 in which the members of this side of the House 
received a greater popular vote than the members opposite. And 
it shall be clear, it shall be clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it shall be 
clear on May 4 when the people of Saskatoon Eastview and 
when the people of Regina Elphinstone cast their choice, cast 
their precedence, and cast their judgement on the performance 
of the members of the government opposite. 
 
It shall be clear because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as they have been 
rejected by a majority of the people of this province, so shall 
they be rejected again, and so shall they turn into what for them 
will become a political and moral disaster, which are the two 
by-elections upcoming. And we will be glad to welcome two 
new members to this side of the House. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

467 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Because, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this 
government reflects, this budget reflects the priorities of this 
government. And this reflects the choices they’ve made. It 
reflects the choices they’ve made in the tax structure. 
 
What do we find when we look through the budget of this 
government? Do we find a tax structure and tax reform which 
benefits the average working taxpayer of this province? Do we 
find a lightening and a lessening of the tax burden which falls 
upon the taxpayers of this province? Do we find that in the 
budget? The member from Saskatoon Mayfair, I believe, says 
he does, says he does. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not correct. 
That is not correct. 
 
(1615) 
 
We have seen this government make choices on taxes. We have 
seen this government decide who shall have precedence when it 
comes to tax reform. And what do we find in the budget? We 
find the corporate tax rate reduced from 17 per cent to 15 per 
cent. The corporations do benefit from this budget, there is no 
doubt. The multinationals in particular will find their coffers 
enriched because of the tax structure put forward by this 
government and this budget. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, do we find, do we find the average taxpayer 
in this province benefitting from this budget? Do we? The 
answer is no. The answer is no. The facts speak for themselves. 
 
What do we find instead? We find the flat tax, the infamous flat 
tax imposed by the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden over 
the objections of the majority of the people of this province 
imposed on them. We find an increase in that flat tax, an 
increase. And why? Because the Minister of Finance put 
forward the reason why. He said, because we want to maintain 
our programs in education and health. He wants to maintain our 
programs in education and health. Well for those people who 
have suffered at the hands of the cut in the dental plan and those 
people who have suffered at the hands of the cuts in the drug 
plan, that’s small comfort. 
 
But it’s interesting to note how the Minister of Finance 
proposes to maintain those programs — cutting taxes of the 
multinationals and the rich; upping taxes for ordinary taxpayers 
like the people of Regina Rosemont who I have the honour and 
the privilege to represent. 
 
That shows the kind of priorities this government has chosen 
when it comes to taxes — cut the taxes of the multinationals; 
jack them up, jack them up for the average taxpayer. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, there could have been tax relief 
for the average taxpayers of this province. There could have 
been tax relief if the Minister of Finance had taken a leaf, a 
small one no doubt, but a leaf from the federal Minister of 
Finance, who in fact as we’re leading up to an election year, 
moves into the old gambit of cutting personal income taxes a 
bit. 

And taxpayers in my constituency and throughout 
Saskatchewan would have benefitted from this last-minute 
conversion when it comes to taxing from the federal 
government. They would have benefitted somewhat in their 
take-home pay. But what happened instead? The minister from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance has said, and 
did, that the federal minister, Mr. Michael Wilson, have giveth, 
but the hon. member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden will taketh 
away. And when it comes to taxes, that’s what’s happened. 
He’s taken it out of the pockets of ordinary people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister, the Premier, Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago in 
this House, stood up to defend another one of his choices, stood 
up to defend a choice and a decision that was made by his 
government, and that’s the decision to go ahead with the 
Rafferty dam and Shand boondoggle, a boondoggle which will 
cost the people of this province $1.2 billion. That’s $1,200 for 
every man, woman, and child in this province. 
 
And we heard the Premier of this province say to everybody 
that’s watching on television, and everybody in the galleries, 
and to all the members here, that they’re going ahead, by God, 
and build that project. It doesn’t matter what the federal 
Department of the Environment said. It certainly didn’t matter 
what our provincial Minister of the Environment said, despite 
the fact that that minister, in his approval for the project, said 
that all federal licensing regulations must be met. And they 
haven’t met them and he’s still sitting there in his seat allowing 
this project to go ahead. He made a choice. The Premier was as 
clear as a bell. He wants to spend $1.2 billion in his own riding, 
of taxpayers’ money, for supposed benefits. 
 
Now in the environmental impact statement, 2,000 pages, 18 
volumes of nonsense put forward by that government, they talk 
about flood control and they talk about recreational benefits and 
they talk about irrigation and they talk about water for the 
Shand plant. But you know, Mr. Speaker, there’s not one word 
in that environmental impact statement about water 
conservation for drought relief. Not one word. And there’s a 
reason for that and I’ll get to that in a minute. 
 
But it’s interesting to note now that in this province when we 
are facing drought throughout southern and central 
Saskatchewan, when we have water problems beginning to 
magnify in the urban areas and on the farms of this province, all 
of a sudden the Premier is a great water conservationist. 
 
Well it was very interesting that that wasn’t mentioned in the 
environmental impact statement, but all of a sudden the Premier 
has become a convert. And the reason for that is clear. The 
reason for that is clear. He knows he cannot justify Rafferty, 
Alameda, and Shand on straight economic terms. He knows he 
cannot justify it in terms of the environmental damage done to 
the southern area of this province. He knows he cannot justify it 
in every independent study done by outside agencies outside, 
the bought-off people in his government, have proven that it 
will not stand on its own. He knows he can’t justify it and   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

468 
 

all of a sudden he’s a water conservationist. 
 
But there’s a flaw in the Premier’s logic. There’s a flaw in that 
logic. And that is, if you are building a dam to control flood 
waters in Saskatchewan, to hold back the flood waters of the 
mighty Souris, what are you doing building the dam to conserve 
water in times of drought when there’s no water there to be 
conserved? 
 
I don’t know about the member from Souris-Cannington. I 
don’t know whether he’s an outdoor enthusiast, but I challenge 
that member to try to take a canoe through the city of Weyburn 
where the Souris flows, to try to get a canoe through the city of 
Weyburn along the Souris River without making a fairly 
lengthy portage, because there’s no water there. And the logical 
flaw in the Deputy Premier and the logical flaw in the Premier’s 
reasoning is this: is that if you’re building a dam, there must be 
some water to hold back, and in times of drought there is no 
water to hold back. But we’ll have ample opportunity to discuss 
the question of water conservation and alternatives to 
Rafferty-Alameda. 
 
Well let’s turn to Shand for two minutes. Let’s turn to Shand for 
two minutes. The Deputy Premier, who’s there chirping from 
his seat, once again showing his ignorance, and I may say, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Deputy Premier and George Hill were put 
together, and if ignorance were bliss, we would have the 
happiest couple here in the province of Saskatchewan. When it 
comes to dealing with the facts and figures on this dam, they 
have no credibility. He has absolutely no credibility because he 
hasn’t done his homework. 
 
I may say, that how does the Premier and the Deputy Premier of 
this province rationalize power production from the Shand 
generating plant at a cost of 12 cents per kilowatt-hours for 
consumers in 1985 dollars, when we can go south of the border, 
we can go to their friends at Basin Electric Cooperative in 
North Dakota and buy power at three cents — we can buy 
power at three cents per kilowatt-hour. 
 
The minister says, it’s not true. Well I want to challenge the 
minister responsible for SaskPower here to now put on the 
table, as we’ve been asking time in and time out, month in and 
month out, to put on the table to prove that it’s not true. Put 
your studies on the table, sir, to prove that what I’m saying is 
not true. And you know something? I can challenge you with an 
impunity because I know darn well you won’t put them on, 
because I know darn well you have . . . you don’t have, you 
don’t have those studies. And I know darn well that what I’m 
saying is correct, as it has been time in and time out in this 
House when dealing with this project. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier alluded to the fact — no, 
he didn’t allude, he said openly that not one man or woman 
across the province of Saskatchewan would oppose the 
Rafferty-Alameda project, not one thinking man or woman 
would oppose the Rafferty-Alameda project, you know. And I 
think that he threw that statement out as an apology to the 
people of this province. 
 
We have the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation with 
 

around 35,000 members who’ve overwhelmingly opposed that 
project. You have the members of my political party, the party 
that I have the honour to represent, with somewhat the same 
number, around 40,000 people who are opposed to that project. 
You have the Friends of the Valley, an organization 
representing another 40,000 groups and individuals who oppose 
this project. You have SCRAP, the Stop Construction of the 
Rafferty-Alameda Project group who’ve announced their 
opposition to the project, who just several days ago said that 
they represent 52,000 individuals and organizations in this 
project who are opposed to it. 
 
The Premier is deliberately, deliberately not telling the truth 
about SCRAP or any of the organizations which deal with 
Rafferty-Alameda when he tries to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The hon. member has made the remark 
that the Premier is deliberately not telling the truth. That, 
according to Beauchesne’s and under citation 316(c), the ruling 
is that a member may not make a personal charge against 
another member. I’m afraid that that’s the category that falls 
under, and I must ask the hon. member to withdraw and 
apologize for that statement. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I withdraw that statement, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much for your ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — And I’d ask you to also apologize. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m sorry, I didn’t hear. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I asked you to withdraw and apologize. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw and apologize that 
I’m not supposed to use the word “deliberately misrepresented.” 
 
The facts of the matter are that there are a great many people in 
this province who are opposed to this project for good, common 
sense economic reasons, the kind of economic reasons when, 
for example, you can buy power from Basin Electric at a third 
of the cost that it’s going to end up costing power users and the 
people of this province, jumping their rates, jumping their rates 
like we have seen in the past few years when electrical rates in 
this province have risen 21 per cent. Well if people were 
unhappy with that 21 per cent, all I can say is: just watch what’s 
coming — just watch what’s coming if the Premier’s able to 
ram through the shafferty boondoggle. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the political 
priorities laid out by this government, when you look at the 
orientation of this government as set forth in the budget, I think 
that people in Saskatchewan, despite the tax increases, and 
despite all else — despite all else — have one thing more to 
fear than any other thing. And that’s the kind of political 
landscape that this budget attempts to draw, or attempts to 
redefine, in terms of Saskatchewan, for their primary political 
reason, for les raisons d’être, pour l’existence de ce 
gouvernement au Saskatchewan, their primary political reasons 
for existence — and that is to pave the way to make the choices 
which will enable multinational corporations to enter into this 
province, to dominate it, to subsume it in, as Reagan said, a 
continental constitution, to swallow up   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

469 
 

our province in the maw of the American free trade deal. 
 
Because the budget is one of those, one of those paving stones 
in the political operation of those people opposite who want to 
see the end of this country as a separate entity, who want to see 
Canada become nothing more than an appendage of the 
American economic and military machine, who want to sell out 
Saskatchewan and to sell off Saskatchewan to the highest 
bidder. 
 
Their budget makes those choices clear. Their budget, in terms 
of where the money’s going, makes those choices clear, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They have chosen the agri-business 
multinationals over, for example, the dairy industry, by 
allowing the first steps to the deregulation of the dairy industry 
in this province to take place. 
 
(1630) 
 
And we’ve seen it, we have seen it with the rulings to the dairy 
board to allow Foremost dairies and that brand to enter into the 
province. And that is just the first step on the road to doing 
away with the milk control board in this province, or to change 
its function, if not to do it away, to change its function from a 
board which guarantees dairy farmers in this province — 
farmers, by the way, Mr. Speaker, who make, on average in 
1986, $44,000 in net farm income, and who have prospered as a 
result of that supply-management board. These people are 
opening the way to see the destruction of those kinds of 
institutions to be replaced by the American multinational who 
— or the Canadian multinational, in the case of Peter 
Pocklington and Palm Dairies — to order, to see the destruction 
of supply-management in the dairy industry. 
 
These people have made choices. These people have made 
choices when it comes to choosing multinationals or to 
choosing working people in this province. These people have 
made choices. They picked B, K and E — B, E and K 
Construction, or whatever that Alabama-based construction 
firm is called. They made the choice to allow it to come into the 
province to trample on the rights of Saskatchewan workers. 
They made that choice. That budget reflects that choice 
because, in their haste to develop the economic union with the 
United States, they want to create a level playing field, and in 
doing so, trample on the rights of Saskatchewan workers and 
trample on the kind of livelihood enjoyed by Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on and on and deal with the 
questions of free trade, but ultimately it comes down, I believe, 
to a question of a vision of Canada and how, in fact, we build 
that Canada. Do we attempt to build it, as the members opposite 
say, by opening the doors to American investment and allowing 
the Americans to reap the profits from our natural resources, to 
allowing American multinational corporations to reap the 
profits put forward by the labour of our citizens, and to 
impoverish us and to put us in the position of a third-world 
nation as the American multinationals have done throughout 
Central America, throughout South America, in Africa and 
around the world where they have sucked the economic 
life-blood of the peoples of the world dry? Is that the choice 
that we’re going to make? 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people on this side of the House have said no. 
We have another way. We have another way. It is not to rely on 
American multinationals. It is to rely on the strength, the 
individual and collective strength of Canadians, to build, to 
diversify, to become self-sufficient. 
 
It cannot, and history has proven that it cannot be done, that it 
cannot be done if we are going to rely on the American 
capitalists, the American multinationals. Saskatchewan was not 
built that way; Canada was not built that way. It took our own 
self-sufficiency. It can be only done, Mr. Speaker, it can be only 
accomplished . . . our task of building a New Jerusalem here in 
Canada can only be accomplished by Canadians working 
together co-operatively, socially — through social ownership, 
through social responsibility, through socialism. It can only be 
built this way because those who support, blindly and 
ideologically support, the capitalist system will sell us down the 
river to the Americans — only the socialists in Canada, and 
their friends have stood up for Canada, who are saying: we 
won’t trade Canada away, Canada is not for sale, Saskatchewan 
is not for sale, and we’re going to fight you tooth and nail to 
prove it. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure I rise again to speak in this legislature. Firstly, I wish 
to thank the constituents of Arm River for their continuous 
support. This is 10 years, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve been serving 
the great constituents of Arm River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have many topics that I want to speak on tonight. 
In this budget speech I want to talk a little bit about opinions 
from my constituents. The members opposite say that we are 
not listening, that we are not in touch. And I intend to, 
throughout my speech for approximately 20 minutes to a half an 
hour, say that we do listen to our constituents, and the member 
from Arm River is one of those. 
 
In mid-February, Mr. Speaker, I advertised in my local papers, 
asking for my constituents’ response on the following matters: 
the dental plan, the drug plan, the free trade, public 
participation, the teachers’ contract, change of legislation 
regarding nurses, plus farm debt — concerns that they might 
like to relate to me in writing. When the ad went into the paper, 
Mr. Speaker, it was prior to the Supreme Court ruling on 
abortion, the homosexual scandal and also the production loan 
changes. 
 
The reason why I’m doing this, Mr. Speaker, is, as I said before, 
I want to bring to this legislature what the constituents of Arm 
River plus my surrounding constituents are saying, because the 
four papers I put this ad in was Outlook, Watrous, Craik and 
Davidson, which touches seven constituencies. So what I’m 
saying here is on behalf of a lot of people, including the people 
from the constituency of Humboldt — I received many letters 
which offered various opinions. 
 
Firstly, regarding the dental program, I had some people   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

470 
 

say to me that they were opposed to our program, mainly 
because of location, that they were too far from a dentist. But, 
Mr. Speaker, when I take the dental issue on a percentage basis 
of the people who contacted me in writing or verbally, 
approximately 95 per cent said they would rather have their 
children going to a fully qualified dentist and were glad to be 
rid of that socialist program. They said to me very clearly that 
the next thing these socialists will want to do is to bring doctors 
into the schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pertaining to the 1987 drug plan where our 
government changed the basic outlay from 3.95 a prescription 
to 20 per cent, I would say that nearly 100 per cent approved of 
the drug program after they — after they found out that the 
opposition members were using socialistic scare tactics . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I would like to raise a point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. We seem to be real sticklers on the rules in the 
Assembly today, and I had to take note as the member was 
reading his speech over there, that it points out very well in both 
Erskine May and also in Beauchesne's that reading speeches are 
not allowed. And if we look at citation number 309, citation 
309: 
 

(1) It is a rule in both Houses of Parliament that a 
Member must address the House orally, and not read 
from a written, previously prepared speech. 
 

(2) On April 19, 1886, a resolution was adopted by the 
House, which reads: 
 
That the growing practice in the Canadian House of 
Commons of delivering speeches of great length, 
having the character of carefully and elaborately 
prepared written essays, and indulging in voluminous 
and often irrelevant extracts, is destructive of 
legitimate and pertinent debate upon public questions, 
is a waste of valuable time, unreasonably lengthens 
the sessions of Parliament, threatens by increased 
bulk and cost to lead to the abolition of the official 
report of the debates, encourages a discursive and 
diffuse, rather than an incisive and concise style of 
public speaking, is a marked contrast to the practice in 
regard to debate that prevails in the British House of 
Commons, and tends to repel the public from a 
careful and intelligent consideration of the 
proceedings of Parliament. 

 
Now although granted there is no reflection in the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, it 
certainly clearly states at the beginning of the rules of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, General Rule No. 1: 
 

In all cases not provided for in these Rules or by sessional 
or by other orders, the usages and customs of the House of 
Commons of Canada, as 
 

in force at the time, shall be followed so far as they may be 
applicable to this Assembly. 

 
And there are exceptions, Mr. Speaker, for some reading of 
speeches that I would submit to you. Certainly, the member 
from Arm River has no exception to reading a speech that’s 
voluminous in nature and often, irrelevant of the debate. And I 
ask you to call the member from Arm River to order, and if 
we’re going to be sticklers on rules in this procedure this 
afternoon, I ask you to rule that those members opposite cannot 
be reading the speeches prepared by their caucus research. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order with care and I certainly agree that the House has changed 
a great deal since 1888. I suppose the ideal would be if every 
member would rise and speak without speaking notes. And that, 
of course, is not now and has not been for a long time the 
practice of this House, nor so I think it’s safe to say in the 
House of Commons in Ottawa. 
 
Under that observation, I don’t believe the hon. member is out 
of order if he refers to notes or uses quotations in his speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On a point of order . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. If it’s a different point of order 
I’ll accept it. If it’s on the same topic I won’t. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It’s a different point of order, Mr. Speaker. I 
was referring to a quotation that may have been from 1886, but 
it is still in the current Beauchesne’s in use by this Legislative 
Assembly. In reference to your experience in the House of 
Commons, Mr. Speaker, I’ve also had experience in the House 
of Commons, and I don’t challenge your . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I think that the 
hon. member realizes that besides rules of standing orders of the 
House, and besides Beauchesne’s and Erskine May, customs 
and practice of the House also have something to do in 
precedence with the way the House is conducted, and therefore 
I rule that the customs and practice of this House do allow for 
hon. members to quote from relevant material, and even to read 
speeches. As you well know, many members do that, and I 
think that we will lay that point of order to rest and allow the 
member from Arm River to continue. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very easy to understand 
why the members opposite don’t want me to read, because they 
don’t like what they’re hearing. But it would be better to listen 
to what . . . I’m here, Mr. Speaker, than . . . rather than if I start 
coughing, that would bother them a lot more. 
 
The members opposite, for as long as I can remember . . . if 
they want me not to read, I won’t read. For as long as I can 
remember, Mr. Speaker, for 10 years I’ve been the MLA from 
Arm River, I have heard nothing but scare tactics and rhetoric 
from that side of the House. If we ever talk about the health 
program in this province, it’s always   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

471 
 

scare tactics, and that’s the only policy that I know they’ve got. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we should call them the party of scare 
tactics because it’s the only policy they’ve got. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, even in 1978, Mr. Speaker . . . 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, if you say anything that upsets the 
opposition they don’t want to hear you talk. 
 
I would like to ask them the courtesy to let me finish my 
speech, because I never say one word when one of you 
members are on your feet — in 10 years. I do not heckle, and I 
will ask you the courtesy to just please let me finish my speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important that I read some 
of this off because I’m reading from statistics, from the 
opinions from my constituency, and they don’t want to hear it. 
 
In 1982 the people of Saskatchewan lost faith in these vicious 
attacks. Now this is what the people told me in letters. If they 
want me to take an hour or two off I will read the several 
hundreds of letters I got, especially when their own policy for 
the election platform was “save your medicare”. People out 
there, Mr. Speaker, the ordinary voter in Saskatchewan proved 
they believed in the Progressive Conservatives when they 
elected us in 1982, re-elected us in 1986 and will again elect us 
in 1990-91. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, the average, hard-working 
citizen realizes that the members opposite can only condemn 
what a good government does when they haven’t got any 
policies of their own. They only can condemn it. That’s all I’ve 
heard here since 1982 is condemn, condemn, condemn. They 
don’t come up with policies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, looking at my constituents’ response for 
free trade. Approximately 80 per cent of my replies believed in 
free trade and a few wanted to know more about it. Mr. 
Speaker, I was able to get back to the majority of the persons 
that were against free trade to discuss the reasons why. One 
hundred per cent . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. I think it 
would be in the best interests of this House if hon. members just 
contained themselves and the remarks they’re making from 
their seats which are certainly, to say the least, perhaps 
bordering on unparliamentary and allow the member to 
continue and I think the House will proceed in an amicable, if 
not agreeable, manner. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every individual I 
talked to admitted they received this misinformation from 
listening to the Leader of the Opposition and the CBC because 
they were all told, Mr. 
 

Speaker, and they told me very clearly, that the only thing we 
had against free trade is we might lose our sovereignty to the 
United States. But when discussing it with them, each and every 
one said it came from the CBC and the Leader of the 
Opposition. So it proves more scare tactics. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, after sitting down with these people, I’m 
pleased to inform you that they were very pleased that they 
could go out with a clear mind and talk to their neighbours and 
friends about free trade and not clouded by the members 
opposite. 
 
The next item, Mr. Speaker, is regarding public participation. 
Again replies in writing and verbally indicated that a 
convincing 95 per cent clearly stated that this government is on 
the right track in allowing the public to become the owners of 
our Crown corporations. They did express the feeling that 
Saskatchewan Power and SaskTel should be retained, but that 
the public should be allowed to be involved as shareholders. 
The message, Mr. Speaker, was that they firmly believe that 
public participation in Crown corporations will serve 
Saskatchewan people better than being totally 
government-owned. 
 
As for the issues pertaining to a contract for teachers, the only 
persons that responded, Mr. Speaker, were the teachers in my 
riding. There was a request to have a contract as soon as 
possible, and I naturally agree with them, Mr. Speaker. I want at 
this time to thank the many teachers that wrote to me with their 
concerns regarding many issues. 
 
Now I would like to turn to the farm debt, and I’m glad the 
member from Humboldt is here. Mr. Speaker, many 
constituents that answered these letters, many, many people 
wrote concerning . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I clearly heard the member from Arm River 
refer to another member on this side of the House by his title, 
and that’s clearly against the rules of this legislature unless 
some kind of tradition over the years here has also made that 
acceptable in the judgement of this House, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask that he cease from doing that and not refer to the 
hon. member again in regard to his presence or lack of in this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The rules do in fact state that even though it’s 
quite common in the House . . . but the rules do in fact state that 
hon. members should not make reference to the absence or 
presence of members. The point of order is well taken and I ask 
members to continue with . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when I received the information that people were telling me 
from . . . especially from my riding and from the Humboldt 
riding that these papers were circulated in, people related back 
to me that these are the things that they were concerned in. And 
they would like to see the government do something about 
freezing the home quarter, complete moratorium, partial 
moratorium, equity financing; some people said, do nothing at 
all. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

 

472 
 

But when you put it all together, what they said to me, that most 
of them wanted a freezing on the home quarter or some 
protection, Mr. Speaker, for the home quarter. But very, very 
few people agreed with what the members of the opposition 
perhaps suggested the other day in the House — a complete 
moratorium. There wouldn’t be 1 per cent. So we are out 
hearing from responsible people here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about farm debt 
we’re talking about a very complex situation. We have 
problems out there. Some people haven’t. There’s people out 
there that are doing quite well; there’s some people that are just 
hanging on; and there’s many farmers desperate and don’t know 
which way to turn. 
 
Now this isn’t an easy situation to solve, but if the members 
opposite would do like I know the rural members are doing 
here, and if the member from Humboldt would do what I do, he 
wouldn’t have this problem, Mr. Speaker, he just tells his 
people there is no programs. Why doesn’t he tell them there’s a 
counselling assistance program? Why doesn’t he tell them that 
there’s a farm debt review board? Why doesn’t he tell them 
there’s a farm security board? No, he says there’s nothing. He 
wants the farmers to believe there’s nothing. 
 
They want, the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, want the 
farmers to go broke. That’s the socialist way of thinking, Mr. 
Speaker. Have the businesses go broke, the farmers go broke; 
take over your farms, take over your land, and that’s their 
agenda. And it comes through the Regina Manifesto, and it has 
never changed since 1933. 
 
And the member from Humboldt is telling people out there — 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt is telling people out 
there there is no programs; telling them not even to sign the 
security agreements when it comes to production loan. When it 
comes to a production loan, the only problem we have, Mr. 
Speaker, was the Leader of the Opposition and the member 
from Humboldt telling people, don’t sign those security 
agreements. That’s more of your scare tactics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This system is working very well, Mr. Speaker, this system of 
taking our farmers’ problems to the farm debt review board, the 
farm security board, and going to the counselling assistance. 
But I’d like to ask the member from Humboldt why he doesn’t 
do these things. Why do I have to have consistently calls from 
the Humboldt area, farmers that will not go to him and come to 
me? Now the only reason I’m doing this, because I love people; 
I like helping them. Now I challenge him to love people and 
help them, instead of saying there is no government programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member from Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have the Leader of the Opposition — which has been said so 
many times in this House, but I’m going to just enlarge on it a 
little more. 
 
People are saying that he’s out there saying the banks are 
terrible people. The Leader of the Opposition and the 
 

member from Saskatoon Fairview, I believe it is, he says, they 
say very clearly that the banks are terrible people. They’re 
frauders and they’re frauding people, but they do enjoy the 
money they get when they foreclose on the farms. We know, 
Mr. Speaker, we know that all law firms in this country have a 
right to act on behalf of the bank, but the difference and the 
issue that we’re missing here, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of 
the Opposition is a leader of a political party and it is absolutely 
. . . to me it’s hypocritical to be on one side criticizing banks 
and saying they’re going to help farmers, and then taking 
money in his pocket one way or another. To me it’s 
hypocritical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to bring my remarks in to talk a little bit 
about socialism versus capitalism and free enterprise. If we’ve 
heard the members holler and scream before, they’ll come 
really to life now, because they won’t want to hear what the 
truth is. But maybe they will be quiet because I’m going to be 
mentioning the word Regina Manifesto maybe 15 to 20 times. 
It’s their agenda, it’s their constitution. And I have the whole 
Regina Manifesto here. If anybody doesn’t understand what 
they stand for, then I’ll give them a copy. They will know what 
their whole program is about. They’ll know what they’re 
standing for, but now I don’t think they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I go into that, I just have a comment to 
make. I think it was the member from Regina North — and 
they’re always standing up here talking about the Premier broke 
his promise when they took away the gas tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this is 
absolutely hogwash. When the Premier stood up in this here 
province in 1982 and stated there would not be any more gas 
tax in this province, he has lived up to his promise. Ask them if 
any of them pay gas tax over there. If they aren’t capable 
enough to make out a little receipt once a year and send in their 
rebates, then they’re not even good business men. I have no 
trouble in my riding whatsoever. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
stand up and tell people, here, throw them away. There isn’t a 
farmer in Saskatchewan that’s paying gas tax. There’s not an 
individual that drives a car paying gas tax. We’ve only tax on 
the transient people who are going through this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over in England many people now refer to the 
socialist Labour Party as the radical left. After having listened 
to some of the NDP opposition members in this budget debate, I 
am now convinced that Saskatchewan’s NDP caucus is 
controlled by the same kind of . . . that same kind of thinking. 
 
During the course of this budget debate the socialist, left-wing 
members opposite have engaged in sanctimonious and 
holier-than-thou, left-wing talk. The socialist member . . . NDP 
members opposite have gone out of their way to denounce free 
trade. Why? Because the Regina Manifesto agenda spells out 
that there must be state control of the economy. Mr. Speaker, 
they would rather cling to their Regina Manifesto of state 
control than give the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to 
have   



 
April 11, 1988 

 

473 
 

free trade. 
 
There’s another good reason why the left-wing opposition does 
not want free trade. They hate the United States; they hate them, 
and they would rather take part in demonstrations of burning 
flags. That’s what they would rather do — they’ve done it, they 
believe in it — than be friends with the oldest neighbours that 
we’ve got in Canada is the Americans. Why don’t they just 
stand up and admit to the people in Canada, we hate the 
Americans. Be honest — stand up and say what you mean. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite are so anti-American that the 
national policy calls for the removal of the Canada from the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan need to know what this real 
socialist agenda’s all about, Mr. Speaker. I just hope that some 
voters from Elphinstone are listening here tonight, and they 
would take heed in what they’re hearing and what they’re really 
voting for over there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if . . . I know that some of them must have 
heard our Premier speaking the last few weeks, and I know that 
some of those people over there must be thinking of what this 
Premier stands for. He stands for the family; he stands against 
these here immoral issues that they stand up for over there, Mr. 
Speaker. Let me cite you an example, Mr. Speaker. The Regina 
North West in his budget speech compared the government to 
Hitler, to Stalin, and South Africa. I just can’t believe we have a 
man stand up here and say that in this House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — When did he say it? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — He said it very clearly in his speech. 
Compared to this government, compared to this government . . . 
compare this budget speech to “Hitler to Stalin . . . (and) South 
Africa.” And if you want to know where it’s from, it’s in 
Hansard of April 4, 1988. Look it up for yourself. 
 
Now I note the Leader of the Opposition never says very much 
about this. But I think he’s frightened of his left-wing element 
over there that he can’t control. I think it’s a scandal that a 
member can come in here and say some of the things he has 
when he compares us to Hitler and to Stalin. No premier, no 
government stands stronger for the cause of freedom, liberty, 
free enterprise and the family than does this government right 
here that I’m so proudly a part of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, socialism is dead in England, 
and it is still alive here in Saskatchewan by a small element of 
Tommy Douglas’s party. That’s the only place in North 
America where it’s alive, right here. And it’s these here 
left-wing socialists that’s keeping it alive. 
 
They are the people who want to shut down the uranium mines 
of Saskatchewan, the people who want state-owned abortion 
clinics. They use the Regina Manifesto as their guide. They 
want to bring back the land bank, the state ownerships of farms. 
These people in the left wing want to take over the banks, to 
take over the 

railways, and yet the member for Saskatoon Riversdale is afraid 
to deal with them. The member for Riversdale knows better. 
He’s a person that doesn’t even believe what he is saying, or 
else he, too, maybe is a part of this socialist agenda. 
 
Just as the budget is the economic guiding force for this 
government, the Regina Manifesto is a guiding force for those 
in the opposition. The socialist Regina Manifesto says they 
want a planned socialized economic order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve read that speech already. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying must be 
bothering the members opposite. But you’d think they’d enjoy 
what I’m saying, because I’m speaking exactly right from their 
own constitution. 
 
The Regina Manifesto calls for socialization of finance. It calls 
for it. How would they do this? Through state ownerships of 
banks and financial institutions. In the provincial budget we 
have a continued commitment to agriculture . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think the member 
should be able to continue his speech without constant 
interruptions. The odd comment of course is permitted, but 
constant interruptions are not acceptable, and I would like to 
allow the member to continue now. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite, we know they hate businesses and small businesses. 
They just don’t like this. They want to own them and control 
them; they hate free enterprise. They won’t even stand up there 
and say that. Let there be no doubt about it where this guiding 
force is coming from; it’s coming right from the Regina 
Manifesto. 
 
The man who would be king over there, but he just couldn’t 
quite make it, made a statement here that really bothered me, 
Mr. Speaker. He attacked the personal religious beliefs of the 
Premier. This really bothered me when he done this. The 
godless left-wing thinkers who write their speeches, they talk 
about speeches and reading them — they’ve been reading them 
here for 10 years. They may think it’s intelligent to call the 
Premier of Saskatchewan names and compare him to a 
disgraced television preacher. And this was done in recent 
debate, Mr. Speaker, and it shows little respect they have for 
our parliamentary traditions, our heritage, and our freedom of 
religion . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It being 5 o’clock, the 
House now stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Renovations to SaskPower Offices
	Proposed Legislation on Minority Language Rights
	Rafferty Dam Project
	ORDERS OF THE DAY

