


















































June 2, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 2, 1988 
 

1767 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Gardner, from the Standing 
Committee on Estimates, presents the second report of the said 
committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee considered the estimates of the 
Legislative Assembly, Legislative Library, and Legislative 
Counsel and Law Clerk and adopted the following 
resolutions: 

 
1. Main estimates to March 31, 1989: 

 
Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
twelve months ending March 31, 1989, the following 
sum: 

 
For legislation — $4,048,500 

 
2. Resolved that towards making good the supply granted 

to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, 
the sum of $2,905,600 be granted out of the 
Consolidated Fund. 

 
3. Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 

twelve months ending March 31, 1988, the following 
sums: 

 
For legislation — $572,500 

 
4. Resolved that towards making good the supply granted 

to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, 
the sum of $572,500 be granted out of the Consolidated 
Fund. 

 
5. Resolved that this committee recommended that upon 

concurrence in the committee’s report the sums as 
reported and approved shall be included in the 
Appropriation Bill for consideration by the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the 
member from Regina Lakeview: 
 

That the second report on the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and to all members of the Assembly a guest in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I hope I’m saying this right, Mr. 
Declan Kelly, chargé d’affaires of Ireland and the Irish embassy 
in Ottawa. Mr. Kelly is here visiting Regina for Mosaic, I 
understand, and while he is here is meeting with some officials 
of Executive Council in government. 
 
I would like all members to join with me, Mr. Speaker, in 
welcoming Mr. Kelly here to Saskatchewan, and I trust that he 
will enjoy his visit, not only to Mosaic but to the offices of 
government here today. And I ask all members to join me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the opposition, I would also like to extend our greetings to Mr. 
Kelly and wish him a very enjoyable stay in Saskatchewan and 
a safe trip home. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, a group of 12 students 
from the Parry Elementary School. They are in grades 1 to 6, 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they are here for 
question period. I will meet with them immediately following 
question period for pictures on the steps and drinks. I would 
hope that they enjoy proceedings here during question period 
and enjoy their stay in Regina. I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming the children from the Parry Elementary 
School. Thank you. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague 
member from Humboldt, I’d like to welcome, on behalf of you 
and the House, 33 grade 6 students from Watrous Elementary 
School who are seated in the east gallery. They are 
accompanied by their teachers Arley Olson and Shelley Engel, 
chaperons Milton Sather and Doreen Rudneski, and the bus 
driver Vivian Boisvert. I’ll be meeting them for pictures and for 
refreshments on the lawn following the question period. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have the sheet 
in front of me, but I recognize the grade 12 students from 
Shellbrook, so I’d like to introduce them to you, and through 
you to this Assembly. I also recognize the principal, Mr. 
McIvor, that’s with them. 
 
I want to welcome them here and hope they enjoy the question 
period. I’ll be meeting with them for drinks at 2:30 and pictures. 
I hope they enjoy their trip home afterwards. I’d like all 
members to welcome them in their usual manner. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you, and to members of this Assembly, a constituent of mine 
who was seen on television regularly  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1768 
 

and has got a road show that’s travelled across Canada and 
across the United States — is Brian Sklar, who is the lead 
player and the owner and organizer of Prairie Fire. Welcome 
Brian. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lay-off Notices for PCS Workers 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We might not be 
able to get prairie fire going in the legislature, but maybe in this 
question period a little bit of legislative fire. 
 
My question today, Mr. Speaker, with your permission, is 
actually directed to the Deputy Premier because of what we, as 
the opposition, believe is the gravity of the problem, but it could 
also be directed to the minister in charge of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Minister of Finance. 
 
It refers to a copy of a letter which we received in our office of 
the opposition just around noon hour, approximately that time, 
from a Saskatoon woman by the name of Gina Digness, a wife 
of a soon-to-be unemployed potash worker at Cory. And I’ve 
sent copies of her correspondence to both the Deputy Premier 
and to the minister in charge of PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan International) so they have them before them and 
can answer the questions that I direct to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to begin with, the letter contains what can only be 
categorized as some fairly outrageous events describing the 
actions of the chairman of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Paul Schoenhals, in terms of his attitude and 
statements, but I won’t be dealing with that in my question 
period, as important as that is. Rather I want to refer the 
minister to page 1, paragraph 5 of the letter where Mrs. Digness 
states that, quote: 
 

Mr. Schoenhals advised me that “the decision to shut 
down Cory was made last fall!” 

 
These are the words, quote: “advised me that the decision to 
shut down Cory was made last fall!” 
 
My question is this: last fall the government, in introducing The 
Potash Resources Act, from the Premier down, assured the 
legislature, assured the workers, assured the industry that in fact 
there would not be a shut-down or a loss of jobs, where now it 
appears obvious on the admissions by Mr. Schoenhals to Mrs. 
Digness that all the while that they were telling the Assembly 
this, the government was secretly planning for, and in fact had 
decided to shut down Cory. 
 
I ask the minister in charge — those who wish to respond, 
whether it the Minister of Finance or the Deputy Premier: how 
in the world do you expect this legislature and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan to accept that degree of 
untruthfulness in dealing with this important and vital issue 
respecting the workers? 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I simply, Mr. Speaker, would have hoped 
that the Leader of the Opposition would have asked the 
question whether it was true or not. The fact is that the decision 
to deal with Cory and to have it simply produce the white 
product with the lay-offs was made at the most recent board of 
directors meeting of the potash corporation, and the statement 
that it was made last fall is simply not a true one. It is not an 
accurate one, and it’s not a fair one. 
 
I mean, you’re taking this at face value. It may or may not be 
correct, the statements. I’ve asked for a meeting with the 
chairman and the employee referred to, to get their version of 
the facts. And certainly if these statements were made, and if 
that type of attitude was shown, I think appropriate action 
would be taken. It’s not called for, if true, if accurate. But I 
simply can assure the hon. member that the decision on Cory 
was made at the most recent potash corporation board of 
directors meeting. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for that 
answer, and I’m particularly pleased that he is going to take the 
time to check with the chairman of the potash corporation in 
terms of the statements that have been made. 
 
As a follow-up and as a supplementary, I direct this question to 
the minister. Would the minister be prepared to table minutes or 
copies of the minutes of the board of directors of PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) to, in effect, assure the members 
of the House that the decisions with respect to Cory were taken 
when he says they were taken? 
 
And furthermore, would the minister be prepared to go back to 
the period of August, September, October, November of 1987, 
at the time of the consideration of The Potash Resources Act, 
and to table also relevant board minutes or documents at the 
time that PCS’s responses to The Potash Resources Act was 
being considered, so that we can have further verification of 
what the minister say today? 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I remind the Leader of the Opposition 
of the traditional and historical practice of an assurance of a 
member of this Assembly. 
 
I’ll go back and take a look and see what the precedent is on 
tabling of minutes. I seem to recall requesting minutes when 
you were minister responsible for the potash corporation with 
regard to Lanigan expansion, decisions made on what it was 
based, and being refused that type of information. 
 
I certainly would be prepared to take a look at it from the 
precedent point of view as to confidentiality of the minutes, but 
let me say, I do feel it a proper and an appropriate course of 
action to, before I make any response on the allegations made, 
that I do meet with the chairman and the employee responsible. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
responding minister, the minister in charge of PCS. There is of 
course another employee of PCS who was involved,  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1769 
 

other than the chairman Mr. Schoenhals, according to this letter, 
and that is the person who’s in charge of your industrial 
relations, Mr. John Gugulyn. 
 
And there on page 2 of the letter which we have before us, the 
letter writer, Mrs. Digness, reports that Mr. Gugulyn said, quote 
— these are her words: 
 

We were shocked when he warned us that if the media got 
involved “it could get dirty” (in quotation marks, she 
attaches) not only for us, but for the men at work. 

 
Then he went on to say, according to the letter, that Cory has 
always been a source of irritation and that Cory employees were 
most vocal in regards to lay-offs. 
 
The minister has a copy of the letter before him. My question to 
him is this: Mr. Minister, doesn’t that say to the workers who 
have been so dramatically and tragically affected by the 
decision of your corporation, that the real reason for the closure 
of Cory was more an act of vindictiveness than it was 
economics? Isn’t that really the reason for the closing of Cory? 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, when I answered the 
question earlier I made reference to the employee, as well as the 
chairman, as to the allegations made by the individual. Some 
make the allegations that if there was political decisions or 
political vindictiveness as the basis for the reason, then why not 
shut down Lanigan where we had a highly partisan political 
strike, as well-known the involvement of the member from 
Quill Lakes? That’s been a question that was raised, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the political one is not a factor; it never was a factor. We 
made the decision in the best interests of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, again it’s simply not a true 
statement, but I have undertaken and I have asked for a 
meeting, as I said in my first answer to the hon. member, to 
meet with both the chairman and the employee referred to. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have to ask a new question, 
with your permission, of the minister because I want to refer to 
a brief quotation. I just, before asking the question, would 
preface my remarks by saying that the Lanigan example, with 
the greatest respect to the minister, should give no assurance to 
anyone, because the attitude displayed by the ministers, if the 
facts are proven to be the case — and I would see no reason 
why Mrs. Digness would misrepresent — would cast a chilling 
tone and a note for all government workers, not only in potash 
but everywhere, about the nature of this government. 
 
But my question is this. The minister says that it is not for 
political vindictiveness. He uses Lanigan as his example. We’ll 
see about that. He implies that it’s economic reasoning. How 
would the minister explain therefore, in the Star-Phoenix as of 
today’s date, January 2, 1988, under a headline called 
“Economist doesn’t buy denial of U.S., Cory link”, the 
following is stated by Mr. Arne  

Paus-Jenssen, Professor Paus-Jenssen is from the University of 
Saskatchewan. He said: 
 

“It’s always been my impression that the Cory mine was a 
commercially-viable operation. I’m just wondering if (the 
scaledown) means they’re simply going to write it off and 
close it down completely,” said Paus-Jenssen. 

 
And then I’ll just finish the quote to frame my question: 
 

The mayor of Carlsbad, (New Mexico) Bob Forrest, was 
overjoyed that the local mines (there) would be 
re-opening, but puzzled as to why the Cory mine would be 
cutting back. 

 
“If you’re in business at $30 (US) a ton, you could damn 
sure stay in business at $60 a ton,” he said. 

 
And that’s what the Americans are saying. They don’t 
understand the economics. 
 
I say to the minister opposite, in the light of these statements, 
isn’t it true that the real reason for Cory is an act of 
vindictiveness against the workers for standing up for their 
rights, and an act of vindictiveness because the people in 
Eastview didn’t vote for your party; they voted for the New 
Democratic Party? You’re punishing us. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me respond first, Mr. Speaker, with 
regard to the Star-Phoenix. And I suppose we have an example 
of a newspaper, representing a city with a major industry called 
potash, with a frankly frightening ignorance. 
 
The Star-Phoenix today, Mr. Speaker, said there is a new potash 
mine coming on stream in Manitoba. We can’t find that mine, 
Mr. Speaker. Manitoba can’t find the new mine. But the 
Star-Phoenix says there’s a new mine. The Star-Phoenix in the 
editorial today said a new mine in New Brunswick has come on 
stream. We can’t find that new mine, Mr. Speaker. New 
Brunswick can’t find the new mine. There’s no new mine, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s no mine in Manitoba, but the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, Mr. Speaker . . . It’s frightening, it’s frightening 
how stupid, Mr. Speaker, this . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member 
still has an opportunity to finish his answer. I’d just like . . . I’d 
like the House to give him the opportunity to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, in responding to the 
Paus-Jenssen . . . in each of the last years, the potash 
corporation has in fact increased its sales into the United States. 
The shares of Canpotex have also increase its sales into the 
United States. The shares of Canpotex have also increased. The 
argument that we’re losing market share is simply not true. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is a very simple one, that when 
Lanigan phase 2 expansion was completed, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan has the capacity to produce 8.6 
million tonnes of potash. This is in excess of 4 million tonnes, 
Mr. Speaker. We have  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1770 
 

double the productive capacity over what our sales are, and our 
sales are increasing. It’s that simple. It’s that difficult, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the fundamental problem. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. minister talks about 
frightening news coverage. Well I’m not going to get into the 
business of shooting the messenger, and I don’t think that the 
Minister of Finance enhances the debate by shooting the 
messenger and failing to address the main issue. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Minister, what is frightening is the fact 
that the mayor of Carlsbad, Mr. Bob Forrest, is cited in this 
newspaper story, and we know it to be a fact, that two mining 
operations in Carlsbad which had been idle for more than six 
years, according to this news story, they’re now opening up, 
and the mayor of New Mexico, Mr. Forrest himself, says he 
can’t believe it. 
 
They’re opening up. He can’t believe your argument that at $30 
a tonne you can’t make a go of it, yet two broken-down, old, 
New Mexico potash mines are getting started. 
 
What in the world can we interpret except that this government 
has decided to play over dead . . . roll over and play dead to the 
American potash industry to help the American potash workers 
while the husbands of people like Mrs. Digness go unemployed, 
begging for some job security. That’s a shame. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
. . . For some reason, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
who, we should remember throughout the course of this debate, 
was the minister who took the potash government take-over 
legislation through this House and became the minister 
responsible for the potash corporation — and they cheer that, 
Mr. Speaker — and was the minister responsible for the potash 
corporation when the decision was made to expand the Lanigan 
potash mine, Mr. Speaker. We should remember that. And they 
cheer. They haven’t changed their policy, and we all should 
read that, including the Star-Phoenix. They have not changed 
their policy, Mr. Speaker — they have not changed their policy. 
 
Here’s what’s happened when they said that the potash 
corporation is rolling over and playing dead. In 1985 the potash 
corporation’s share of the U.S. market of Saskatchewan 
producers was 28 per cent. In 1986 it was 30.4 per cent — an 
increase, Mr. Speaker. In 1986 it was 30.5 per cent, another 
increase in 1987. And for the first four months of the current 
year, Mr. Speaker, we are holding at 30.5 per cent increase, Mr. 
Speaker — increases, increases, increases into the United States 
market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they say lay-offs. The lay-offs come about because, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1979 the now Leader of the Opposition made the 
decision to bail the member from Quill Lakes  

out by doubling the capacity of the Lanigan mine so that the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan today, at taxpayers’ 
expense, has 8 million tonnes capacity when there are sales for 
4 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have to clear up that difficult situation, Mr. Speaker. Those 
are the reasons for the decisions. I’m disappointed in the hon. 
member. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is a new question to the 
minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I 
have to preface the question by a short quotation which say as 
follows: 
 

With this belief in mind, the board of directors supported 
management’s recommendation to continue with (to 
continue with — I underline those words) one of our 
major projects in Saskatchewan. I refer to the PCS mining 
Lanigan phase 2 expansion which is now under way. 

 
And then goes on to justify why it’s being done. 
 
Signed by Lorne McLaren, chairman of the board. Your 
minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
had made that decision. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s not 
the issue. You say that there is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, if it’s the issue, then the issue falls squarely on the 
minister that you fired, in charge of Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And if it’s an issue, it’s your responsibility for 
going with that route. 
 
My question to the minister is this, my question to the minister 
is this: you claim that our share of the potash market in the 
United States is being maintained. You claim that they’re doing 
the job; they’re doing the job in selling, and you also claim that 
in doing that job of selling we’re maintaining our work-force. 
 
If that’s the case, how in the world do you justify the fact that 
200 families in Cory, and other families in the potash industry 
in Saskatchewan, are being laid off; and why is it that The 
Potash Resources Act, which apparently was designed to stem 
this kind of discriminatory action, has not been proclaimed? 
You’re nothing but propagandizing this issue, and you know it 
yourself. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition said that 
his decisions to nationalize, to take over the potash industry, 
expand the potash . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they don’t 
want to hear, they don’t want to hear, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
want to hear, for very good reasons. He said that his decision in 
1979, his personal decision, is not the issue. It is the issue . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. The 
minister is having difficulty answering, and as the hon. 
members can see, there are a good number of members  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1771 
 

who would like to answer. But the minister has been asked to 
answer; therefore, let us allow him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, secondly, with referring to the 
minutes that he hon. Leader of the opposition referred to, as 
we’ve debated in this assembly during his four-year absence 
where the seemingly didn’t learn anything about the potash 
industry, Mr. Speaker, the commitment was so far down the 
road that the cost would have been too great. But, Mr. Speaker, 
what he fundamentally misses when he talks about the one 
mine, two shafts — and we should keep that in mind, not two 
mines again, like the Star-phoenix seemingly didn’t understand 
— Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Order, 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the particular mine that’s 
opening up in New Mexico — and the company bought very 
little from the potash corporation, Mr. Speaker. It bought its 
tonnage, when it was shut down, from Israel, Mr. Speaker. 
Israel is the one losing market share with the increase or the 
opening of the mine in New Mexico, Mr. Speaker. The 
fundamental decision was the hon. member making the decision 
to have a double shaft, Mr. Speaker, in Lanigan, a double shaft 
for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. There are a good 
number of members who would like to ask a question now, but 
I believe the Leader of the Opposition has the floor. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A new 
question to the minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, who talks about shafting, and he’s right; the only 
people who have been shafted are the working men and women 
and the families that this government says it cherishes and 
protects, by words — but by action, dismantles and hurts. 
That’s the shaft in the first place. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I want to return to the letter by Mrs. 
Digness to your chairman Mr. Paul Schoenhals. Mrs. Digness 
says in the letter, quote: “ He accused me of being . . .” . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, it’s right on the subject. If you 
would listen to the families and be concerned about them, you’d 
know it’s right on subject. He says this . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The letter says, 
from Mrs. Digness, as follows: 
 

. . . he accused me of being an irrational woman involved 
in a political exercise . . . He also accused me of acting on 
behalf of the Union and the N.D.P. When I denied this, he 
accused me of  

“lying”. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, do you consider that these are words which 
should come from any civil servant, words of insult and 
ridicule? And if you disapprove of those words, and on your 
investigation you find those words are said, will you give this 
House assurance that there will be an unqualified apology to 
Mrs. Digness and all of those wives and families struggling for 
survival, and an apology to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I think everyone notes how 
the Leader of the Opposition wanted to get off the potash 
decision-making process for obvious reasons, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it’s quite clear as he made in his reference with regard to 
who got shafted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government take-over of the potash industry by the New 
Democratic Party and the now Leader of the Opposition was a 
shaft for the people of this province, a tremendous financial loss 
at a great cost to the taxpayer. I said — and, Mr. Speaker, this is 
a repetitive question. I assured the hon. member in this 
Assembly that I have asked for a meeting of the two people 
involved, and I want to hear their side of the story, Mr. Speaker. 
I think that’s only fair. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, and I say, if, that those statements were made, 
then more than an apology is necessary, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
think that would be tolerated by any public service of any party 
or anyone in public life, Mr. Speaker. I said “if.” But, Mr. 
Speaker, in fairness, in fairness, Mr. Speaker, I think, before 
this is taken as fact, we should check it out, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Effects of Privatization Legislation 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the minister of 
privatization. Mr. Minister, yesterday your government 
introduced its omnibus privatization Bill. This Bill gives the 
cabinet the power to sell any public asset to anyone, at any 
time, under any terms of conditions that you see fit, without 
ever having to justify that sale to the taxpayers of this province 
through this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question is simply this: why are you afraid to 
bring your privatization deals one by one before this 
legislature? And why are you afraid to account for your actions 
in this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor; — Well, Mr. Speaker, that simply isn’t the 
case. The Bill was introduced, and I’d be more than pleased to 
give second reading of this Bill this afternoon to explain to the 
critic the actual intent of the Bill. Obviously she does not 
understand it. 
 
I think the Bills before the House today indicate that many of 
these ventures will be debated in this legislature, as is the case 
with the Bill of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation) that is before the House at this time, which 
indicates that things will come here for dialogue and debate. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, this Bill is the arrogance of  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1772 
 

the highest order. This Bill gives the PC cabinet the power to 
make deals to sell off public assets in the dead of night without 
ever any public scrutiny on these deals. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you afraid of the public’s reaction to your 
privatization deals, or have you and your government become 
so arrogant that you simply don’t care about what the public 
thinks? 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, it’s very evident 
the member is not aware of the content of the Bill. The Bill 
does give some power to me as the minister. But that is power 
to protect the interests of individuals in Saskatchewan, of 
employees and of the public. And yes, I would be pleased to 
have the open and up front . . . And as of always, be it due to 
their ideological blinkers of the members opposite, they will 
oppose all of these initiatives, and that’s where exactly I like to 
have them. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend the Wildlife Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act Respecting the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill respecting the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to raise 
with you, on orders of the day, to raise with you a point of order 
and ask you for your ruling and interpretation. And I rise 
pursuant to rule 51 in the Rules and Procedures of this 
Assembly. 
 
In the blues today, Mr. Speaker, there are 19 Bills in second 
reading. Twelve of those Bills are labelled as being not printed. 
Now that’s not a totally unusual occurrence, but it is used very 
rarely, Mr. Speaker. This large number is unusual. 
 
And it would not be, I think, surprise to anyone if people were 
to conclude that what we see here is the government  

attempting to hide something and be very secretive and 
dishonest in their approach with important legislation to this 
legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that Bills not printed 
cannot be introduced into second readings and read a second 
time. And I would like you to provide to this House an 
interpretation of the rule 51 to clarify that issue and make it 
clear whether those Bills which are indicated to be not printed 
can be read a second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Speaking to the point of order. And 
I’m surprised that a member with the experience of the 
Opposition House Leader and certainly with the experience of 
his seat mate who was government house leader for about, well 
several years, would have difficulty in understanding or 
interpreting that particular rule. The fact is that Bills that are not 
printed cannot proceed with second reading without leave of the 
Assembly. 
 
The normal course of events of course is that Bills are printed 
and distributed at first reading. Second reading cannot proceed 
until Bills have been circulated, I think for 24 hours, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s always been understood as long as I’ve 
been around here. And Bills that are indicated to be not printed 
on the blues cannot be proceeded with in second reading 
without leave. 
 
However, those who attach some importance to proceeding 
quickly with some of these bits of legislation, would give leave 
providing they had the opportunity to adjourn debate and 
review the Bill. And I’m not asking that they should do that. 
I’m just telling what has happened in the past. 
 
And I freely admit, Mr. Speaker, that there’s an unusual number 
of Bills on the blues today that are indicated to be not printed. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I listened to the point of order raised by the 
member for Regina North East and to the response to it by the 
Deputy Premier, and I find that the point of order raised by the 
member for Regina North East is well taken. Bills which are not 
printed cannot go forth for second reading unless of course they 
receive the leave of the House. So the point of order is well 
taken. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 
that clarification. I now rise on a question of privilege before 
orders of the day. Before orders of the day I rise, Mr. Speaker, 
to raise a question of privilege according with the rules of this 
Assembly and in accordance with the parliamentary authorities. 
 
I’m aware that while Beauchesne’s states that a question of 
privilege must be indicated one hour prior to the normal sitting 
time, the rules of the Assembly specify that notice should be 
given two hours. Let me correct that. Whereas I gave you notice 
one hour prior, there is a requirement of two hours. 
 
I advised you in writing of my intention to raise a question of 
privilege earlier today as soon as I was apprised of the issue that 
I am addressing here. I believe that this matter is  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1773 
 

of such serious concern, and that with respect, I would like to 
suggest that a waiver of the two-hour notice is in order, and I 
will leave that, with respect, with you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday the government gave first reading to a number of 
Bills. And many of those Bills were not printed and they were 
not tabled and they were not distributed to members. And while 
that is not unknown in this Assembly, as I said earlier, in raising 
my point of order, it is rare. 
 
But one of those Bills is the one listed on today’s order paper as 
Bill 55 to establish the public participation program. Instead of 
waiting until the Bill was properly printed and tabled in the 
legislature for all members to see, however, the government 
gave a few copies to the press very late yesterday afternoon. 
 
I submit, Mr. Speaker, that by distributing copies before the Bill 
was tabled in the Assembly and available to all members, the 
minister committed a breach of privilege. 
 
I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to Beauchesne’s Fifth Edition, article 
16, which defines “privilege” as follows: 
 

. . . the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each 
(member) collectively . . . and the Members of each House 
individually, without which they could not discharge their 
functions . . . 

 
He states further: 
 
The privileges of Parliament are rights which are “absolutely 
necessary for the due execution of its powers,” . . . and are 
enjoyed by individual Members, because the House cannot 
perform its functions without (the) unimpeded use of the 
services of its Members. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan elected all the 
members of this Assembly, on both sides of the House, to 
consider Bills of public importance. There can be no such 
consideration if the Bills are not printed, not tabled in this 
Assembly, and not given to members. 
 
I submit to you, sir, that by giving copies of the Bill to some 
members of the press yesterday afternoon before providing any 
copy to members, constitutes a breach of privilege by the 
Minister of Public Participation. 
 
I’m aware of the appropriate role and the important function 
played by the Speaker in such cases pursuant to Beauchesne’s, 
article 84, and rule 6(2) of this Assembly. And accordingly, Mr. 
Speaker, I respectfully urge you to find that there is in this case, 
a prima facie case of privilege, after which I shall move an 
appropriate motion in order that the legislature itself may take 
the appropriate action. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if the facts as set out by 
the hon. member are in fact true, I would suggest that there 
might indeed be a case of breach of privilege in the 
circumstances. However, in talking with the minister, he  

is not aware that there have been advance copies given to 
anyone. That’s not to say that there wasn’t an advance copy 
given to someone or maybe more than one. I don’t know. 
 
I would invite Mr. Speaker to investigate the allegations as set 
out by the hon. member and bring his ruling back to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I received a copy of the notice of the point of 
privilege at 12:59 today, for which I thank the hon. member 
from Regina North East. Notwithstanding the fact that the 
notice was received after the deadline, I am prepared to rule on 
the matter at this time. The point raised by the hon. member is 
not a new circumstance, and I refer all hon. members to a ruling 
of the Chair of December 4, 1975, and I quote: 
 
(1445) 
 

It has been the custom of the Assembly that when a 
minister is going to make an important announcement 
while the Assembly is sitting, he does so in the Assembly 
before making the announcement outside the Assembly. 
The custom or practice is based on the principle that the 
members should be advised of new policies before the 
public generally. 

 
This is a Speaker’s ruling of March 22, 1967, found in the 
Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on page 
255. 
 

The same custom has usually applied to the distribution of 
Bills. This custom has grown up as a courtesy to the 
members of the Assembly that they should receive copies 
of the Bill before general distribution of the Bill to the 
public. 

 
However, neither the rules or the precedents require that the 
Bills are to be kept confidential until introduction in the 
Assembly. For further clarification of this point, I refer hon. 
members to other precedents of this House, namely dated 
January 19, 1976 and April 5, 1976. 
 
I therefore rule that the hon. member for Regina North East 
does not have a point of privilege, but caution all hon. members 
that the usual courtesies shown to the Assembly should be 
maintained. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 39 — An Act to 
amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, we are on Bill 39, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. I spoke on it yesterday and I 
indicated at that time that I wanted to take a look at  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1774 
 

the remarks which the minister had made when Hansard was 
made available. I have done so. 
 
I indicated at that time our concern with the severe cut-backs 
that the government has brought about in revenue-sharing 
funding, and I indicated to the minister that I would be having a 
lot of questions of him when it came to specific cases, as well 
as to the total approach of the government including the kind of 
revenue-sharing formula that is being applied. I can ask those 
questions only in the committee, when the Bill comes to 
committee, and I will be prepared to do that. For now we’re 
prepared to concur that the Bill should go to the committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 42 — An Act to 
amend The Controverted Municipal Elections Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I will not pursue the debate 
on this any further. I indicated to the minister yesterday the 
questions that I will be asking of him. The principle of the Bill 
is something we agree with in the opposition. We have no 
objection to the principle but there are some specifics which I 
think need some clarification, and I will be doing that when the 
Bill is in committee. And so for now we are again prepared to 
let the Bill go to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 
amend The Residential Tenancies Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. This Bill 
is typical of this PC government. This Bill 38, to amend The 
Residential Tenancy Act, really purports to befriend renters and 
tenants, when in reality it does them in. It does them no service 
by making the amendments that are proposed by this particular 
legislation. 
 
This legislation, as the government has indicated, abolishes the 
Rent Appeal Commission. But it really does more than this. 
What really is behind this, Mr. Speaker, is a betrayal of renters 
and a failure to protect them from inordinate and unfair fees and 
manipulations by landlords. 
 
This legislation is really stacked in favour of landlords and 
against tenants. It allows for tenants to file complaints with the 
Rentalsman’s office, but lo and behold, they now have to do it 
at their own initiation and they have to conduct their own 
investigation. 
 
The investigatory powers of the Rentalsman’s office are gone 
with this legislation, gone the way of the wind. And that means 
that tenants have to do their own investigation, marshal their 
own evidence, produce their own facts, argue their own case 
before the appeal board put up by this legislation. And that 
simply isn’t good  

enough for most tenants. 
 
This legislation then, sets tenants adrift on a landlord sea of 
legislation. It’s part of deregulation, Mr. Speaker. It’s part of 
the deliberate, calculated strategy of this government to 
deregulate and abrogate its own responsibilities and to privatize 
the conduct of business and government business, public 
business, the public welfare, into the hands of individual 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan families. 
 
It’s analogous, essentially, to what happened with the 
prescription drug program. That was really privatization of the 
provision of health care onto the shoulders of the individual. 
This legislation privatizes the provision of protection for renters 
onto their own shoulders. 
 
And we on this side of the House believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is a positive role for the government to play in protecting 
renters from inordinate rent increases, from manipulatory 
practices, from predatory practices on the part of landlords, 
when it comes to the refunding of rental deposits. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that most renters are ill-equipped 
to conduct an investigation against a landlord. It’s not 
uncommon for landlords to own any number of rental 
properties, often in large blocks; to have their own expensive 
legal counsel to protect and to defend them; to take rental 
deposits and to simply put them into a bank account, and even 
now, to bank on the fact that tenants will not go through the 
hassle with the Office of the Rentalsman to secure their deposit 
back when they’re entitled to it, because they have to go 
through so many hurdles in terms of approaching the 
commission and getting an investigation going. That’s a 
problem already now, but how much more will it be a problem 
when tenants have to initiate and conduct that investigation 
themselves. 
 
Not only this, Mr. Speaker, not only do they have to conduct it 
themselves, but they now have to pay a fee for this kind of 
appeal. And this is really uncalled for and really unfair in that 
this is costly for renters when they’ve had to put up a rental 
deposit to begin with. We all know that most people who are 
renting aren’t in their own homes, aren’t home owners, 
precisely because they aren’t in that circumstance to be able to 
afford it. 
 
But now they’re going to be asked, with this legislation, to 
further pay for government services, that they should be 
provided for by the taxpayers and the public purse, out of their 
pocket and at their own initiative for their own protection. We 
believe that the government should be providing this service. 
 
This is an intimidating process, to conduct an investigation and 
to go up against your landlord, for most renters — the kind of 
process that most renters are not going to be prepared to initiate 
for precisely that reason. Not only is it costly and intimidating, 
but it’s fundamentally unnecessary. 
 
We believe, as I said earlier, that this sort of public function 
should not be privatized on to the backs of individual renters; 
that there is a positive role for the rent  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1775 
 

commission to fulfil on the part of all renters in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What this legislation will do, Mr. Speaker, is essentially make 
rent relations a matter of dispute for small claims court. There’s 
no longer any enforcement function for the Office of the 
Rentalsman. They’re there simply to collect fees from 
consumers. God only knows who will enforce this legislation. 
No one from the government or from the Office of the 
Rentalsman will be around to enforce it; tenants won’t be able 
to enforce it. Even if they initiate a case, even if they pay for the 
case, even if they go to a lawyer for legal advice, there’s no 
guarantee that there’s going to be enforcement. 
 
This is not responsible legislation. Mr. Speaker, in our view. 
We will be opposing it. And before I go any further in 
addressing it, I would like to adjourn debate so that I can do 
more consultation with people who will be affected by this 
legislation. I think that that is only appropriate. And it’s obvious 
that the government has not conducted a consultation with 
renters, but rather with landlords on this particular legislation. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 44 — An Act to 
amend The Department of Finance Act, 1983 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in 
his explanatory remarks the Minister of Finance said that the 
Bill before us was, and I quote him, “simply to address a 
long-standing technical difficulty with the Act.” Later the 
minister went on to indicate that the amendment “simply 
clarifies.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that minister uses those kinds of words, tries 
to pass off an Act dealing with the revenues of the province, 
dealing with the finances of the province, tries to pass off 
amendments as innocuous, that’s when I get concerned; that’s 
when all members of this side of the House get concerned; 
that’s when the public of Saskatchewan gets concerned, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because you have to remember that this is the minister who ran 
a government for some months in 1987 on special warrants, 
until forced to bring a budget forward. You have to remember 
that this is the minister who has set records for late tabling of 
the Public Accounts and denies the public the right of 
information on a timely basis. You have to remember, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is the Minister of Finance from a government 
that has earned a special place in history for prompting the 
Provincial Auditor to state, and I quote the Provincial Auditor: 
 

I find it regrettable that, for the first time since my 
appointment, I must include in my annual report 
comments concerning a lack of co-operation in obtaining 
information that I consider necessary. 

 
(1500) 
 
And let’s remember, Mr. Speaker, that this is a Minister of  

Finance who projected a $400 million deficit before an election, 
then conceded that there is a $1.2 billion deficit after that 
election, and we are now finding out that in actual fact, that that 
deficit is $1.4 billion. This is a Minister of Finance who is $1 
billion out. That’s the Minister of Finance we are talking about. 
 
This Minister of Finance is not to be believed when it comes to 
the fiscal management of this province. And now he asks us to 
believe, and he asks the people of Saskatchewan to believe, that 
what he proposes is simply an innocuous minor amendment to 
The Department of Finance Act. 
 
And as I look at this amendment, as I look at the Bill before us, 
Mr. Speaker, it states that, or indicates that where special 
warrants are issued, that rather than the special warrants having 
to be included in the next Appropriation Act or which can be 
interpreted under certain circumstances to mean an interim 
supply measure, he says rather than do that, we want to amend 
it so that if we spend money by special warrants, we shouldn’t 
really have to report on that or include that in The 
Appropriation Act until the Estimates are tabled in the next 
ensuing year. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, as I look forward to 1991, as I look forward 
to 1991 I can see, for example, a government that might table a 
budget that year, which grossly underestimates, grossly 
underestimates certain expenditures in order to present a picture 
of a budget that is balanced or perhaps shows a large surplus, so 
that they can say to the people of Saskatchewan, well, isn’t this 
a great budget? but in the course of doing so, grossly 
underestimates certain expenditures, and then would propose to 
deal with these under-expenditures through the course of 
special warrants during the course of the year — and saying 
then that we shouldn’t consider those during the course of 
interim supply Bills which might be before this Assembly, but 
simply to leave those until the next estimates come forward, 
until the next budget comes forward — the year after the year 
after an election. 
 
What we’re seeing here, Mr. Speaker, is a way for this 
government to legitimize the kinds of things that it did in the 
last election campaign, and I say that all members of this House 
have very grave concerns about what that minister is doing. 
And when he says that it’s an innocuous, minor amendment, I 
say that perhaps there’s much more to it than this, and I find 
myself very concerned about the Bill that’s before us. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I listened to the 
member from Victoria talk about Bill 44, which on first blush is 
exactly three clauses long and about 40 words long, I had some 
real cause for concern. I remember over the past while some of 
the details that the member from Victoria relayed with respect 
to this Minister of Finance and what he has done with respect to 
our . . . management of our province. 
 
He talked about the fact that the Minister of Finance, in 1986, 
leading up to the provincial election, indicated to the people of 
this province that there would be a budget deficit of $389 
million. After the election was over and  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1776 
 

the dust was cleared, we have seen over a billion dollars, over 
and above that that was spent to re-elect the Conservative 
government in this province, that the minister did not account 
for — that’s a billion dollars. Instead of $389 million deficit, 
Mr. Speaker, the deficit for that fiscal year was $1.4 billion — 
one billion more than the minister originally projected. 
 
And what that means to me, Mr. Speaker, is it lends and 
reinforces the air of incredibility that this government has, and 
this minister has. We’ve seen the Minister of Finance 
participate in the pork-barrel politics and the patronage. He’s up 
to . . . he’s so far deep into the pork-barrel you can’t even see 
him, and his colleagues are in the same position. 
 
And when you see those kinds of things with regard to the 
political appointments and the amount of money they’re getting, 
and you see the fact that the Minister of Finance in this 
Conservative government made commitments during the 
election campaign to eliminate the gas tax, and the Premier of 
this province himself, standing outside of this Legislative 
Building, in full view of the public and television cameras, in 
May 1982, promising that the gas tax will be abolished — he 
abolished it; promising as well, Mr. Speaker, and you may 
recall this in clear terms, that as long as there was a 
Conservative government in this province, we would never, 
ever see the reinstitution of the gas tax — well, we’ve seen that 
reinstituted, Mr. Speaker, and we see it increased as well. 
 
I recall vividly, Mr. Speaker, the promises that personal income 
tax would be cut by this government. They promised a 10 per 
cent cut across the board. Instead of that, we’ve not seen a 
decrease in personal income tax, Mr. Speaker, but we’ve seen a 
massive increase, and in fact an additional tax on personal 
income, called the flat tax, levied on workers and families in 
this province. 
 
We’ve seen as well, Mr. Speaker, promises from this 
government and the Minister of Finance to eliminate the sales 
tax, to eliminate the 5 per cent E&H tax in this province. On the 
contrary, we have not seen the elimination or the reduction of 
the sales tax, Mr. Speaker; we’ve seen an increase of 40 per 
cent, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, of all goods purchased in 
this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what that does, along with the remarks from 
the member from Victoria, is re-emphasize and remind the 
people of this province, and in particular the opposition, what 
kind of government we have. They say one thing and they do 
the opposite. It’s a government of opposites, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this Bill, the Minister of Finance gives a reason for 
introducing an amendment to not allow discussion of special 
warrants in the current session, because he calls it a technical 
amendment which will facilitate and make his job easier. Well 
you got it right. It will make his job easier, because now he can 
hide special warrants leading up to election years for longer 
periods than we’ve even had them in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there’s some very, very incredible things 
and some incredible motives with respect to this Bill. And I 
have a real suspicion as to the motive of the  

minister; I have a real suspicion as to the remarks that he’s 
made. And I’d like to, as member and former revenue critic, 
member from Regina North West, I think we have to undertake 
a clear scrutiny, a timely scrutiny in questioning of all special 
warrants as they are issued, not a year or further down the road. 
 
And I believe the Minister of Finance is hiding the real reasons 
for introducing this amendment and wanting to see this 
amendment go through. 
 
So as a result of those considerations, Mr. Speaker, I would beg 
leave to adjourn the debate, or I’d move we adjourn the debate 
on this issue. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to explain to you, and to all members of the legislature, the 
purpose of these amendments to The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Act. 
 
In 1986 the government established a dental plan for 
Saskatchewan teachers in accordance with the provision of the 
collective agreement for that year, the new agreement for ’87 
through ’89, which was signed several weeks ago, includes a 
number of changes to the plan, and the purpose of these 
amendments is to simply enable the new provisions of the 
teachers’ dental plan to take effect. 
 
There are three specific amendments, Mr. Speaker. First, it was 
recognized some time ago that certified teachers employed in 
those private high schools which qualify for government grants 
should be included in this dental plan. These teachers are now 
being included, retroactive to the date of the plan’s 
implementation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Second, teachers who are on a temporary contract of 
employment with the school board, as opposed to regular 
contract, will become eligible for dental plan benefits on 
January 1, 1989. 
 
And finally, the required period of service before eligibility for 
benefits commences is being reduced from 80 days to 50 days, 
effective January 1, 1989. 
 
As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are all 
necessary in order that changes to the teachers’ dental plan, as 
included in the new teacher contract, can be legally 
implemented. 
 
I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 41, And Act to 
amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the minister’s 
remarks and indicated that this Bill was designed to provide the 
legislative authority for what has been negotiated between the 
teachers’ federation and the  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1777 
 

government trustee team. 
 
I would mention that we are in agreement with the changes, 
particularly because it expands the dental plan to private 
schools and to temporary teachers, in addition to the regular 
contract. 
 
I also want to mention that we on this side of the House have 
been looking for ways to expand dental service to all residents 
of Saskatchewan, slowly, and this is happening to more and 
more residents. That was why we brought in the school dental 
plan to begin with, which this government now saw fit to get 
out of the way. But nevertheless this particular thing is moving 
in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a very 
specific Bill. It has absolutely nothing to do with the 
school-based dental plan. My remarks were very specific in 
second reading, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask you to rule the 
member opposite out of order because he is clearly straying 
away from the content of the Bill and my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
really should not be so sensitive about this. Surely he should 
understand that the member opposite is talking about the Bill. 
He is indicating that — and I’m speaking to the point of order 
— he is indicating that this Bill deals with a dental plan for a 
certain group of people, and the dental plans for all people 
would be of some merit, and in fact of great importance. I don’t 
consider that to be point of order. And I would be surprised, Mr. 
Speaker, if you thought it was a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Debates and their relevancy to issues 
being discussed, of course, are always of an issue an open to 
interpretation. 
 
Let me just say this about that. Hon. members should, inasmuch 
as possible, try to make certain that their remarks, whether they 
are in second readings or motions or whatever debates, that 
they’re relevant to the issue being discussed and that longbows 
should be avoided if possible. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
mentioning, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side favour the 
expansion of dental programs to teachers, to all employee 
groups. We hope that everybody in this province will eventually 
be able to achieve this type of work benefit at their place of 
work or at their place of employment. 
 
I did make contact with the teachers’ federation, and they 
indicated to me that, although they had been consult — of 
course they took part in a process — they had not had an 
opportunity yet to peruse the Bill to make sure that all 
provisions were in there, as they understand it, according to the 
negotiations. I want to give them an opportunity to get back to 
us on this, at which time then I would make concluding remarks 
on it. So I would move adjournment of debate on this motion. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
(1515) 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to establish the Public Participation 
Program 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to 
present the second reading of Bill No. 55. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I’d like hon. 
members to please carry on the debate after I have left, which I 
am about to do. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 
1981 

 
Mr. Chairman: — I ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have one official 
with me, Mr. Gerry Tegart, who is a lawyer with the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Simard: — We’re on section 1 now, Mr. Chairman? 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what this Bill does is changes the appeal 
procedure that doctors are entitled to under the existing 
legislation on matters of discipline for unprofessional conduct 
and on matters of competency to continue practising in the 
medical profession. 
 
Presently, in the existing legislation, after the doctors have had 
a review in front of their peers at a discipline committee, there 
is an appeal to a tribunal on trial de novo; the appeal is by way 
of a trial de novo. A trial de novo, Mr. Chairman, is a 
completely new trial. In other words, the evidence is heard 
again. 
 
This appeal, Mr. Chairman . . . the tribunal rather, I should say, 
consists of a couple of lay appointments, non-medical 
appointments, or a judge and an appointment by the university, 
and there’s room for another appointment as well, the 
appointment by the university, I believe, that could be a doctor, 
but not necessarily. But I think for the most part there’s one 
medical person on the tribunal. 
 
The minister had indicated in second reading that the reason for 
the amendment was to keep the legislation in line with the 
intent of The Medical Profession Act, which is peer review. The 
existing legislation however has that peer review at the 
discipline committee — that will still be maintained. But in 
addition, it has review by a tribunal, with some non-medical 
individuals on the tribunal. In other words, there’s provision 
through this tribunal for consumer input into the question of 
disciplining the medical profession. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1778 
 

We had some concern with respect to this Bill because there 
was mixed feelings amongst the medical profession as to 
whether or not the tribunal and the trial de novo should be 
eliminated, and we wanted to put those concerns on record. We 
felt, Mr. Chairman, that it would be more advisable to put 
forward an amendment which allowed an appeal by trial de 
novo, but made the trial de novo an option upon the application 
of either party. And we will be putting those amendments 
forward today in Committee of the Whole. 
 
I just want to say for the record, that the first amendment that 
will be moved with respect section 3 will be of a technical 
nature, but it is necessary inasmuch as it deals with the latter 
part of the amendment, which is an amendment to allow an 
appeal to a tribunal on trial de novo. 
 
That amendment that is the sort of the heart of the matter 
basically says: 
 

Upon notice of the appeal being filed, the minister shall: 
 

request the Chief Justice of the court to appoint a judge of 
that court, which judge shall preside at the hearing of the 
appeal; 

 
request The University of Saskatchewan to appoint a 
member: and 

 
appoint another person: 

 
to hear the appeal, and those persons constitute the appeal 
tribunal. 

 
So it reinstitutes the appeal tribunal, Mr. Chairman. 
 

As soon as the appeal tribunal has been appointed, the 
minister shall deliver to each member of the appeal 
tribunal a copy of the notice of appeal. 

 
The local registrar of the court at the judicial centre where 
the appeal is to be heard shall act as registrar for the 
appeal tribunal and shall have custody of all documents 
relating to or concerning the appeal. 

 
The latter part of that amendment says that: 
 

The appeal shall, on the application of either party, 
proceed: 

 
by trial de novo, to be conducted in accordance with The 
Queen’s Bench Rules relating to trials of civil proceedings 
in the court except that there shall be no discovery as to 
documents and no examination for discovery; or 

 
on a question of fact or law arising out of the record of 
proceedings before the discipline committee. 

 
The key words being that the appeal shall be on application of 
either party, proceed by trial de novo or  

proceed on the transcript. And that’s the intent of that 
amendment. 
 
I have chosen to read it into the record at this time in the event 
that the consequential amendments to section 3, which will 
come first, because section 3 of this Bill comes up first, are 
rejected by the government. I want the record to show that we 
were going to move this amendment. We will not be able to 
move that amendment, however, if our earlier consequential 
amendments to section 3 are rejected. And that’s why I’m 
reading it into the record at this particular time. 
 
I have some questions then, Mr. Chairman, of the minister, with 
respect to the legislation. And I would like to know of the 
minister whether or not he knows whether the entire process of 
appeals and discipline in front of the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons is being reviewed at this time or whether there is the 
intention to review it in the near future. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Louise, I didn’t get the gist of your 
question, exact question. Sorry. 
 
Mr. Simard: — I will repeat the question for the minister, Mr. 
Chairman. Is the minister aware of whether or not the process 
of disciplining doctors, the process in front of the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons and at the discipline committees, is he 
aware as to whether or not this is being reviewed at this time or 
whether it will be reviewed in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as it relates to a specific 
review within the college as to how they do or how they might 
conduct their peer review process, I believe there’s an ongoing 
sort of process at any event, and there may well be. And that’s 
about as far as I can say about it now, because it certainly is 
something that is internal to the college in terms of how they 
will conduct their peer review process. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just might put on the record and just speak for 
a moment about the need for this. We did some of this in 
second reading, and just somewhat in reply to the hon. 
member’s concerns — I guess you could characterize them as 
— that she’s mentioned here. 
 
In coming to the decision to bring forward a Bill, or this 
specific Bill, there was a good deal of consultation and a very 
good deal of discussion, Mr. Chairman, with the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. And certainly the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) has had some discussion 
with me as well, although in this case certainly it’s the college 
that we deal with because it is the college that’s responsible for, 
first of all, the protection of the public, and also are responsible 
for the review by peers of members of their profession. 
 
And the balance that we must come to, the balance they must 
come to, and within the college certainly, and that which is 
provided for in their Act but certainly which is part of the 
professional judgement there, the balance must be between the 
protection of the public from what we could call substandard 
practice on the one hand, and protection of the individual 
physician who is subject to appeal proceedings or is subject to 
scrutiny by his peers  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1779 
 

and by his college. 
 
So there’s always that balance, and from time to time it’s a 
difficult one, and it certainly is one that we all have to be 
cognizant of, and I know the member is raising that. 
 
In effect, Mr. Chairman, what we’ve done in bringing this Bill 
forward, after the consultation that I refer to, is we’ve brought 
forward a process which we believe, and which the college very 
strongly believes, is a better process than what is there now; is a 
process that has been successful and in fact is, at this day, 
successful in almost every jurisdiction across this country. And 
the process we’re asking for here is that same process. 
 
The amendments that the member refers to, which would have 
the basic effect of maintaining the status quo the way it is now, 
would basically, I believe, take the present status, the trial de 
novo status, in virtually all cases. That would be the net effect 
of what would happen, because the tribunal that is in place in 
the present legislation has been for some period of time used — 
if I might characterize it this way — as a delay tactic in the 
process. And that’s fine. I know that works in the . . . I mean, I 
know that goes on in the legal profession and through courts 
and so on, that there can be some reason for that. But I know 
that that’s the case and I believe it to be the case and I know the 
college believes it to be the case, as do many physicians. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I guess what I’m saying is it’s extremely important when 
you’re trying to balance this protection of the public and the 
protection of the individual physician and coming to some 
semblance of balance which we believe this Bill, as it’s 
presented, does. And we have to look, and we did look, to 
places in other jurisdictions in other areas where this very 
process works well and continues to work well. 
 
Now what I’m saying to the member of the House, Mr. 
Chairman, is that I would ask all members to vote for the Bill as 
it now stands because I believe, and the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons believe, through long consultation, that it is the 
proper course to take. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Muller: — I would ask leave of Assembly to allow me to 
introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you, 21 grade 
7 and 8 students from Wild Rose, Saskatchewan, some of the 
most beautiful country up there north of Holbein between 
Prince Albert and Shellbrook, chaperons, Mrs. Anne Curran, 
Mrs. Sandy Shaw, and their bus driver, Eddie Nelson. 
 
The reason I left the teacher to the last, Mr. John McKenzie — I 
was at a banquet last Saturday night where  

he spoke after me, and I said that I would be speaking here in 
the legislature, introducing him today, and that I’d get my 
rebuttal. But he was very kind to me last Saturday night at that 
banquet. 
 
And I want to welcome them here. I hope they had a good trip 
down. I hope their trip is educational and I hope they have a 
good trip home. I would ask all members to welcome them in 
the traditional way. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I’d like to join the member from 
Shellbrook-Torch in welcoming the students from Wild Rose 
School, and particularly in welcoming Mr. McKenzie, who is 
very active in the soccer association in the city of Prince Albert. 
I hope that you all have a very enjoyable time and that you have 
a safe journey home. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 
1981 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, with 
respect to the comments that you made as to your reasons for 
introducing this Bill, I would like to reply by saying that this 
right to a trial de novo has been there for doctors in 
Saskatchewan for many, many, many years. There was only a 
brief period when it was repealed by Thatcher and then 
reinstituted again in ’81. So the right . . . Not in this particular 
form, Mr. Minister, but nevertheless, the concept of a trial de 
novo was there, and I think we have to acknowledge that. It’s a 
long-standing right that doctors have had in Saskatchewan. 
 
The other point that I wish to make about the amendments that 
we’re proposing — simply maintaining the status quo — I 
would suggest to you that that’s not the case, because I have 
consulted with lawyers who have said to me that they would 
choose to go on a transcript, and would be using the trial de 
novo only when they felt that their client . . . that the trial had 
not been fair from their point of view initially, and then they 
would be opting for another trial. 
 
There may be some lawyers or doctors who will want a second 
trial regardless, but I have been advised by people that they 
would be going on the transcript, would, in some cases, perhaps 
prefer the transcript. So I don’t think it’s fair to say that it 
would simply maintain the status quo. 
 
Now with respect to a review of the laws by medical profession, 
I have been advised that there is going to be a review of the 
laws relating to discipline, with respect to the medical 
profession. Now perhaps I have been misinformed, but I have 
been advised that that is the case. So I am assuming that that 
information is correct. And if it is correct, I think the minister 
had an obligation to find out whether or not this was in effect 
the case, and if it was, to hold these amendments to see exactly 
what was going to be suggested by the council of the College of 
Physicians  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1780 
 

and Surgeons and by the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Now the minister has indicated that he doesn’t really know 
what’s happening, and I wish to suggest to the minister that this 
should have been determined before he proceeded with these 
amendments. 
 
The other question I have of the minister, Mr. Chairman, is that 
I’m wondering whether the minister agrees to consumer input 
into the governing and management of the medical profession 
and health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 
direct question to the member, yes, I agree with consumer input, 
and it’s the very reason that there is consumer representation. 
And I know, as the member’s very well aware, on the council of 
Physicians and Surgeons there are consumer or non-physician 
representatives there. I believe the hon. member was one of 
those people at one time in the province’s recent history. 
 
And frankly, we’ll be coming forward with other health 
professional Acts soon, in the nursing profession and others, 
that will ask for and that will call for consumer representation 
on the council of those professions. So certainly I agree with 
that concept. 
 
If you’re leading to the next question which says well, if you 
believe in the concept, then why not have consumer 
representation on the tribunal, you know, the next step, as it is 
in existing legislation. And I suppose the answer to that is you 
have your consumer representation on the council, the peer 
review process is done by the council, and I believe that the 
process that we’ve outlined in the Bill certainly is considered by 
the College of Physicians to be very overdue now. And with the 
consultation that we’ve had with the College, I am satisfied on 
behalf of the Department of Health, and from that position on 
behalf of the citizens, that the balance that I spoke of earlier is 
achieved by this Bill. 
 
Mr. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you’re quite right . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Excuse me, Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would like leave to 
introduce some students that have just arrived. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
through you, and to members of the Assembly, 45 students 
from two schools in Yorkton, Saskatchewan — grades 4 and 6 
from Angus Spice, and the grade 4's from Fairview School, a 
total of 45 students altogether. 
 
And I would just like to welcome all here to the legislature this 
afternoon, we hope you’ve enjoyed your trip to Regina and I 
hope you enjoy the proceedings that are taking place in the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 

Students, we’re in Committee of the Whole, which is debating 
the Bills that come to the legislature. And we’re debating today 
an Act, Bill 12, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, and 
the opposition member from Regina Lakeview is questioning 
the Minister of Health on the contents of the Bill. So that’s what 
is taking place. I will look forward to meeting you at 4 o’clock 
for pictures and to have some refreshments with you right after 
that. So I would ask all members to please welcome these 
students from Yorkton to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
 Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 
1981 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I take 
it then that you agree that the appeal tribunal allowed for 
consumer input into the disciplinary process and the governing 
of the medical profession. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I said in my earlier 
answer, while I agree with you that under the tribunal that is 
now in existence there was some consumer representation, I 
don’t believe, nor does the college believe, that there was a 
necessity for consumer representation at that additional stage, 
let’s say. Because let’s recognize, and I think you do recognize 
what the purpose of the appeal was in the first place — any 
appeal in this kind of case. And it’s important to recognize that 
the purpose of the appeal is for the judge, in this case and what 
we’re proposing, to determine whether the college is operating 
under the proper framework in making its decision. And I 
believe that a Court of Queen’s Bench judge is the proper forum 
for that to rest. 
 
Mr. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have in effect 
acknowledged then, that by the repeal of this appeal tribunal 
you are removing an element of consumer input into the 
governing of the medical profession. I don’t believe that fact 
can be disputed. 
 
As to whether or not a Queen’s Bench judge is appropriate, I 
simply wish to say that on the tribunal there was a Queen’s 
Bench judge appointment as well, but you also had input from 
other individuals, from consumer representatives and probably 
from a doctor, so you had more input from the public, and as 
well your Queen’s Bench judge. And what you’ve done is 
eliminated that public input, not to mention the fact that a 
long-standing right that was there for doctors is being removed. 
 
Now I understand the reasons for doing it, the fact that there 
were delays with respect to the appeal process — and those 
delays cause me concern as well — but, Mr. Minister, with 
respect to my earlier comments, those delays are not solely 
caused by the appeal process. There are other ways along the 
process where there are delays, and it’s for that reason I feel 
you should have insisted on the whole process being reviewed 
completely and updated, if you like, before you removed a right 
from doctors and before you removed consumer input on  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1781 
 

behalf of the public. That process of review should have been 
completed. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to know . . . Because you’ve 
indicated in this discussion here today that the option is not 
acceptable to you, having in mind the fact that some people 
would exercise the option for trial de novo, others for transcript, 
would you please advise why you see that option as not a good 
option for the government to choose? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I’ve indicated, 
when you mention the option, I believe that the . . . and while 
you will say, I’ve discussed this with some lawyers who say 
they would, and their preferred option would be, in most cases, 
to use the transcript and so on, I believe that by giving the 
option — and just because of the nature of the work that is 
being done here — that there would be significant delay and 
that they would be used as a delay option. 
 
The second thing is this, Mr. Chairman. I think it’s important 
that all members understand this as well. The only professional 
Act for professions that are governed in the way in which the 
medical profession is — and there are several others that we’ll 
deal with in a few moments that are . . . or whenever we’ll deal 
with, some time today — that are contingent upon this one, that 
have this type of tribunal process, is this medical profession and 
other health care professionals. 
 
Legal profession, for example, does not have that. And the hon. 
member would . . . maybe would suggest to me that it isn’t as 
important. I know she’s a member of the legal profession. But 
in any case, I think that they’re both important, very important 
to the well-being of the public, and so on. 
 
And I think that both professions have had a good history, 
frankly, of . . . their peer review processes have worked well 
and will continue to work well, and I believe that this process, 
as we’ve outlined it in this Bill, will accomplish what the public 
will require, and it will also accomplish looking after the rights 
of the individual physician. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the legal profession is not 
unimportant, but the fact of the matter is the government does 
not pour the sort of money into the legal profession that it does 
into the medical profession. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, on an individual basis they don’t. The people of 
Saskatchewan don’t express the same sort of interest . . . I 
mean, the letters that I received before I was opposition Health 
critic were largely in the area of health, Mr. Minister. So the 
people of Saskatchewan are interested in health; it’s a major 
concern of the people of Saskatchewan. And so I would like to 
distinguish it on that basis, and that is one of the reasons why I 
believe there is an appeal by trial de novo in existing 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I take it from your comments that you’re not 
going to be agreeing to our amendments. I have a second 
amendment that I will be proposing, and that is an appeal  

on the application of either party to proceed by trial de novo or 
on the transcript solely to a Queen’s Bench judge. 
 
Now we prefer the first option, there’s no question about it. But 
we would like, in order to preserve the right that has been 
long-standing for doctors, to put forward the second option if 
the minister, as he has indicated, is not prepared to go with the 
first option, are you prepared to . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Would you . . . Do you just want . . . 
The member wanted me to reply with her. I am prepared to go 
with either option. 
 
Mr. Simard: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well what I would way to you is that 
the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I know you’re not. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m glad to hear that the member from 
Regina Centre is so perceptive. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we believe strongly, and the medical profession 
in this province believes strongly, that the Bill, as it’s presented 
to the House today, is a system which will work well and which 
has worked well elsewhere. 
 
Just let me say, Mr. Speaker, that the arguments presented by 
the member from Lakeview as it relates to health care being 
very important to the people and so on, I certainly agree with 
that. But while those arguments . . . The arguments that she 
talks about in terms of the public being concerned about health 
care and the amount of dollars that are spent in health care are 
arguments for a system which works well, and they’re 
arguments for a system that must protect the public; I agree 
with that. And they’re arguments for a system which must 
protect the individual physician who is practising medicine in 
the province; I agree with that. And they, frankly, are arguments 
for the system which I am proposing here because this system 
works well elsewhere. I will work well, and work well for a 
number of years in some form here in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I guess the short answer to the question that member has 
about whether or not we will be in agreement with the 
amendment that the member is suggesting she will put forward, 
the answer to that, Mr. Speaker, is that we will not. 
 
Mr. Simard: — Okay. I simply want to say, Mr. Chairman, 
that the amendments we are proposing are very reasonable. 
They are certainly a compromise position. They recognize the 
need to deal with the delays. At the same time, they preserve 
the doctor’s right to a trial de novo in cases where he or she 
feels it is necessary. At the same time, they preserve consumer 
input where the medical profession or the doctor feels it is 
necessary. 
 
And we feel that the amendments we are proposing are 
reasonable and are a very good option for the government to be 
accepting. And I’m very disappointed that the government has 
indicated it won’t be going along with our amendments. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1782 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to clause 3, I want 
the . . . I wish to move: 
 

That section 3 of the printed Bill, being Bill 12, be 
amended by striking out the words “appeal tribunal and,” 
and “court and,” and “where they occur therein.” 

 
And in so moving that, Mr. Chairman, I wish to state that that is 
a consequential amendment upon the further amendment that 
there be trial de novo to an appeal tribunal. 
 
Amendment negatives on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, because the earlier amendment 
was rejected, I am proposing a second amendment to section 7 
of the printed Bill: 
 

By adding immediately after subsection 62(2) thereof, the 
following subsection 2.1: 

 
The appeal shall, on the application of either party 
proceed: 

 
(a) by trial de novo, to be conducted in accordance with 

the Queen’s Bench rules relating to trials of civil 
proceedings in the court except that there shall be no 
discovery as to documents and no examination for 
discovery or; 

 
(b) on a question of fact or law arising out of the record of 

the proceedings before the discipline committee. 
 
This motion, Mr. Chairman, allows for an appeal either on trial 
de novo or on the transcript to a Queen’s Bench judge, which is 
the second of the two amendments that we wanted the 
government to agree to. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 18 
 

Shillington Goulet 
Tchorzewski Hagel 
Thompson Pringle 
Brockelbank Lyons 
Mitchell Calvert 
Simard Trew 
Kowalski Smart 

 
  
Solomon Van Mulligen 
Atkinson Koenker 
 

Nays — 28 
 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Sauder 
McLeod Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Lane Hopfner 
Taylor Petersen 
Smith Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Hodgins Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuck 
Klein Saxinger 
Pickering Britton 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, as I 
understand The Ophthalmic Dispensers Amendment Act is 
consequential upon amendments to The Medical Profession 
Act, and therefore I’d like to ask you whether or not the 
Ophthalmic Dispensers Association is in agreement with this 
legislation, because the last time I spoke to them, I believe they 
hadn’t met you on it at that time. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And if I 
could just clarify. I know during second reading debate, the 
member had indicated that she had talked to one of their 
representatives who said that there was something that they 
weren’t sure about with it, but that’s been cleared up. And I just 
say to the House now and to the hon. member, this association 
is in agreement with this Bill. One of their legal counsel had 
written a letter at one stage asking for something a little more 
than that, and that’s been resolved. And I just say to the House 
that this profession is in agreement. 
 
And just add one more thing, Mr. Chairman. This Bill, plus I 
believe three others that follow, while they may not be, in the 
classic sense of the word, consequential to The Medical 
Profession Act, they are to bring these professional Acts into 
the same format that has been adopted for The Medical 
Profession Act. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1783 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Denturists Act 
 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Dental Profession Act, 

1978 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Optometry Act, 1985 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Simard: — There are some other amendments in this Bill, 
other than those that are consequential upon amendments to The 
Medical Profession Act, or flow as a result of amendments to 
The Medical Profession Act. 
 
And I would like to ask the minister a general question with 
respect to the section of the Bill that allows for the association 
to specify a limit on the number of times an individual can fail 
an examination. That limit was not there before, and I believe 
this legislation gives the association the right to do so by 
by-law. Would the minister please advise what limit the 
association is intending to put? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Excuse me. Can I ask the hon. member 
to make specific reference to the section that you refer to? 
 
Mr. Simard: — The particular section that I have in mind is 
section 16 of the Act and it’s section 7 of the Bill. And what it 
does is section 7 of the Bill add the words, “subject to the 
by-laws.” The explanatory notes indicate that the reason for that 
is to allow for a future by-law to specify a limit on the number 
of times an individual can fail the examination. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed, Mr. Chairman, that it’s 
not uncommon, in various professions, for a profession to 
require a person, after having failed a particular exam a certain 
number of times, to be required to go to take further education 
or a refresher course or whatever before wanting to attempt the 
exam again. And that is in place in several other pieces of 
legislation, and the optometrists are contemplating that type of a 
change in their by-laws. 
 
Mr. Simard: — The explanatory note, Mr. Minister, says that it 
is to . . . The association will be specifying a limit on the 
number of times an individual can fail the examination. It does 
not say the individual could go back and take further courses 
and then resubmit for an exam. 
 
Have you discussed with the association what that limit will be 
and what their intent is with respect to the by-law? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the 
member that I have not had specific discussion as it relates to 
the specific number that they would contemplate, the number of 
times that one of their  

profession would be allowed to fail a particular exam before 
being required to go further. 
 
But I would say to the member — and I know that she knows 
this as well; I’ll just put it on the record — that the by-laws that 
we refer to here are by-laws which are subject to the approval of 
the Minister of Health. 
 
And, you know, if a by-law change came forward, that by-law 
change would have to lay out the specifics, and I would 
certainly review it at that stage, but not at this stage, in terms of 
what they are contemplating, as the profession will deal with it 
and then they’ll come forward to the by-laws. But I have not 
had, and I make it clear, I have not had specific discussion with 
this profession as to what they are contemplating or a specific 
number they’re suggesting. 
 
Mr. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would suggest before 
you bring an amendment into the House that you know what the 
association is intending to do with that amendment. 
 
But since you’ve neglected to do that, then can I get your 
undertaking that you will flag these by-laws when they come in 
to the government for the minister’s approval, and that you will 
ensure that the limit is not too strict so that it operates against 
the public interest? Can we have that assurance from you, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You have this assurance in that that’s 
the reason for the by-laws requiring approval of the Minister of 
Health for that very reason that you just cite. 
 
But in terms of the principle of bringing the amendment 
forward, the principle of allowing the profession to limit or to at 
least adopt in principle the right to limit the number of times 
that an individual may fail a particular exam before being 
required to go to further education or whatever, is a principle 
that I think is valid. And that’s why it’s here, without regard or 
without reference to a specific number that may be 
contemplated. 
 
The by-laws, as I’ve said, when they come forward for the 
approval of the minister, that is the time at which we look at 
and would look at, in the normal course, how their particular 
by-law may impact upon the public. 
 
Mr. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, it just seems to me that it 
would be much more thorough for you to have discussed with 
the association, or your officials to have discussed with the 
association, what limit they had in mind before the amendment 
was put forward. And I don’t wish to labour that point, but 
certainly I believe that the minister now has extra responsibility 
to make sure that that limit is not unreasonable. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I’ve said, Mr. Chairman, the 
principle that’s in this Bill that we are dealing with here today is 
a valid one in terms of the profession having the right to limit 
the number or to discuss the number that they would . . . 
(inaudible) . . . So the principle is a valid one without regard to 
the particular number and then the by-laws would be dealt with. 
 
The member says there’s a responsibility that lies with the  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1784 
 

holder of this office to be sure that that’s there for the protection 
of the public. I agree with that and carry out that duty with that 
in mind, certainly. 
 
(1615) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons 
who Perform Work of Electrical Installation or Sell 

Electrical Equipment 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, sitting beside me is Peter 
van Es, deputy minister of Environment and Public Safety; Rick 
Knoll, next to him, director of administration; and Nick Surtees, 
behind the deputy, director of administration. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for introducing 
your officials. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, this Bill had been referred to 
the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. I understand that it was 
brought back to the House for a matter of a technical 
amendment, and we’re happy to see this technical amendment 
go through, and would consider the Bill to be non-controversial. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That section 27 of the printed Bill be amended: 
 

(a) by striking out “gas” in subsection (3) and substituting 
“electrical”; and 

 
(b) and by striking out “gas-fitter” in subsection (4) and 

substituting “journeyman.” 
 
And as has already been explained, Mr. Speaker, that’s just a 
technical amendment to get things right. 
 
Clause 27 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 28 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend the Fire Prevention Act, 1980 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Same officials, Mr. Speaker, and this is 
a consequential to what’s going on in the whole  

inspection thing. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has indicated that 
this is consequential to what’s going on in the whole inspection 
change-over, a process to which I have indicated my opposition. 
 
The more substantive changes are happening in other Bills, and 
so therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would like to reserve our 
discussion for these more substantive Bills, but just to indicate 
that we will be opposing this Bill on the grounds that we are 
opposing changes being made in the other Bills. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 17 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 
Installations and Gas Equipment for Consumers 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with me, sitting beside 
me is Fred Bates, vice-president, human resources of 
SaskPower; Jim Mitchell, current director of gas and electrical 
branches of SaskPower; and Douglas Nunn, previous director of 
gas and electrical branches of SaskPower. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This Bill will shift 
the responsibility for the inspection of gas installations from the 
Department of the Environment and Public Safety over to 
SaskPower. I want to ask the minister to explain to the House 
why this is being done. Why the move from the Department of 
Environment and Public Safety over to SaskPower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Sorry. That’s one of the toughest 
questions I’ve ever had to deal with. As we talked about when 
the Bill was introduced, this was a decision taken by 
government to move the gas and electrical inspection over to 
SaskPower for a couple of reasons, not the least of which is to 
take advantage of some existing facilities or processes that exist 
in Power relative to where the expertise lies. 
 
The human resources branch of SaskPower is responsible for 
public safety and gas and electrical installations in the province, 
or they have a general interest in public safety, period. So it was 
considered that there would be some reasonable logic to moving 
this inspection over to SaskPower, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I would like you to answer the 
question, please. In terms of the cost of the program now being 
administered by the Department of the Environment and Public 
Safety, how much of the . . . what figure in the budget of the 
Department of the Environment and Public Safety is there for 
gas inspections, and therefore how much will be taken out of 
the budget for the Department of Environment and Public 
Safety. How much will the cost be, therefore, transferred over 
to SaskPower? 
 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1785 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There’s nothing being transferred over 
in terms of budget. The total cost will be picked up by 
SaskPower, and revenues from the delivering this service, as 
well, will be picked up by SaskPower. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Yes, I understand that, Mr. Minister. What I 
want to know is: what is the figure? How much in the 
Department of the Environment and Public Safety, how much is 
budgeted to provide this service through the department to 
Saskatchewan consumers now. How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Why didn’t you ask when I had the 
department officials here? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well you sent them out. I expect we would 
have Environment officials here. The Deputy Premier wants to 
know why these questions weren’t asked when the Environment 
officials were here. You sent them out and brought in 
SaskPower officials, which surprises me. I thought this Bill was 
being conducted through . . . under the jurisdiction of the 
Minister of the Environment. 
 
I’d still like an answer to the question, Mr. Minister. I’d like to 
know how much is being currently spent by the Department of 
the Environment and Public Safety to provide this service to 
Saskatchewan consumers? It’s being taken from that 
department and placed into the hands of SaskPower. I’d like to 
know how much money the government is saving, in doing this, 
from the Department of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have 
that. I’ll undertake to get it for the member. My guess is that the 
Environment officials that were here a few minutes ago are a 
block from the building now and between telephones, and 
obviously I’m sure you wouldn’t expect that SaskPower 
officials would have that information. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well then perhaps you could give me a figure, 
at least a ballpark figure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, I can’t. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — No, not on what the department is now 
spending but on what SaskPower, on what it is anticipated that 
it will now add to SaskPower’s expenses to have the process 
being conducted under the jurisdiction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s hopeful that it will pay its way 
once it’s set up and, you know, had time to be — become 
established in its new environment. We hope that it will pay its 
way. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well then I guess I do need the figure from the 
Department of the Environment and Public Safety. Do you 
know if it’s paying its way now; like, do the fees that are being 
charged now cover the cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s probably fairly close, but we  

don’t know. Those are the questions that we should have 
addressed to the Department of the Environment. I’ll get those 
numbers for you, but I don’t know. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, now I hear you saying that 
you’re hopeful that the fees are going to cover the cost. That 
would indicate to me that you have established the fee structure 
that will be instituted by SaskPower for the inspections. Could 
you provide the House with the fee structure that’ll now be 
enforced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As it exists now, there will be no 
change in the fee structure. As it exists now, that will be moved 
over and the same fee structure will be in place. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m just a little surprised that 
you don’t have a little more precise information. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How can you be more precise than as it 
exists? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well you’re saying, you’re saying that you 
hope that the fees are going to cover the cost, but you’re not 
sure. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I said that in a very jocular way. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — You say that in a jocular way? Well, Mr. 
Minister, we’re talking about people’s power bills in this 
province, and if it’s going to end up on power bills, this is not 
too jocular. So do you have an estimate, Mr. Minister, or do 
your officials have an estimate on what this service costs? Let’s 
just do the cost side. What does this service cost to provide to 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I apologise for the lack of precision, 
but ballpark, typically total annual revenues for both gas and 
electrical inspections come in at around $2.6 million. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The ballpark revenues are $2.6 million, now 
being, I understand, collected through the Department of the 
Environment. Is that correct? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s the case now. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — That is the case. Okay. Do you anticipate that 
the cost to SaskPower for providing the inspection service will 
be, therefore, $2.6 million? Are you assuming, are you hoping 
or assuming or what, that the cost to SaskPower for undertaking 
the inspections now will be $2.6 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would hope that it’s not wildly out of 
line with that, because if it is, there will be some adjustments 
made. This is not, in the long haul, to be a revenue generator, 
it’s to provide the service at cost. And I would hope that kind of 
revenues balance off against cost, that that would be the 
intention. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, you see, if I’m having the 
inspection done either as a contractor or a consumer and I have 
to pay the fee, I have some interest in this. And as you know, 
the new Bill indicates that the corporation shall prescribe the 
fees. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1786 
 

What I’m trying to determine is, are we going to see an increase 
— small, large? Are we going to see an increase in the fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There is no plan to change the existing 
fee structure at this time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
she says, next week. Maybe next week when we get a look at it 
and get it moved over and get it set up — which won’t be that 
soon, by the way — but it may well be that there’ll be a 
reduction, I don’t know. What I’m telling you is that revenues 
will be offset against cost; cost against revenues, whatever. 
 
And I mean, what would you have them do? Would you move 
this thing over to Power and do inspections for nothing and put 
it on the power bill? I don’t think you would suggest that to be a 
wise course of action. Would you move it over and have 
terribly inflated fee schedule for electrical or gas inspections so 
you could take care of the debt problem at Power? I don’t think 
you’d suggest that as a wise course of action either. I think, 
when you really think about it, that you would suggest that the 
wise course of action would be to provide this inspection 
service, gas and electric, at somewhere near cost of delivery. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I think the wise course of action 
would have been for yourself to have done this research prior to 
making the change. It’s not, it seems to me, it’s not difficult 
research to know precisely what costs SaskPower is 
undertaking in this change and to know precisely how it’s going 
to be and how we’re all going to come out in the end on this. 
 
Now we’ve heard a lot of “I hopes” this afternoon. Well indeed 
we all hope that we see neither a dramatic increase in the fees, 
nor a dramatic increase in our power bills. 
 
So I will trust, Mr. Minister, that you will endeavour to get the 
information from the Department of Environment and Public 
Safety on what it costs now, and to provide that to me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And I hear you saying, yes. 
 
Mr. Minister, the major change of course in this legislation is 
that this legislation will permit the contracting out of inspection. 
I guess again I’ll start with the question: why? Why are you 
moving to the option of contracting out inspections rather than 
using public servants who have been inspectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told that there’s a significant 
backlog in inspection right now, and in order to take care of the 
backlog and get things up to date, it’s considered to be 
appropriate to do some contracting out initially. In the long haul 
it’s considered that the inspections can be covered off with 
in-house staff once the backlog has been taken care of. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, why in the world do we have 
this huge backlog? How has this happened that we  

have this huge backlog? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told that — and again I’m trying to 
speak for the Department of Environment and I’m not 
competent to do that — but I’m told that there have been some 
vacancies in the inspection branch and this has built up over 
some time, and so we are planning to do some contracting out 
to take care of the backlog, and once things are current, we 
expect that we will be able to take care of it and keep it current 
with the in-house staff at Power. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess you’ve confirmed 
my fear that in fact the backlog has built up because of 
vacancies that the department hasn’t filled. It’s just shortage of 
staff that has allowed this backlog to build up. And that’s been 
clearly, then, the responsibility of the department, not having 
enough staff out there doing the inspections. So that’s your 
reason for contracting it out. 
 
Would it not be an alternative, Mr. Minister, to in fact simply 
hire more permanent inspectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If you hire more permanent inspectors 
and take care of the backlog with permanent inspectors, then 
you either have them sitting around or lay them off once the job 
is done, and you have less of an ongoing load to maintain a 
current situation. So I think that the suggestion of the hon. 
member isn’t appropriate in the circumstances, and I think the 
more appropriate course of action is to contract out to take care 
of the backlog and then have some stability and continuity in 
the process from here on in. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, we found ourselves in a 
backlogged position because we didn’t have, apparently, 
enough inspectors out in the field. So we’re going to hire some 
contractors to wipe out the backlog. At the end of all that we’re 
still going to have, I assume, the same number of permanent 
inspectors, unless you intend on adding to that staff. If it’s the 
case that we come to the end of the backlog and we have the 
same number of inspectors that we have now, then what’s to 
prevent another backlog from building up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We already have a slight increase in 
numbers that will be transferred to Power with this legislation, 
so it’s not accurate to say that the same number of inspectors 
will be at Power as were in Environment. That number’s 
increased. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess if I wanted to deal 
with a backlog and I knew there was going to be a continuing 
demand for inspectors — and there will be, you know that; we 
hope the demand would go up; that’s what we would hope — 
that it would be the wisest course to put people on staff, 
permanent people on staff, people who have no, absolutely no 
vested interest in the contracting, in the installation of gas 
installations in this case, electrical installations in the other 
case. 
 
So what we’re going to do for an indefinite period of time — 
however long it takes to deal with this backlog — we’re going 
to be appointing, I take it, contractors to do the inspections. Mr. 
Minister, how will this process work?  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1787 
 

How will the contractors be chosen to do the inspections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Any contractor who would qualify as 
an inspector would, so to speak, be de-licensed as a contractor 
— he obviously couldn’t wear two hats, as a contractor and an 
inspector. And in addition to that, he would be under the strict 
control of the chief inspector, in-house. So, you know, I don’t 
have the same kind of concern that the member opposite does as 
it relates to that potential conflict. We think that’s covered off 
quite well. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, where in this Bill does it indicate 
that contractors will be de-licensed as contractors before they 
can serve as an inspector? I just don’t see that in the Bill at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s a simple matter of internal 
regulation between the chief inspectors, so that’s covered off 
both on the gas and electrical side. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So let me the this straight if I can, Mr. 
Minister. If a contractor who is in the business of installing gas 
appliances, and so on, wishes to do the inspection role, then 
you’re saying, well while he’s contracted to do inspections, he 
can’t be involved in any of his usual installations. Is that true? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s right. That’s true — absolutely 
right. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, do you think you’re going 
to find many contractors who are willing to shut down their 
business to undertake a part-time contract of inspections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’re talking again, Mr. Chairman, 
about a backlog, and I would hope that the backlog isn’t dealt 
with helter-skelter. I would like to have it dealt with quite 
quickly, to get things current as quickly as possible. So I don’t 
see that as being part-time; I see it as being, you know . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You see it as being holus-bolus, not 
helter-skelter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s right. And until things are 
current, Mr. Speaker, I see it as being virtually full time for a 
contractor that would be interested in that. But he will 
obviously make his choice. He will not be, at the same time, an 
installer and an inspector. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, when we’re talking about 
a contractor then, let’s assume that I’m a contractor who owns 
the ABC plumbing company; I have other people who are under 
my employ. Those people who are under my employ in the 
ABC plumbing company, are they still able to conduct my 
business while I serve as an inspector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would say not. I would say it would 
be probably in the realm of the smaller operator that would be 
interested in this contracting out, not somebody that has a 
multifaceted or larger business. The  

choice is clear — him and his organization cannot, at the same 
time, be an installer and an inspector. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Okay. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So your company, Calvert Plumbing 
doesn’t qualify. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I may become Calvert Plumbing 
and look for a contract. 
 
I still have a concern. Even if the contractor, while being an 
inspector, cannot be involved in the actual practice of his trade, 
I’d still have a concern, because he does not, or she does not, 
forget or lose acquaintance with those others in the field who he 
or she may know, who may on one hand be a friend, or on the 
other hand may be a professional enemy, competitive enemy in 
the field. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not admit there at least exists the 
possibility, the possibility of some sort of deal-making, 
favouritism, or personal vendettas involved in this kind of a 
new process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose the same possibility exists 
even with in-house inspectors, because they all live in our 
community, they all know . . . they all go to the same movies, 
their kids go to the same school, they know one another, like 
you and I know one another — and I would not want to be 
accused of showing favouritism to you, of course. But, you 
know, the same possibility exists. 
 
I think that there is a genuine sense of fair play among the vast 
majority of people in Saskatchewan, and they are under the 
strict control of the chief inspector. So, you know, I think that 
it’s reasonably covered off. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I refer 
specifically to 2(e), the definition of “corporation,” which here 
is defined as meaning Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am of the view that you have announced in this 
Assembly previously that Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
now only deals with electricity. And would you please advise 
me, Mr. Minister, as to why it is that we have an Act here that 
says that this SaskPower Corporation, which is no longer deals 
with gas, deals only with electricity, is now going to appoint gas 
inspectors. Could you please explain the rationale for the 
definition of corporation being SaskPower corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Two things, I think, Mr. Chairman. 
Number one, the spin-off of the gas side didn’t spin it off into 
never, never land. These . . . the gas side of the utility is still 
wholly owned by SaskPower, that’s number one. 
 
Number two, the human resources division, of which Mr. Bates 
is the V.P. responsible of SaskPower, is responsible for gas and 
electrical safety. So this inspection unit will be housed in the 
human resources section of SaskPower. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1788 
 

Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The minister, with his remarks today and the 
other day, has not convinced me that we are not endangering 
public safety by privatizing the inspection process. That is 
permitted in this Bill by section 6, and so, Mr. Chairman, I 
would like to move an amendment. 
 
I would move: 
 

That section 6 of the printed Bill is amended by striking 
out subsections (3) and (4) thereof, and substituting the 
following subsection therefor: 

 
(3) No person shall be appointed to the office of chief 

inspector or as an inspector who is interested, either 
directly or indirectly in the sale or installation of gas 
equipment. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if I could speak to the 
amendment. The difficulty we have with this amendment is that 
the only way that we can do this would be if we privatized the 
gas side of the utility. Because SaskPower is involved in the gas 
business, this would therefore, if this were passed, would 
therefore make it impossible for any employee of SaskPower to 
be involved in the inspection or chief inspector’s position that 
we’re trying to set up here. 
 
It would make things a little awkward, I’m afraid. So I would 
urge all members to vote against the amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas Installations 
and Gas Equipment for Consumers 
 
Agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 18 — An Act Respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installation and Material 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, in the interests of time and 
because this is such a similar Bill as Bill 17, I won’t raise the 
concerns again. I continue to hold the concerns. 
 
I will though, Mr. Chairman, want to move an amendment at 
the appropriate clause of this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Again I have the concern of the privatization 
of the inspection process, of contractors inspecting contractors. 
This amendment would stop that from happening, Mr. 
Chairman, and so I move: 
 

That section 6 of the printed Bill is amended by striking 
out subsections (3) and (4) thereof, and substituting the 
following subsection therefor: 

 
(3) No person shall be appointed to the office of the chief 

inspector or as an inspector who is interested, either 
directly or indirectly, in the sale or installation of 
electrical equipment. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I could speak to that. I 
will just substitute the word “electric” for “gas” in my previous 
argument, and the same argument applies. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1700) 
 
Clause 36 
 
Mr. Chairman: — 
 

Amend section 36(1) of the printed Bill by adding “may,” 
immediately after the word “Commission” where it occurs 
in the second line therefor. 

 
Clause 36 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 37 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Regional Colleges Act and The Institute Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, I have a statement to make 
regarding the amendment to one of the amendments here . . . 
one of the clauses, that is, specifically clause 3 of Bill 47. And 
what this clause does is it used to, in the old Bill, it used to 
make provision for a commission of the Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation to consist of a representative of the association 
of community colleges. 
 
Now this has now been changed to regional colleges, and we 
are talking here about the people who teach in the regional 
colleges who are non-union. And the Bill makes  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1789 
 

provision for change. So instead of it being written in The 
Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act that the 
representative be in the association of community colleges, it’s 
now written, “an association, that in the opinion of the minister, 
represents employees of regional colleges.” 
 
So the objection here, Mr. Minister, is that I believe it to be 
inappropriate that the minister should make the decision as to 
who represents. It should be left completely up to the 
association. So I will be proposing an amendment within a 
moment. 
 
I want to ask the minister one or two questions before I do that. 
One is, Mr. Minister: what procedures are in place for these 
employees to select their representatives if there is any 
procedures in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay, relative to the point that you’ve 
raised around the amendment, and to put you at ease perhaps on 
your view that the minister may be into a power grab or 
something, the association is, or has been at least, or would 
have been under the community college structure — SCCTA, 
the Saskatchewan Community College Trustees Association — 
that association now that they are . . . it is now a regional 
college system, are in the process of redefining their mandate, 
and where that will take them, we’re not really sure at this very 
moment. 
 
So in the face of that, it’s not as though I’m on a power grab. 
It’s just that there has to be somebody to make some decisions, 
if you like, and that’s why we’ve got the minister down. In so 
far as the process in place, I mean, the representative has been 
SCCTA and whether that changed or not, as I said earlier, 
they’re in the process of redefining their mandate. So it’s not as 
though as I’m trying to impose myself here, if you like. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Are you playing any role, or is the 
department playing any role, in establishing an organization in 
this new context? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, Mr. Chairman, That’s within their 
own membership to make those decisions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In accordance with the comments I made 
earlier, I move: 
 

That clause 3 be amended by striking out the words “in the 
opinion of the minister” in line 3. 

 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, have you got concurrence of 
the LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors 
and Superintendents) group on this, and did they ask you to put 
in any appeal procedure with respect to the recommendations 
that may arise from the professional relations committee? 
 
I would ask the minister whether they had the concurrence of 
LEADS organization to put this into place, and whether the 
LEADS organization asked them to put in any type of an appeal 
procedure that may be asked for as a result of a judgement or 
recommendation of the professional relations committee? 
 
I understand that there’s an appeals procedure following a 
disciplinary committee recommendation, but I’m asking about 
the first one, the professional relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, yes, the changes were 
brought to us and in full concurrence with LEADS and the 
LEADS executive, and relative to an appeal on the professional 
relations committee, there was no mention made of that. The 
observation is made by my officials — it’s not certain why one 
might want that, because it doesn’t lead to the same kinds of 
things that a ruling on the discipline committee might lead to, 
for example. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 
1981 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Denturists Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1790 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Dental Profession Act, 
1978 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Optometry Act, 1985 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons 
who Perform Work of Electrical Installation or Sell 

Electrical Equipment 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments 
now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the 
Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend the Fire Prevention Act, 1980 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 17 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 
Installations and Gas Equipment for Consumers 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 18 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installation and Material 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments 
be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Regional Colleges Act and The Institute Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


