


















































June 28, 1988 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 28, 1988 
 

2611 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 11 
of this Assembly to present a petition signed by over 5,000 
Saskatchewan people expressing their opposition to the 
privatization of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are expressing their view that SGI 
has served Saskatchewan people very well as a publicly owned 
corporation and they are firmly opposed to any sell-off of this 
company that all the people of Saskatchewan currently own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 of this Assembly to present 
a petition signed by over 5,000 Saskatchewan people expressing 
their opposition to the privatization of SGI. 
 
These petitioners are expressing their view that SGI has served our 
province well as a publicly owned corporation and that they are 
firmly opposed to privatization. 
 
This brings to well over 10,000 petitioners, Mr. Speaker, asking 
that the Government of Saskatchewan end its privatization plans 
for SGI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Rule 16 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a couple of 
statements. My first statement deals with rule 16 today. On Friday 
last at 11:27 o’clock a.m. a notice under rule 16 was received at 
the Table. Under rule 16, written notices are to be tabled no later 
than 11 a.m. on the preceding Friday. Since the notice did not 
meet the deadline specified under the rules, I rule that the motion 
under rule 16 in today’s Routine Proceedings and Orders of the 
Day is out of order. 
 

Ruling on Point of Privilege 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The other statement I have is the statement, of 
course, which deals with Friday’s question of privilege. On June 
24 the member for Regina North East raised the point of privilege 
regarding comments attributed to the Minister of Justice 
concerning the Provincial Auditor as reported in The Kindersley 
Clarion. 
 
All members will be aware that the purpose of parliamentary 
privilege is to provide members with the rights and protection that 
they need to enable them to carry out their duties as elected 
members. The protection of parliamentary privilege is also 
extended to officers of 

the Legislative Assembly in certain circumstances. The member 
for Regina North East has referred to appropriate citations in 
parliamentary authorities which point out that any act which 
obstructs or impedes any officer of the House in the discharge of 
his duty or which has a tendency directly or indirectly to produce 
such results, now or in the future, may be treated as a contempt. 
 
Historically, most cases which have been found to be contempt 
have involved cases of physical interference or obstruction or 
threats of the same against an officer in the performance of his 
duty. However, verbal attacks which call into question the 
competence, impartiality, and professional credibility of the officer 
have also been found to unduly interfere with an officer’s abilities 
to serve the Assembly. 
 
It is against this measure that the words attributed to the Minister 
of Justice must be considered. While the reporter made certain 
statements, it is only the words directly attributed to the member 
that are subject to the scrutiny of the Chair in this instance. The 
words are as follows: 
 

Auditors are people who bump against reality once a year. 
 
They live in that jungle-zoo and call themselves bureaucrats. 
They wear thick glasses because they are looking at the fine 
print to see if every “i” is dotted. 

 
While these comments may be interpreted as being inappropriate 
and belittling to auditors, and by implication to the Provincial 
Auditor, I do not find that they constitute the kind of unfair 
personal attack on the officer which will prevent him from 
adequately performing his duties. The words, while regrettable, do 
not of themselves call into question the competence, impartiality, 
or professionalism of the Provincial Auditor. I am confident that 
this officer can continue to carry out his duties in a professional 
and impartial manner. 
 
The precedent . . . Order, order. The precedent referred to by the 
member for Regina North East respecting another legislative 
officer, the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, in contrast to this 
one, was a case involving an attack on the professional 
competence and impartiality of the officer. Based on the above 
points, I find that a prima facie case of breach of privilege has not 
been established. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that we 
go directly to Government Orders, Committee of Finance. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Participation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2612 
 

Mr. Chairperson, last night from 10 o’clock at night to . . . or 
pardon me, from 11 o’clock at night to 12 o’clock at night we 
reviewed the minister’s privatization plans for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the minister was not forthcoming with his 
plans. He told those things that we already knew. He told us that 
the government was involved in bond and share offers. He told us 
that the government was involved in employee buy-ins, that there 
would be contracting out, and that there would be a complete 
sell-off of some government assets to their corporate friends. 
That’s nothing new. 
 
We also explained to the minister opposite that all of their 
privatization deals have meant one of three things: there have 
either been lost jobs, lost revenues, or lost control over our own 
provincial economy. 
 
We’ve also explained to the minister that privatization benefits 
appear to go to people outside of Saskatchewan. They appear to go 
to big business interests outside of Saskatchewan, or they appear 
to go to the Conservative friends of the Conservative members 
opposite. This is an ideology that is foreign to Saskatchewan. It is 
not the Saskatchewan way. And this minister appears to be 
clinging to the skirts of Margaret Thatcher. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, last night I asked you some specific questions 
which you did not answer. I asked you for the names and salaries 
and qualifications of all of those officials that work for your 
department of privatization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated to the 
member last night, I said that we would have that ready for today, 
and I do have the information here. I don’t know how detailed she 
wants all the qualifications. I have them and I will send them over 
to the member now. I hope they’re satisfactory. If they are not, 
please feel free to ask some further questions. I’ll just get it ready 
for you and pass it across. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, while you’re getting that 
ready, shortly after you introduced your bill on privatization, your 
omnibus Bill, your officials gave to the press results of Decima 
polling that was done on privatization in Saskatchewan. I would 
be interested in knowing, Mr. Minister, how much that polling 
cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? As I understand, there were 
more than 120 questions given to over 1,000 participants, so I 
want to know the cost of that polling. I want you to table the 
questions here today, and the answers, Mr. Minister, and so I’m 
asking you now to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Regarding the Decima poll, I think you 
mentioned that one of my officials gave it to the press. That’s not 
correct. None of my officials gave it to the press; and secondly, we 
didn’t pay for the poll. So I don’t know what it cost. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you didn’t pay for the 
poll — I gather you mean the department of privatization — then 
which department did pay for the poll? Can you clarify that for us? 
s 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I believe it was Executive Council. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have said all 

over this province, from one end of this province to the other end 
of the province, that your privatization strategy would be open to 
public scrutiny, and I have asked you to table the questions and the 
answers that Decima poll was involved in. I’ve asked you to table 
the cost. This poll was on privatization; you’re the minister of 
privatization, and I ask you today to table that poll with the 
answers and the questions and the cost. And, Mr. Minister, if 
you’re really interested in public scrutiny, you will get that 
information from Executive Council right now. 
 
(1015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think it is in the 
keeping of this government or past governments to be tabling 
polls. I remember . . . I’ve been in this House for over 10 years and 
I haven’t seen a poll tabled by the previous government. Some of 
the ministers that were in that government are on the front 
benches, and I think they could concur with me that there never 
was a poll tabled that I can recall. 
 
And secondly, I listened today at the beginning of the procedures, 
and I saw the member for Regina North and the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana rise with some endorsements, they indicate, of 
people who say they’re against the privatization of SGI. 
 
Mr. Chairman, certainly I’m not asking the question of what 
question they asked of those people, but I’m sure that the question 
they asked did not indicate the plans of the government as I have 
articulated in my visits around the province in meetings with 
people, pertaining to SGI. 
 
Also I don’t think it would be the same type of question that was 
asked in the poll, and I don’t know what question was asked in the 
poll because I didn’t commission the poll. But I do know the 
results of the poll, which said there was about 56 per cent of the 
people in Saskatchewan were in favour of public participation in 
SGI. 
 
So we all know, Mr. Chairman, that it depends on the type of 
question that is asked. I don’t ask her what question they asked of 
their people to get their supposedly 10,000 replies, but certainly 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you would like to ask a question, 
the member from Moose Jaw North, please rise in the estimates 
and do so, because it’s very difficult to respond to this nattering 
from your seat. I mean, if you want to persist in that, that’s your 
prerogative, but your critic, I’m sure, will let you up to ask a 
question. If you have a question, please rise and ask it in the 
proper fashion. 
 
But certainly, as I say, it is not the tradition of this House to table 
polls. I did not commission the poll. I don’t know the question that 
was asked in the poll, so I hope that information is what the critic 
will understand. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well the critic doesn’t understand that, Mr. 
Minister. She doesn’t understand that explanation at all. 
 
Here’s a government that has gone from one end of this province 
to the other talking about how this Decima poll, and you’re the 
minister, supports the whole concept of the sell-off of our natural 
resources, Crown corporations, 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2613 
 

and public services. You have said that in the press. You are a 
minister that has said to the press that 53 per cent of the people 
support the sale of Crown corporations if the government makes 
an effort to distribute the shares widely. 
 
You say that 76 per cent of the people surveyed support the 
sell-off of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) to 
Weyerhaeuser, but we have two members from Prince Albert who 
were elected after you sold PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington. And the results in those two ridings show very 
clearly that the people of this province do not support your 
privatization moves. 
 
You’re a government that goes around saying that 68 per cent of 
the people support the merger of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation) and Eldorado Nuclear and the sell-off 
of our hard-rock mining company; you say that. Now you say you 
don’t know the questions that were asked. Any competent minister 
that goes around this province saying that people support 
privatization should know whether or not those questions are 
unbiased and fair. And you can’t give us that information, Mr. 
Minister, because you say you don’t know. 
 
You have said in your meetings in Moosomin and Gull Lake and 
Rosetown and Estevan that privatization would be a public affair, 
that privatization would be open to public scrutiny. And I’m 
asking you now, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that somehow 
your privatization poll got into the Leader-Post, got in to the CBC 
radio, you say you didn’t give the results out — well someone did 
from your government. And you say that those results show that 
people support the privatization of Saskatchewan assets and 
Saskatchewan services, and I’m asking you, in view of your 
statements on a public process, table those questions, table those 
answers, and for Pete’s sakes tell us the cost. 
 
We don’t have to table any poll on our side of the House because 
we do it at our own party expense. Your polling, Mr. Minister, is 
done at the expense of the taxpayers of this province, at the 
expense of the taxpayers, and they deserve to know how much this 
polling’s costing them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, my 
department didn’t pay for the poll, we didn’t request the poll, so I 
have no idea what the poll cost and what the questions were. I do 
know what the results are, and correct, I have gone around the 
province indicating what the results are, and the results are very 
positive. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that people should realize that the poll was 
done by Decima Research, and I think if you look across Canada, 
Decima Research will be one of the major polling companies, one 
of the most credible in Canada, polls for various governments, 
various political stripes, polls right across this country on a 
number of initiatives. 
 
And I quote some of the figures just to indicate, just to indicate the 
support of those surveyed: 53 per cent said they would support the 
sale of Crown corporations if the government makes an effort to 
have a wide distribution of 

shares; 76 per cent thought that the sale of Prince Albert Pulp 
Company to Weyerhaeuser Canada was a good deal, while 68 per 
cent said the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation and 
Eldorado Nuclear merger was a good one; a full 65 per cent feel 
investors should be allowed to purchase shares in Crowns; and it 
goes on, 61 per cent believe in shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a legitimate poll. It was a broad base of 
Saskatchewan respondents, and it certainly indicates that people in 
Saskatchewan are wanting and asking for and supporting the 
opportunity to share in the development of our Crown 
corporations, be they utility, be they resource. 
 
And I have travelled the province. I’ve had five meetings in 
various parts of the province to date, and I plan to have 
considerable more. And I can tell you, at those meetings, 
represented by a cross-section of Saskatchewan people, that there 
is strong endorsation for bond and share offerings. There is strong 
endorsation for the opportunity of Saskatchewan people to share in 
the development of this province. There is strong support for 
initiatives that will result in job creation, that will result in new 
industries, value added commodities, and diversification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can criticize that if she so 
wishes, but I have met with a lot of people in the past two or three 
months who have verbally said what this poll indicates. I’ll admit, 
people in the province don’t want to see a Crown — say, SGI for 
example — sold in entirety. And there is no intention, there is no 
intention to touch the auto fund in any way, shape or form. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not true and you know it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the member who grumbled last night 
is back at it this morning. He says it is not true. That is the truth, 
simply put. Certainly the general insurance side may well be a 
candidate for public participation. A good number of the people in 
Saskatchewan say that it should be. 
 
But I want to clarify one thing. I heard the member from Regina 
North talking about a sell-off. There would be no sell-off. Let me 
give you an analogy, let me give you an analogy this morning of 
what we’re talking about on the general side of SGI. 
 
Let’s assume that you own the store; you own the store. And you 
were servicing that market, but you knew there was a bigger 
market, but you lacked capital and you needed some infusion of 
money, some partners, to go out and compete in the larger market. 
Now in most likelihood you would go to your colleagues, friends, 
or whoever would support you, and say, look it, I have an 
opportunity to go out here and compete in a larger market and 
return revenues to my store, but I need some partners. So you 
would take on two or three. 
 
Now that analogy is very similar to what we could do in SGI 
general. We would not be selling anything off. What we would be 
saying to the people of Saskatchewan — your supporters and my 
supporters — we would be saying to them, look it, there is an 
opportunity for SGI general, the general insurance company, to go 
out into 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2614 
 

the market-places of British Columbia, of Alberta, other parts of 
Canada, and to write business — and to write business. But I need 
some partners to do this. So the partners that we would take along 
are the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would say to your constituents and to my constituents and to 
people across this province, would you like a share of that 
expanded bigger store? And they would say, yes. And we would 
take those partners in, and they would be part of that growth and 
development of this larger insurance company that would be 
competing across this country — a well run general insurance 
company, which all indicators say can really make a large 
indentation and grab a share of the general insurance market. 
 
Now to me, that is not a sell-off. That is just simply saying to the 
people of this province, here is an opportunity; we want you to 
share in that opportunity; we will sell you a share in this larger 
store so that we can go out and we can compete across this country 
for business in the general insurance. And that company would be 
headquartered here in Regina, and the added jobs, and I said last 
night, we project a growth over a period of time of somewhere 
between 200 and 300 extra jobs, not counting the front line people 
who would be selling the policies. 
 
Those jobs would be here in Saskatchewan, and to me that is what 
people, as I travel this province, say to me. Yes, if you can take a 
resource that we have here, if you can build, if you can diversify, 
if you can create more jobs and at the same time allow the 
ordinary people of Saskatchewan to have a share in that 
development and growth, then, Mr. Minister, that is what we 
understand is public participation the Saskatchewan way, and that 
is what we support. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well the minister of privatization has done 
everything, everything to avoid answering the question. 
 
I asked you to table the questions and the answers to your poll on 
privatization conducted by Decima polling which is closely 
aligned to the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada and 
Saskatchewan, and you refused to do that. 
 
You talk about public participation, Mr. Minister, and really what 
this is all about is privatization and privatization of the process. 
It’s a very private matter when it comes to the PC government 
opposite. You refuse to reveal the public nature of those questions. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’ve been contacted by one of the people who 
participated in that little survey of yours, and I’m advised that she 
was never given the opportunity to state her opposition to 
privatization, never given the opportunity once. So how do you 
call that an unbiased and fair poll, Mr. Minister? 
 
You can’t do it, and when you refuse to table the questions, you’re 
telling me that that was a biased poll, that it was not an accurate 
reflection of how people feel about privatization, Mr. Minister, 
and you are trying to cook public opinion. Mr. Minister, you’re 
trying to cook public opinion, and it’s simply not true. And you 
don’t 

have the courage to table the questions or the answers or the cost. 
And that’s the facts, Mr. Minister, that’s the facts. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this little poll that you did asked participants 
how they felt about the government using pension funds to support 
farm debt. It asked how they felt about an out-of-province private 
company investing Saskatchewan pension funds. And it asked 
how this person felt about unions being forced to invest their 
pension funds in areas determined important by the provincial 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, were those questions asked in that Decima poll, and 
if they were, Mr. Minister, give us the results. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Chairman, I would 
draw to the member’s attention that I didn’t commission the poll; I 
didn’t pay for the poll; I don’t know what the questions were in 
the poll. But I see the member opposite, the member opposite 
again, because that really is attacking Decima Research — and if 
she wants to do that, fine, well be it — she said it was a biased 
poll. I believe that if you travelled this country of Canada, you 
would find a number of parliamentarians across the country from 
all political stripes who would say that Decima Research is a very 
valid polling company. 
 
Now if the member opposite wants to say that they are biased and 
that they intimidate people and so on; she may well do so. I don’t 
believe that. I don’t believe they would have the reputation that 
they do have in Canada if that were the case. But the member 
opposite obviously believes that, so let it be on record that she 
believes that; that she wants to attack Decima Research; that she 
wants to say that their results are biased; that it isn’t a true finding. 
 
(1030) 
 
I can only say, from my travels throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, that in talking to a large number of people at five 
general meetings held across this province in different areas, that 
the results and the discussion and the talk support exactly what the 
Decima Research poll indicates. So, Mr. Chairman, if she wishes 
to call it a biased poll, if she wishes to attack a national polling 
company, so well be, let it be on record that that is the stance of 
the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the 
question. I asked you for the results on how people felt about the 
government using pension funds to support farm debt. You didn’t 
answer that question. You have the results. The results were given 
to you by Decima polling. You didn’t tell me how Saskatchewan 
people feel about an out-of-province private company investing 
Saskatchewan funds — and those are pension funds of public 
employees, SaskTel employees, SGI employees, Legislative 
Assembly members, the civil service. 
 
I mean, we’re dealing with about $6 billion in funds, Mr. Minister. 
You didn’t tell me the answer to that. You haven’t told me how 
people feel, whether unions should be forced to invest their 
pension funds in areas determined important by provincial 
government. You didn’t tell me the answer to that. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2615 
 

And, Mr. Minister, this poll goes on. This minister asked people 
what they feel about an American corporation buying SaskTel. 
What’s the answer to that question, Mr. Minister? 
 
Then they ask Saskatchewan people what they think of all of SGI 
being sold off, not just the general insurance side, Mr. Minister, 
but all of it. And the questions go on and on. And you don’t have 
the courage, Mr. Minister. to tell us, to tell us the answers to those 
questions, nor do you have the courage to table the questions 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Minister, you run around this province saying that this is 
going to be a public process, that this is going to be an open 
process. Well, Mr. Minister, you have not tabled the deal when it 
comes to Saskatchewan Minerals; you haven’t tabled the deal 
when it comes to SMDC and the sell-off of this company; you 
haven’t tabled the deal as it pertains to Sask Minerals, and the list 
goes on and on and on. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you hiding? Are you hiding the true 
problems with that poll, that that poll was not an unbiased and fair 
poll, and that that poll did not give the people of our province the 
opportunity to say no to your privatization plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems very strange 
that the member, wanting to know what the questions are, and 
stands up, from a piece of paper and reads pretty well all the 
questions off. I fail to understand her reasoning there. 
 
Certainly, on the pension corporation — she asked about the 
pension corporation — yes, there is support among the people of 
Saskatchewan of various pension plans to form a pension 
corporation, a pension corporation which they would have a 
board, that they would have their own members on that board 
which would direct the investments in the pensions of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Presently it is done by the Department of 
Finance. I think there is a fair amount of support by the various 
pension groups to have their own people on a board that would 
have their own staff that would make the decisions to invest the 
pension sin the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And also, and when I say, in the province of Saskatchewan, let’s 
just emphasize that a little more. A lot of the investment of the 
savings of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, be it in 
pensions or be it just in saving accounts, has for a number of years 
been invested out of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think with the whole movement towards public participation, 
there are a lot of people here that are saying: certainly, we look at 
this as an opportunity to invest in our province. Because, Mr. 
Chairman, if you would look at the potential of the province of 
Saskatchewan, especially in the field of resources, and you can 
look across this country, you can look across this continent, we are 
in a very, very, very advantageous position. When you look at the 
resources in oil, you look at the resources in uranium, you look at 
the resources in natural gas, you look at the resources in timber, 
you look 

at the resources that are developing in gold, you can see that we in 
Saskatchewan, with a very small population in comparison to 
other parts of Canada, are in a very enviable position for 
investment and development. 
 
And people in Saskatchewan are saying, yes, why should our 
dollars have to go outside of our province when we can invest here 
and we can get a return on that investment that comes directly to 
them and by that, by that we build, we build jobs, we diversify the 
economy, and that translates into new jobs for our young children 
and succeeding generations. 
 
And as I go through the province . . . And you can ask some of my 
colleagues who’ve attended meetings with me, and you can ask 
people at those meetings if you know some people who have 
attended them. They say that makes eminent good sense to build 
on the strength of Saskatchewan, use the Saskatchewan resources, 
both financial and natural, to develop opportunities for the human 
resource in this province. 
 
So again, Mr. Chairman, that’s what public participation is bout. 
That’s what the Decima poll was testing — that attitude by the 
people of the province. And I can only say once more to the 
Assembly and to those who will be watching, that as I travel the 
province, there is a strong support for those type of developments 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I have some questions about your 
sell-off of Sask Minerals. 
 
Three months ago to this day, three months ago to this day I asked 
you in this House if you would table the deal made in regard to the 
sell-off of Sask Minerals. And you said that day: 
 

I will be tabling in this House what is normal to table. I do 
not have that prepared for today, but as soon as possible, I 
will have it prepared. 

 
Mr. Minister, time is up. Do you have the deal with you today and 
are you willing to put it on the table? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, as you know, in any agreement there is 
always some after documentation that has to be completed and so 
on, and when I’m satisfied that every “t” has been crossed and . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Get the Minister of Justice to look into it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you want to get in the debate, please rise, 
sir, and I’ll answer whatever questions you ask. But if you prefer 
to just heckle from your seat, then you continue to do so. 
 
To the other member from Moose Jaw, as I pointed out to you 
previously, when I am satisfied, as the Minister of Public 
Participation, that all documentation is completed, that everything 
is in its final form, I’ll be more than glad to present it to this 
Assembly and to you, sir, 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2616 
 

for your perusal and scrutiny. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you go all over the province saying 
that you want this to be an open process, a public process; you 
want people to know what’s going on. Three months ago, three 
months ago, you said in this House, as soon as possible I’ll have it 
prepared. Mr. Minister, that’s three months ago. Changes are 
being made on a daily basis out there at the sodium sulphate 
operations, as you know, and we’re going to discuss them. All 
sorts of things are happening, none of which are positive. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you have the deal ready today? I’m 
convinced it is ready to be tabled and that you’re trying to hide 
something. So would you please table that deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Chairman, there’s no attempt to 
hide anything. As I said, when I am assured that all aspects of that 
deal have been completed, that everything is in its final form, 
when I’m sure of that, I will table it. And it’s open for public 
scrutiny by the member, by the member over here, by anyone in 
this province; it’ll be a public document. And I said that and I 
stand by that, and when I’m convinced and assured that all aspects 
are completed, then it will be tabled. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, what is there, what is there 
about the deal that yet needs to be finalized? What is the hold-up 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would have to look into all the 
documentation and see just if everything is in, Mr. Chairman, let’s 
make a point here. I mean, these are rather significant transactions. 
I mean, it’s not like writing out a coupon and entering a contest or 
something. These are large business deals with a lot of legal 
ramifications, and one has to make sure that all aspects . . . it’s 
only right, as a minister of the Government of Saskatchewan, a 
minister with those responsibilities, that you make sure that all 
aspects have been covered before a document is tabled publicly. 
And that’s what I intend to do and that’s what I will do. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, on one thing we agree: this is a 
very significant deal, significant in the lives of a number of 
Saskatchewan people, significant in the lives of a number of 
Saskatchewan communities, and the people of this province have 
the right to know what you’ve done with Sask Minerals, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have another quote of yours that I would like some 
response on. You can verify that these are your words, if you wish. 
This you said in a letter to a resident of Chaplin: 
 

Nevertheless, I have made a commitment to consult with the 
public throughout the public participation process. As a 
result, I refuse to give my final approval to both deals, 
Chaplin and Carrot River, until I have visited both 
communities (and listen to this, Mr. Minister) and assured 
employees that no job losses would result from the 
transactions and that in both cases the deals represented a net 
gain to the community. 

Mr. Minister, do you still stand by that commitment that there will 
be no job losses from this transaction to sell off Sask Minerals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, as we were 
negotiating that deal, this is one of the things that was paramount 
in our discussions, as I said in question period in the House some 
time ago. As you make the deal you . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
Well again the member continues to chatter from his seat. I wish 
you would either stand up and get into the debate, or else have the 
decency to be quiet and let your fellow colleague hear the 
response. I’m sure you don’t like the response, because it would 
be a little foreign to your thinking, but in fairness to the rules of 
this House and a long-standing tradition, if you have something to 
say, rise and say it or else have the common courtesy to be quiet 
while discussion is going on. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as I indicated to you previously, that certainly 
welfare of employees is one of the things that we look at when we 
strike these deals. There’s a profit-sharing plan in Chaplin which 
was never there before. 
 
I cannot bind the company for ever and a day. If there are 
employees who, in the minds of that company, are not performing 
their tasks, it may well be, it may well be that the member 
opposite believes that company should keep all its employees for 
ever, remain that status quo, regardless of function and capability 
of employees. I don’t believe that. I don’t think that is true in 
either the public sector or the private sector. 
 
I’ve run a number of departments within this government over the 
last six years, and within those departments from time to time 
employees change, employees change. I cannot take over a 
department of government and say, for ever and a day you will all 
be in the same position as long as I’m the minister. I can say that I 
will do all I can to look after your rights. 
 
If there may be early retirements that could be brought in, that is 
an acceptable type of situation in today’s labour scene. There may 
be transfers of positions, and that is commonplace in both the 
public and private sector. 
 
Now if the member opposite is expecting me to make an 
agreement that says for ever and a day everyone will stay in the 
same position, there will be no changes, I can’t give that assurance 
within the departments in government of which I’m responsible 
for as a minister. And I think any fair-minded person, which I 
hope you are one, would realize that. 
 
Put yourself in the position if you should be running a department 
some day. If you were ever in a position to run a department, you 
could not, in all fairness, you could not say on the day that you 
took over a department say everybody in this department will stay 
as it is for ever as long as I am the minister of that department. 
You can’t do that. 
 
The status quo does not remain. The world changes; requirements 
change; people change; functions that they 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2617 
 

perform change. And that is the ongoing world of work. 
 
So I stand by the statements that we in Public Participation look at 
employee benefits, look at the welfare of employees, and certainly 
I would like your comments on the profit-sharing that was 
negotiated for the employees at Chaplin. Do you support that, or is 
that also a mistake, something that you’re not supportive of? I 
would like your viewpoint on that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, there are two issues here. There’s 
the issue of Sask Minerals and what you’ve done to this historic 
Crown that’s contributed so much to our province and the 
communities where it’s located, and what you’ve done to the 
employees and the people of those communities. but there’s 
another issue and that issue is your credibility, because your 
credibility therefore reflects the credibility of this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I didn’t write this letter, I didn’t make this 
commitment. You did. Let me repeat what you said to residents of 
Chaplin. You said, "In both cases no job losses will result from the 
transactions." Those are your words, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I want to, just for the record, indicate what has happened 
since the privatization of Sask Minerals. Since that time, in the 
past three months, seven positions have been abolished. Five 
people of those seven positions have been terminated or laid off. 
And, Mr. Minister, I can tell you as sure as I stand here that the 
community of Chaplin is full of fear and uncertainty because 
they’re not sure that this is the end of the job loss. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s your credibility that’s on the line here. How can 
we believe anything you say when you say in written form, in 
letter signed, that there will be no job loss, and within a matter of 
weeks people are losing their jobs? Mr. Minister, will you explain 
again how you can write to people saying there’s no job loss and 
expect anyone in this province to believe anything else that you 
say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I think we’re going to have 
to go through the figures again because the member, and I hope it 
isn’t his intent to scare the employees and raise bogeymen and so 
on, because that appears what he’s going to do. 
 
But let me just go through the Chaplin scenario for you. Mr. 
Chairman, there were three early retirements; there was one 
offered another job, which he refused it; there was one terminated 
for cause, but given a compassionate severance, that totals five. 
And there was one who quit Chaplin, an engineer; and there was 
one early retirement there following the sale. 
 
But, you know, maybe we should look at lay-offs and when 
lay-offs have taken place. This might be interesting, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m sure you’re not aware of this and probably other 
members of the Assembly are not. When Chaplin was under, or 
Sask Minerals was under the previous government, there were far 
more substantial lay-offs than has taken place to this point in time. 
In 1977, and I’m sure the member opposite is not aware of this, 
but 

in 1977 there were 13 lay-offs in Sask Minerals. In 1978, under 
the NDP, there were 19 lay-offs. In 1980, under the NDP, there 
were 34 lay-offs. And in 1981, under the NDP, 35 lay-offs. So I 
think when you see those figures it puts it into perspective. the 
member opposite certainly is not willing, is not willing to mention 
those things. You’d like to sugar over that kind of stuff. You don’t 
like your past to come up and remind you. You try to stand up that 
you’re the guardian of labour, and here you were, and here you 
were laying off these people in substantial numbers — 35 and 34 
are rather substantial lay-offs. 
 
So, you know, let’s get things . . . let’s be fair in here. When you 
discuss . . . You know, as I said to the member last night, if you 
disagree, fine. But let’s be fair. I had estimates last night with the 
member, a veteran politician in this Chamber, one-time Speaker, 
the member for Saskatoon Westmount. We went through the 
whole thing of the property management, the property 
management of this government. And to any man’s standard out 
there that was watching it, it was done in a parliamentary form, it 
was done in what I say, in a high calibre type of . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No. 
 
Let me just tell you a couple of stories. Let me tell you a couple of 
stories here. And the member over there should remember this, 
because he was in the Chamber. But I will say to the member, last 
night we entered into a dialogue in a discussion that was of a high 
calibre that the people of Saskatchewan who are out there 
watching say, this is what we want to see. We want to see a 
reasonable discussion and debate, a question and an answering 
period. And I say to the member from Saskatoon Westmount on 
that side of the House shows those characteristics. 
 
I will also say that the member from Athabasca, who I have 
debated in here for many years . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No. I 
will indicate this, because I will be fair where fair is. And that 
member there has more respect on this side of the House than 
pretty well anyone on the other side, because when he debates he 
gets to the issues pertaining to the people that he represents, and he 
does it in a gentlemanly form, and I congratulate him for that. 
 
So I say to you, I say to you, as a new member in this House — 
and I think you want to be a fair member; I believe that of you; I 
honestly do — that there is a way to get debate and thrust and get 
your point of view across in estimates. But it’s a score on each 
side. And if you score a point with me, fair, dandy. That’s what 
this place is about. But if I score on you, the same thing. So let’s 
continue on in that vein, taking a leaf out of the veteran from 
Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Chairman, this 
minister rightly congratulates some members on this side of the 
House, and I wish he would take some lessons from members on 
this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — When this minister does not want to deal with an 
issue or answer a question he finds all sorts of other things to talk 
about, does all sorts of dancing around 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2618 
 

this House and around the issue. 
 
Now he begins to haul out lists from the 1970s and early ’80s 
about seasonal lay-offs, when today we’re talking about 
permanent lay-offs, permanent job loss, permanent termination of 
people who have given the best part of their levies to Sask 
Minerals. He doesn’t want to talk about that, Mr. Chairman, and 
he doesn’t want to talk about his own integrity. The minister who 
will write and sign a letter that says there will be no job loss, now 
he doesn’t want to talk about that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important in this discussion that we 
once again review the record of Sask Minerals and its contribution 
to this province. As one of our oldest Crown corporations in its 
40-plus years of history, in every year of its operation with the 
exception of one, Sask Minerals showed a profit — in every year 
with the exception of one. 
 
Now this minister seems to question figures that we bring into this 
House. Well I intend simply therefore to read from the annual 
report of Sask Minerals. Mr. Chairman, since its inception, Sask 
Minerals has paid in excess of $60 million . . . $65 million in 
wages and salaries. It’s paid well in excess of $2 million in grants 
in lieu of taxes to the communities where it has been located. It 
has paid in excess of $12 million in royalties. And, Mr. Chairman, 
hear this, hear this. It has paid in excess of $40 million in 
dividends to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the fine record of 
Sask Minerals. 
 
Now what does this government decide? It decides in its blind 
privatization ideology, here’s a little Crown corporation we can 
dispose of and get a quick little injection of cash, and not many 
people will notice and not too many people will be affected, and 
there won’t be much public backlash. 
 
And so they negotiate, in secret, a deal with two central Canadian 
corporations for the sale, the whole sale of Sask Minerals. No 
share offering is offered; no offer is made to the workers or the 
communities. No, a secret deal is negotiated in central Canada for 
this whole sale of the assets of Sask Minerals. 
 
And what do we get? What do we get for this corporation that has 
contributed well over $50 million to the people of Saskatchewan? 
Well we get, Mr. Chairman, we get enough money to pay the 
interest on the debt this government created, enough money to pay 
the interest payments for two and a half weeks. Forty years of 
history to get enough money to pay the interest for two and a half 
weeks — 15.6 or $9 million, which is about as much as Sask 
Minerals earned in its three best years. Three years of profits, 
that’s what we get. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my question to you is simply this: how can you 
in any way, shape, or form describe the sell-off of Sask Minerals 
to two corporations in eastern central Canada as public 
participation? How in the world can you describe this as public 
participation, and how can you describe this as a benefit to the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
indicates various profit statements from the annual reports of Sask 
Minerals. He does not . . . and he fails to take into account, and to 
express to the Assembly here, that there were interest-free loans 
advanced at various times to Sask Minerals. And, Mr. Chairman, I 
know that you’re a farmer, and I know that if I gave you 
interest-free loans, it isn’t too hard to turn a bit of a profit on 
interest-free loans. 
 
It would be interesting to note for the member’s clarification that 
had the province invested the $2.5 million at the average rate of 
interest over the last 40 years, the balance in a savings account 
would roughly be $53 million according to my calculations, and 
that exceeds the $40 million that you’re talking about. 
 
You say, how is this public participation? How is this a benefit to 
Saskatchewan people? Well first of all, there is approximately $16 
million that has come into this province that was not here 
previously — $16 million that is new money, new money for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Now you may be, and you may well 
support this, it may be your philosophical belief that there is some 
benefit in the government owning a salt mine. That may be 
something that rings true with you. I don’t know why a 
government would have to be in salt mines and peat production, 
because with the sale of this we have value added components 
coming about. 
 
Take the situation of Premier Peat in Carrot River. There’s 3 
million of new investment and research money. I had told you last 
night, $500,000 into the University of Saskatchewan for further 
research into peat products. And I understand that some of the 
products that they’re able to produce, with the expertise that is 
brought in with the new owners, will tap strongly into the 
California market. And of course, the California market, as we 
know, is a very big market for fruits and vegetables and so on that 
peat moss is used for. There’s an employee profit sharing plan, 
which I believe is of value for employees. And we hope that when 
the markets and they stabilize in the sodium sulphate, that we will 
see added jobs and development. 
 
The company that bought the sodium sulphate business is not only 
interested in the production of sodium sulphate but very interested 
in other mineral production, and as the member knows — and if 
he doesn’t I will indicate to him, but I’m sure being a member of 
the legislature he is aware — that daily, daily in northern 
Saskatchewan, there are discoveries of very precious metals: gold, 
there’s been . . . since my time in this legislature. 
 
If you would have mentioned, when the member from Shaunavon 
and I were elected in 1978, that there would be substantial gold 
deposits in northern Saskatchewan, it would have perhaps been 
questioned by both sides of the House. Today we see that is taking 
place in northern Saskatchewan, and I understand there are other 
trace elements that, with new technologies and new methods of 
mining and development, may again add value added components 
to Saskatchewan. And those value added components will create 
new jobs, and this company that we have sold to is very interested 
in that. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2619 
 

So as your critic from Saskatoon Nutana, and your leader said, on 
the very good program we put together at Meadow Lake with the 
employees and the Indians, they said, we will reserve judgement, 
and that’s your . . . if that’s what you want to do, that’s your 
choice. I would say to you, Mr. Member from Moose Jaw South, 
is it? — I don’t know which side of the hill you boys are on, but 
I’ll say you’re from south, both on a slippery slope, but anyways, 
anyways — I would reserve judgement because of the capacity 
and the expertise that this company brings to Saskatchewan. 
 
What we may see — and I say may — what we may see is further 
development in some of these further metals in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I know the member from Athabasca would 
stand in his place and say, yes, if you can have development in 
metals and in mining for the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
right on the money, Mr. Minister, because that’s what I want to 
see happen for the people in my area, and he’s the kind of man 
that would stand up there and say it, because he differs right within 
your own party. 
 
And I see the member from Rosemont chirping as usual from his 
seat. But the member from Athabasca, as I am led to believe, has 
quite a different stance on the development and the production of 
uranium, as does the member from Rosemont, as does the member 
from Saskatoon University. I think there’s quite a division there, 
and I would have to say I support the member from Athabasca 
because I believe he sincerely wants to see jobs and development 
for his people. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to turn to the question of the government’s record of privatization 
in regards to the sell-off of our assets which are formerly 
controlled by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and which are 
now controlled out of province. 
 
The minister has made great to-do about the benefits that 
privatization will bring to Saskatchewan. I’d like to just review a 
little bit of the historical record when it comes to our natural 
resources vis-a-vis the coal mining operations in southern 
Saskatchewan and that great record of privatization which the 
minister is so proud about. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Minister, in 1982 you began your process of privatization. 
One of the first steps you undertook was to sell off the drag-line in 
southern Saskatchewan to Manalta Coal of Alberta. And in order 
to make the purchase, in order to make that purchase, Manalta 
Coal had to borrow the money from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. In other words, you sold off an asset worth $45 
million based on a loan guarantee made by the people of 
Saskatchewan through their government. 
 
In other words, Manalta Coal from Calgary, Alberta, had to put up 
no money. And we’ve often wondered why it was that that was 
such a great deal for the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve yet to see 
the benefits in terms of what it’s done for either the power 
corporation or for the people of Saskatchewan in regards to 
producing jobs. 

And I’d like you to comment on that after I’m finished. 
 
In November of 1984 you once again began a privatization 
initiative around the Poplar River coal mine at Coronach. Once 
again you sold it off to Manalta Coal. At that time the member 
from Yorkton, who was the minister responsible for SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation), valued the assets of the coal 
mine for $129 million. But that’s not what your government sold it 
for. In fact, you sold it for $102 which was $27 million less than 
the asset value as assessed by the minister himself. Now again, 
Manalta Coal was not responsible for its financing. The 
government financed, the provincial government, your 
government, and the province and the people of the Saskatchewan 
put up $89 million of that purchase price for Manalta. 
 
In other words, we had an asset which was worth $129 million; 
you sold it to Manalta for $102 million and we lent them the $89 
million to make the deal. We don’t understand what benefit that 
particular deal was to the people of Saskatchewan. How is it that 
when we sell an asset for less than it’s worth, and we have to put 
up the money, how does it benefit the people of Saskatchewan, 
and where are the new jobs and where is the new investment in 
that area of the province that you and your government promised 
at that particular time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in line with the 
minister . . . the member’s questions, that was long before we had 
a Department of Public Participation. I don’t have the . . . I don’t 
have those . . . he’s quoting in 1984. We will, if he wishes, we will 
find the information for him and discuss it. 
 
I think it would be more suitable to ask those questions regarding 
Manalta Coal, and so on, to the minister of SaskPower when the 
opportunity affords itself, and I believer there are some . . . still 
some Bills and so on in this session that the minister of 
SaskPower, the Deputy Premier, will be bringing forth who is 
much more able to and equipped to answer the questions 
pertaining to Manalta Coal, if that is acceptable to the member, 
because my department was not in place at that time, and we do 
not have that information at our finger tips. But if he would want 
something in writing, we would look it up and provide it for him. 
If not, if he prefers to arise on another occasion when the minister 
in charge of SaskPower is on his feet in the House and ask those 
questions, I’m sure the minister would explain that transaction for 
you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is totally incredible. Here 
we have two privatized initiatives undertaken by the same 
government, based on a philosophy that it was going to help the 
people of this province. We have a living example of privatization 
before our very eyes, and it’s incredible that the minister of 
privatization would stand in this House and say that he and his 
department haven’t examined that privatization deal to see 
whether in fact that privatization deal has met his own objectives; 
whether in fact there is any kind of basis for undertaking the 
privatization deals that the government is now undertaking. To not 
look at the history of his own province, which this government — 
and which we have said for a long time — this government 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2620 
 

has failed to do, to not look at the real history of what’s going on is 
totally incredible. 
 
Mr. Minister, we don’t believe you. And as for you giving us 
anything in writing, we’ve already heard what the member from 
Moose Jaw South has had to say in terms of your integrity and 
your incredibility for supplying anything to us in writing, so we 
don’t worry about that. What we are worried about are your 
initiatives in privatization which are selling off the people’s assets, 
the assets which belong to the people of Saskatchewan, not for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan but in fact for the benefit of 
a few large corporations involved in the resource sector. 
 
We have put forward the thesis, time and time again, that 
privatization benefits not the many, benefits the few, doesn’t 
benefit the working people and the farmers of this province, 
benefits only the multinational corporations and indigenous 
capitalists who, in fact, you are rewarding for the political favours 
that they’ve done for you in the past and for the financial backing 
that they have given to you in your rise to political power, and 
you’re now returning the favours. 
 
That’s our thesis, which is why we’re opposed to privatization. 
We’re opposed to it on the principle that it does not benefit the 
people of Saskatchewan, and you have failed to put forward a 
case. We give you a specific example of Manalta Coal, and you 
say you haven’t even looked at that example to determine whether 
or not it’s a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. Your 
credibility is on the line. 
 
The second question, and it again has to do with the sell-off of 
natural resources, and that’s the sell-off of the natural gas 
operations of SaskPower which you are familiar with. It’s 
happened very recently, and it’s obviously done with the 
knowledge and compliance of your Department of Public 
Participation. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, for the past 10 years the natural gas operation 
of SPC have made a profit. In doing so, in making that profit, it 
has helped subsidize the losses that have occurred on the electrical 
generation side of SPC. By having an integrated Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation and an integrated operation you were able to 
stabilize and flatten out the difference between the profit-making 
side in the natural gas area and the losses occurred in the electrical 
side. 
 
However, in April of this year, your government suddenly 
announced that it’s going to sell off the natural gas resources of 
SPC by selling 510 billion cubic feet of natural gas to the 
Saskatchewan oil company, another company that you privatized. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, in doing that, if you could give a rationale 
to the House of how it is that selling off a national . . . a provincial 
asset which can be used in the future for provincial revenues — 
for keeping electrical rates low as it has been in the past, for the 
use of development by both residential farming and commercial 
operations in this province — that the dividends of the use of that 
natural resource, of the profits, if you like, of that natural resource, 
come back to the 

people of the province. How is it that that is a benefit to the people 
of the province? How is it that by selling it to the Saskatchewan oil 
corporation which is now a partially privatized publicly . . . 
privately-owned corporation, how is it that the sale of the natural 
gas reserves of SaskPower benefits all the people of the province, 
as opposed to a small group which are the shareholders of Saskoil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I listened with interest, and I 
noticed that the member opposite chooses not to mention the 
involvement of the 10 Indian tribes at Meadow Lake and the 
employee ownership . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, no, let’s be 
fair. Let’s be fair. He cited examples; he said there’s no benefit for 
the people of Saskatchewan. I hold that one up as perhaps one of 
the best developments in public participation where ordinary 
citizens of Saskatchewan have a chance to own and develop and 
produce their own products. He chooses not to mention that one. 
 
I think it’s only fair I point that out because he said, show me 
where there’s an example. There is a very good example — a 
shining example of public participation. 
 
He then goes on to ask about the splitting of the electrical and the 
gas aspects, the decision, the internal decision made by the 
SaskPower Corporation. Mr. Chairman, as I understand, if you 
look across the utilities across this country, you will find in most 
jurisdictions that there is a split between the electrical and gas, 
because they are different, and it takes different expertise and 
different types of management skills. 
 
Now he says, where is the benefit to Saskatchewan people in 
having the gas aspects split off from the electrical? Well I heard 
the deputy minister stand in this House and say time and time 
again about the number of jobs that will be created by the 
development of the natural gas reserves by Saskoil. I believe, and I 
stand to be corrected, but I believe that somewhere between 600 to 
800 new gas wells are going to be drilled by Saskoil, new gas 
wells. Those are jobs. It takes people to drill those gas wells. 
 
The policy of the government opposite, and I can remember in the 
days of Allan Blakeney, when he was the premier of this province, 
it was his policy, Mr. Chairman, it was his policy to leave the gas 
reserves in the ground and to buy gas from Alberta at a very high 
cost. We were tied in to a long-term contract with Alberta. But 
we’ve got out of that contract — I believe it has expired now — 
and we are saying let’s develop our resources, let’s use our gas, 
let’s create jobs here for Saskatchewan people, and that will bring 
revenue into the coffers of this province. 
 
I was talking to Mr. Ted Renner. Ted Renner, who is the president 
of Saskoil, brings a lot of expertise to that company. Saskoil is 
now one of the 13 top energy companies in Canada, and Mr. 
Renner was telling me that already, since that movement to 
purchase that gas, there are 50 new jobs created here in Regina, 50 
new jobs in Saskoil because of that transaction. 
 
So you take that and couple that with the activities that are in 
drilling, couple that with the added exploration. I 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2621 
 

talked to Mr. Renner the other day and he says there’s more gas 
that will be found. And also, Saskoil are finding more oil. 
 
I think it would be only right to talk to the minister of energy and 
we will see that year after year, with new technology, new drilling, 
drilling deeper, we are finding not only heavy oil as in the case on 
the western side of the province, but more light crude and more 
natural gas. 
 
And to me, Mr. Chairman, that is diversification, that is public 
participation, that is building, that is developing Saskatchewan and 
creating jobs. 
 
And once again I must say to the member from Rosemont, as I 
travel the province, time after time, in town after town — in 
Nipawin, in Estevan, in Rosetown, in Whitewood — they say to 
me, Mr. Minister, if you can use the resources of this province to 
build jobs, to diversify, if we the people of the province can have a 
share in that, then that’s what we want to see take place under a 
public participation program. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I know you’ve got your lines down 
real well, I know you’ve got the political rhetoric smoothly 
polished in this, but the facts of the matter are plain and simple, 
and it’s interesting to note that you won’t answer the question. 
 
Before you began this privatization madness, all people of 
Saskatchewan participated in the results of Saskoil, all people of 
Saskatchewan participated equally in the results of SaskPower, all 
people of Saskatchewan participated equally in the results of Sask 
Minerals, because we the people of this province owned those 
corporations. All of us together equally — not a small group of 
shareholders, not the 50,000 people in this province who 
continually and constantly dabble in the stock-market and invest in 
the stock-market and the bond-market. Not just the 50,000. 
 
The 1 million citizens of this province owned the natural resources 
before you began your right-wing, totally ideologically driven 
determination to sell off our natural resources and our corporations 
to your corporate buddies. We all owned it. Now we don’t. And as 
our leader has said, and this is a question of buyer beware, that old 
Latin phrase, caveat emptor — buyer beware. 
 
We are going to review those privatizations. We are going to 
review those privatizations, and we will take action where 
necessary to defend the principle that the natural resources of this 
province belong to all the people of this province, and not to a few 
local capitalists, and not multinational corporations. That’s how 
we’re going to operate in the future. 
 
And you can tell your corporate buddies, the head of Saskoil or 
whoever else you want, that that is what is going to happen from 
1990 and beyond. We are going to make sure that we all 
participate equally in the development of our province, and that 
not just the few will be able to make oodles and oodles of money 
on the natural resources that exist in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lyons: — And I want to bring to you the final question, my 
final question, Mr. Minister. I want to bring up to you the final 
question. We have seen your government in the last little while, 
again under the guise of developing more public participation in 
the natural gas area of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, we have 
seen the splitting up of SaskPower into three of its component 
parts, and one of that component part is named Trans Gas. 
 
(1115) 
 
And it’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, from people in the oil 
and gas industry in Calgary who have told us that your 
government is involved with the sell-off of the Trans Gas part of 
SaskPower, that in fact you are engaged in negotiations to sell off 
TransGas to a Calgary, Alberta firm by the name of Nova 
corporation. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you will answer these very 
specific questions, without going off on your political tangents and 
your rhetorical flights of fantasy, if you will answer these very 
specific questions. 
 
One, is your government involved with the negotiations for the 
sale of Trans Gas or any other of the component parts of 
SaskPower? And two, to your knowledge, to your knowledge as a 
member of the Executive Council, has there been negotiations 
between your government and/or SaskPower, and any other oil 
and natural gas firm from outside the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — All I can say, Mr. Chairman, is I don’t know 
who SaskPower are talking to. I imagine they’re having ongoing 
discussions with a number of companies across Canada; to what 
extent and to what degree this involves the gas transportation, I 
couldn’t say. I think those questions are more appropriately asked 
of the minister in charge of SaskPower. I have no idea who they’re 
talking to. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to spend a moment or two again dealing with the 
privatization of PAPCO in Prince Albert, which I think is an 
example of a very bad deal that your government made. I want to 
say that you had an opportunity here, Mr. Minister, you had an 
opportunity, dealing with PAPCO, in making a good deal. 
Because when it comes down to arguing the principle of the deal 
here, whether it should be privatized or not, you had a 50-50 
chance. 
 
But because of the kind of deal you made, you lost on behalf to he 
people of the province . . . The question that I want to ask you is 
going to be, how can we tell, now that we have the deal and we 
have all the documents, how can we tell whether or not the 
argument is going to be lived up to; that the agreement is going to 
be lived up to? I want to know what kind of guarantees you’ve put 
into place and what you’re able to document today here, with 
respect to that deal. 
 
But before I do that I want to point out a couple of things, Mr. 
Minister. I want to say that you do a discredit to yourself and to 
your government every time you bring up 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2622 
 

this idea about a $91,000 per day loss. And I’ll tell you exactly 
why. There are two reasons. 
 
First of all, the only time that that pulp mill did lose money was 
after the Tories took government. The last two years of the NDP 
being in government, it made 47 million — 23 million plus 24 
million — $47 million. Then it lost money when you folks got in, 
three years out of four. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister: when it loses money when the 
Tories get in and made money when the NDP, is that a reason to 
get rid of the pulp mill or is that a reason to get rid of the Tory 
government? I ask you that. Now what should have happened 
there . . . That was the first reason, Mr. Minister. 
 
The second reason is this. You keep saying things about your 
polling. You keep saying that you polled the people of 
Saskatchewan and they think that the sale of PAPCO was a good 
deal. Well it depends how you ask the question. And I suppose 
what comes to mind, a good deal for who? And I content it was a 
good deal for Weyerhaeuser. I contend it was a good deal for 
Weyerhaeuser, and I contend it was a bad deal for the people of 
Prince Albert and it was a bad deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — If you would have asked the question, who 
benefited most from the deal, if you ask that question, and I 
guarantee you will get the answer . . . that people will answer at a 
ratio of approximately 4:1, that Weyerhaeuser got the best of the 
deal that you made. 
 
And I’ll list a few things to you, Mr. Minister, to back that up. I’ve 
got a page of items that I’ve taken out of these books. There are 
three volumes of the deal which indicate just what kind of a poor 
business management operation you had when you made it — 
three books worth. 
 
But here’s what it comes out to in the end. There were some things 
that we got and there were some things that you gave away. And I 
want to make a listing of some of them: $350 million pulp mill, 
sold for $248 million. Well not exactly sold — not exactly sold. 
You gave them a debenture, a debenture on which they haven’t 
paid anything yet. 
 
Also they got a chemical plant with that and also they got a lumber 
mill with that. You gave away access to the bulk of the 
Saskatchewan forests, and exclusive rights to that forest — 
exclusive right and the right of first refusal to anybody else. 
 
The buyer got a very experienced and dedicated work-force, and 
that’s got to be worth something. The buyer got a complete road 
network, a complete rail network, air access; the buyer got 32 
kilometres per year guaranteed in roads that we the people of 
Saskatchewan must provide. Right now they’re getting a $2 
million interchange north of P.A., which I wonder whether it was 
necessary or not. This is what they got; that’s the way you did it. 
 
We have to pay for the design of the roads. We the people 

of Saskatchewan, we have to provide forest fire protection. The 
limit to the Saskatchewan rivers . . . the access to the 
Saskatchewan River is limited to the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
The buyer was guaranteed the lowest power rates, lowest power 
rates possible. We promised — you promised on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, to buy back the chemical mill if 
something should go wrong and if it no longer produces, for one 
dollar. That means we’d have to buy it back and clean up any 
pollution. We’d have to do it. 
 
We are promising to pay the sellers of lumber and of pulp and of 
paper, 3 per cent, 4 per cent, and 5 per cent commission. That’s 
what we have to pay. 
 
The forest management rights, they have to pay . . . SCIFI 
(Saskatchewan Council of Independent Forest Industries) has to 
pay — any independent forester has to pay into the stumpage, into 
the agreement, but they have no say as to how the reforestation is 
to be done. 
 
The city of Prince Albert lost the power and gas surcharge. The 
province of Saskatchewan has to provide planting stock. The 
province guaranteed a $73 million loan. Now those are the things 
you gave away, Mr. Minister. 
 
And in fairness, in fairness, I will say, what did we get? Well we 
did get a paper mill. Okay, we got a paper mill. In fairness, I will 
say that. And we got a sales force. But when you put that all in 
balance, because mostly what we got from you, we got those two 
things, but mostly what we got from you was sales rhetoric . . . 
When you put all of those things in balance, the people of 
Saskatchewan look at it as a bad business deal. 
 
It’s very much, Mr. Minister, like having a prize thoroughbred. 
You sold them the thoroughbred, you sold them the thoroughbred 
with a jockey and the pasture, for the right of watching the race. 
That’s what happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now, Mr. Minister, after that deal is done, 
after it’s done now, we now want to know what guarantees you 
have in place, and I get to my question: what guarantee have you 
got in place that any amount of that 248 million will ever be paid? 
How can you guarantee it? Have you got any way of enforcing it? 
Have you got any collateral? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — What a . . . interesting to see the example 
used bout thoroughbreds. I have one, but he hasn’t won any prizes 
yet, so I understand very well about thoroughbreds. 
 
Let me indicate to the member opposite, and we can stand here 
and debate, and last night I laid out a number of the benefits that I 
see that flow from the Weyerhaeuser acquisition. You indicate that 
4:1 people say it is a bad deal. Decima indicate that 75 per cent say 
it is a good deal for Saskatchewan . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
Yes, 76. I’m corrected by my colleague from Meadow Lake that 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2623 
 

it’s actually 76. 
 
And we can debate that. I believe that there’s . . . you know, I 
think you as a member from Prince Albert must admit that, and 
I’m sure you’ve been out to see the paper mill, and it’s state of the 
art. I think the people of Prince Albert are proud to see that there. I 
can’t see any reason why they wouldn’t be. I think the people of 
Prince Albert are happy to see 150 new jobs. I think the people of 
Prince Albert are pleased to see the construction jobs that are 
there. And I understand, as minister of Buy Saskatchewan, that a 
very large percentage of the employees are right from the Prince 
Albert area — pretty well all Saskatchewan people. 
 
I mentioned last night $33 million — I’m going by my memory 
now — $33 million in subcontracts; about $35 million, quoting 
from memory, in supplies and materials, Saskatchewan purchased. 
So I think that’s the rationale, that’s the reason why the people of 
Saskatchewan say yes, this is a good deal. 
 
What are the other benefits? Sixty-three million dollars in interest 
flowing through the province. The repayment of the debenture of 
what, 248 million, over a period of time. The repayment of the 
debenture plus the interest, plus $250 million in a brand-new state 
of the art, best in the world, they tell me, paper mill. So certainly I 
believe that the Weyerhaeuser deal was a good deal for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You look at the situation here in Saskatchewan today, and with the 
crisis in agriculture, with the amount of money that has been put 
into programs for agriculture, the government wouldn’t have had 
the money to build a paper mill, but it’s there. It’s there right in 
your backyard, right there where your constituents, your friends 
and neighbours, can benefit from the jobs of that paper mill. 
 
So I find it difficult for you to stand in here and criticize it. It’s 
your option, if you so wish. But we believe, on this side of the 
House, it was a good deal for Saskatchewan, it was a well-crafted 
deal for Saskatchewan, and the spin-offs for subsequent years to 
come will be very beneficial to this province and certainly to the 
area that you represent at the present time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, the deal is made. Now we 
have in the deal a statement where it says that the basis of the 
payment were based on an audit. Will you table that audit, Mr. 
Minister? And will you table the quarterly reports that 
Weyerhaeuser is supposed to provide? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, and the hon. 
members, if I may before answer, introduce some students, with 
leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
through you I would like to introduce to the 

Assembly some 19 grade 5 students from White City. They are 
accompanied by Lois Orten-Lederhouse, teacher; and chaperons 
Mrs. Vandendort, Mrs. Phenix, Mrs. Elek, and Mrs. Tiefenbach. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure, Mr. Chairman, of meeting with the students 
and teacher and chaperons just prior to their attendance here this 
afternoon. I have, on behalf of all members, introduced them . . . 
or wished them a very safe summer, a very happy summer. I know 
it’s very near the end of the year for them. 
 
I would like all hon. members to join with me, Mr. Chairman, in 
welcoming the students from White City School here to the 
Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Participation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, in regard to the audits of 
Weyerhaeuser, the appropriate place to ask for those would be 
from the Crown Management Board. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I recognize the member from Regina North 
West. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Regina North. My colleague from Regina North 
West might be upset if he learned I was representing his 
constituency. 
 
I want to follow up further on the Weyerhaeuser deal which, as the 
member for P.A. points out, was a good deal for Weyerhaeuser but 
a terrible deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Minister, your government gave a $350 million asset for $248 
million to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington. And if that 
wasn’t bad enough, you went with an ongoing commitment that 
each and every year we, the people of Saskatchewan, will build 32 
kilometres, minimum of 32 kilometres, of logging road for 
Weyerhaeuser. And I point out to you, Minister, that that logging 
road . . . prior to your government taking over, those logging roads 
were all built by PAPCO and built out of the profits that PAPCO 
had made. As my colleague for Prince Albert points out, PAPCO 
made, in the final two years of an NDP administration, $47 
million. From their profits they paid for the building of the roads. 
So the people who owned PAPCO, in effect, were building the 
roads from the profits that PAPCO made. 
 
(1130) 
 
Then you make this sweetheart deal with Weyerhaeuser of 
Tacoma, Washington where you give them the assets — there’s no 
money down. There was $11 million cash and liquid assets the day 
the transaction was made, and did you withdraw that $11 million 
for the people? No. Instead, that went directly to Weyerhaeuser, 
and I suspect 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2624 
 

much of it left Saskatchewan. 
 
But then this year in Department of Highways estimates we 
learned something rather interesting; that is, that the people of 
Saskatchewan are now buying 855 kilometres of logging road that 
they had paid for when PAPCO was running the mill. The roads 
were built and they were paid for; the people that ran the 
equipment were paid; those roads paid for by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And now this year you and your government paid an additional 
$3.75 million in cash to Weyerhaeuser for roads that had been 
built previously. For 855 kilometres of road you paid them $3.75 
million cash. Christmas came early for Weyerhaeuser this year. 
And next year you’re going to pay an additional $1.875 million 
again to Weyerhaeuser for that. 
 
When I first pointed this out to the member for P.A., his response 
was no, you must misunderstand; they aren’t that stupid; no one is 
that stupid. But the facts show that your government indeed is. 
I want to point out that the Minister of Highways, in his estimates 
— I have a short clip here — said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, in summation, the arrangement with the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation for all the people of 
Saskatchewan was indeed a good one, and still is today. 

 
So he’s standing behind the deal. I’d like to clarify, Mr. Chairman, 
some of the money that will be allocated over the next year in the 
purchase of roads . . . and indeed this year it was $3.75 million; 
next year that commitment is 1.875 millions for the purchase of 
roads. He goes on: 
 

Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has asked: was that 
payment deducted from the purchase price? (Being the 
purchase price of the PAPCO mill) 

 
His answer: 
 

No. In fact it was a direct payment for that amount, and it 
will be direct payment next year. 

 
In other words, you didn’t even have the courage to deduct the 
$3.75 million from the $248 million that Weyerhaeuser owes. 
Instead you give them a cheque that they can trot down to the 
bank. 
 
My question, Minister, is: how is this a good deal for 
Saskatchewan people when roads that were built from profits of 
PAPCO are now paid for yet again by the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the question by the member 
opposite just illustrates the thinking of the member. He’s making a 
point of $3.7 million in some payment for roads, and another 1.7, 
supposed for next year. Well I guess you balance that off, Mr. 
Chairman, as I’ve said before in this House, balance that against 
$63 million in interest coming to the government; balance that 
against the $240 million debenture that will be coming to the 
government; balance that against the $250 

million pulp mill that is being constructed; added to that 700 jobs; 
add to that 150 permanent jobs; add to that half a million dollars a 
year coming into Prince Albert, and I think if you look at 
balancing those, then it certainly indicates that the benefits flowing 
to the province from the Weyerhaeuser deal far outstrip any of the 
costs regarded to roads. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, last 
night in one of your long discourses in this House, as we 
approached the midnight hour, you mentioned the privatization of 
the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. And that’s given me cause to 
want to raise a question today. 
 
Mr. Minister, there aren’t many of us in this province who 
sincerely believe that our parks are a public heritage, that parks in 
this province ought to belong to all of the people of this province 
and be accessible to all the people of this province. And the history 
of the wild animal park in Moose Jaw has been a prime example 
of a park which is a public heritage. It’s built on land that was 
donated for the park. In its long history since the 1920s, it’s been 
built and owned and operated by volunteers and service clubs and 
various levels of government. 
 
In recent years the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park has become, as I 
hope you know, a show-case of indigenous Saskatchewan species, 
a show-case that we as a province could be proud of, the only one 
of its kind in the province, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, we’ve 
seen it also as an attraction and a place where families, be they 
local or visiting our province or our community, could visit and 
enjoy themselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what we have now by the action of your 
government is a park which exists for private profit; that’s what 
we have now. And to ensure that that profit will occur, we have 
enabled the new developer to change the entire nature of the 
animal park. It’s now, and will soon in the years to come, become 
an amusement park. And we could debate, I guess, whether that’s 
wise or not, but frankly, that’s what’s going to happen. The Moose 
Jaw Wild Animal Park is not going to remain a natural park, it’s 
going to become an amusement park. 
 
Mr. Minister, I really have two questions, in essence. One has to 
do with the accessibility to that park because of your privatization 
move. And let me just say this, Mr. Minister. In 1985, if you took 
the gate fees in 1985 — before you raised them last year --- if you 
took those gate fees in 1985 and a family that consisted of two 
parents, three children, and one grandparent, if that family visited 
the park in 1985 they could pass through the gates for $4.75. And 
by passing through the gates they had access, equal access to all 
the facilities of the park. 
 
Now with the deal that you’ve made in terms of the privatization 
of the animal park, by 1992 that same family, that same family 
would have to fork out $22 at the gate just to get in — $22 just to 
get in — and then be faced with a whole range of other 
amusements that will cost money. So a family going in 1992, in 
my estimation, better had take with them between 50 and $100 to 
spend an afternoon at the animal park. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what that says to me is that we’ve 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2625 
 

changed the nature of a park from a park that has been, since its 
creation, accessible to everyone, to a park which is more and more 
to become a playground of the rich and the middle class, and 
lower income Saskatchewan residents and lower income visitors 
need not come. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you this: how is it that you can describe the 
privatization of the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park, putting it into 
private hands as, one, public participation? and, Mr. Minister, do 
you share with me the concern, the concern about accessibility for 
ordinary Saskatchewan families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I understand at the 
Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park the animals are still there; they’re 
all there; that the new investor is going to put in about $800,000 
into diversification and development of other attractions at the 
park. There’ll be new jobs created in both the construction and the 
operating. They will get a new amusement park which would have 
added attractions such as camping and go-carts and mini-golf and 
amphitheatre and things of this nature that will be there — added 
attractions for families to go and enjoy in Moose Jaw. 
 
I believe the costs are . . . And also I should point out that the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan will be saving 
$200,000 by this transaction because that was the operating deficit 
of the park — $250,000 in the last year. 
 
He mentions about the fees. I understand in comparing the fees to 
last year . . . let’s look at an adult fee, went from $2 to 3.75, and a 
student from $1.50 to 2.50. But if you compare those with a 
movie, I think you go to a movie, it’s generally about $5. I don’t 
know what it costs to go to a bingo palace, but I think most of 
these charges would be well in line with those, perhaps less. And 
also for that little bit of an added fee the people are getting a 
number of other attractions that were not there previously, as well 
as all the animals, I understand, are still there. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Well, Mr. Minister, we 
have listened to you for practically one hour this morning, and we 
listened to you last night, and my colleagues who are responsible 
for various critic areas in terms of the provincial government have 
asked you for information. And, Mr. Minister, you have not been 
forthcoming, you’ve been not forthcoming at all. 
 
My colleague from Prince Albert asked you to table the audit with 
regards to Weyerhaeuser in order to ensure that the people of this 
province are in fact getting an adequate return on their investment, 
Mr. Minister, and you chose to slough off that question to the 
Crown Management Board. So much for public participation. So 
much for public openness. 
 
My colleague, who’s the critic for Sask Minerals, asked you to 
table the deal; the deal that has meant job loss to the workers at 
Chaplin; the deal that has meant a loss of control over a provincial 
resource to people who reside outside of Saskatchewan and who 
reside in Ontario and Quebec. And you chose not to do that. 
 
My colleague, who is the critic for SaskPower, asked you to table 
the deal as it pertains to Manalta Coal and the sell-off of the 
drag-line to Manalta Coal and the 

sell-off of the Poplar River coal mine to Manalta Coal, and you 
chose not to do that. My colleague asked you very specific 
questions about the sell-off of the natural gas distribution system, 
Trans Gas, to Nova Corporation of Alberta, and you chose not to 
do that. 
 
You chose not to advise this House what, in fact, has gone on in 
terms of those deals and what your plans are for the sell-off of the 
natural gas distribution system. You said, ask the Deputy Premier; 
as the person responsible for SaskPower. 
 
I asked you very specific information about Decima polling. I 
asked you to table the questions, table the answers, and table the 
cost. And once again you said, talk to Executive Council; I don’t 
have the information, even though I’m the minister of 
privatization. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister there’s two more that I want to ask you about. I 
want you today to table the deal between SMDC and Eldorado 
Nuclear. I want you to table the valuation of those assets, and I 
want you to table the deal that sells off SaskCOMP and SaskTel to 
WESTBRIDGE computers and Mercury Graphics, who are your 
friends, and all of the other private enterprise corporations that 
have come into this merger of SaskCOMP and SaskTel. I want 
you to table that deal. I want to know how much money those 
private corporations are going to be receiving on July 1. I want 
you to table all of the details. 
 
You have said from one end of this province to the other that you 
would be releasing this kind of information. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we have seen here this morning how you in fact react when we ask 
you specifically for that information. And the way you react, Mr. 
Minister, is to say, talk to my colleague. And, Mr. Minister, what 
are you hiding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Chairman, we’re 
hiding nothing. As I’ve said previously in connection to the 
SMDC-Eldorado merger, all aspects of the deal isn’t completed. 
As well, regarding WESTBRIDGE, Minerals, these ones, as I said 
previously in this House about half an hour ago, that when I am 
convinced that all aspects of it have been carefully scrutinized and 
have been gone over and are completely final, when I am 
convinced of that, I will certainly be tabling them here in the 
House for the opposition to look at and for the people of 
Saskatchewan to examine if they care to do so. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, your response is totally 
inadequate. Premier Cdn is in fact in operation in Carrot River, 
operating the peat bog plant. Kam-Kotia is in fact in operation in 
Chaplain and Fox Valley, busy laying off workers. The deal is 
signed. Why don’t you table the deal, Mr. Minister, so we can find 
out whether in fact we’ve gotten a good deal for those assets. And 
if you won’t table the deal, Mr. Minister, that only tells me that 
you have once again sold off this province to some of your friends 
in Ontario and Quebec. 
 
Table the deal, do it here today, show this province that you have 
some courage and you’re prepared to live up to your word that in 
fact those deals would be made public. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2626 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, once again I rise to inform 
you and the members of the Assembly that when I am certain that 
all aspects of the deals are completed to my satisfaction as minister 
responsible, I will be tabling them. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, what aspect of the deal isn’t 
completed? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, these deals are rather 
complicated deals. There’s a lot of transactions, there’s a lot of 
legal actions and so on, legal documents that have to be perused. I 
have a department that looks over all of these things. I can’t say 
what specific item is not completed at this point in time. 
 
I can assure you, and I can assure the member from Regina 
Centre, chirping again, I can assure him that when I am satisfied 
that those deals are completed then they will be tabled in this 
legislature. And I challenge the members opposite to at least read 
them, because they certainly didn’t read the Weyerhaeuser 
operation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, what aspect of the Sask Mineral 
deal has not yet been completed? It’s a very specific question. I 
would ask you to address your remarks to the very specific 
question. What aspects of that deal with Kam-Kotia and Premier 
Cdn have not been completed in regards to the negotiations with 
Sask Minerals or Saskatchewan Crown Management Board or 
whoever it is that’s negotiating on behalf of the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the member 
opposite doesn’t understand how my department functions and 
how it works. We’re involved in development of deals. I say after 
a deal is . . . often, after closing, agreements, legal documents that 
have to be in place. When I have the assurance of my department 
that all those things have been looked at, and when I am sure as 
the minister that every aspect of the deal has been considered, 
every aspect is closed, every legal document, every legal piece of 
paper is in place, then I will be tabling the document. And until I, 
as the minister, am sure of all of those things, I would not table the 
document because that would not be right for the people of 
Saskatchewan. I can assure you, once again, that when I am 
assured of all those, the documents will be tabled. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you explain to the people of 
this province how it is that Kam-Kotia is busy laying off people in 
Chaplin when you haven’t completed all of the legal documents 
necessary in order to close that deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, again, we’ve been through 
this before. They are not laying off people. There are people that 
are taking early retirement, and I don’t see that as a lay-off. There 
are people who are being moved from one aspect of the minerals 
to another area: engineer, moved from, I believe, from Fox Valley 
to Chaplin. There 

have been some people that have exercised early retirement. There 
was one person that was terminated for cause with a severance 
package, so I don’t see how you can equate that to lay-offs. 
 
So the member again, I don’t know if she deliberately tries to 
mislead or not, but certainly that is not the case. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, I’ve just been accused of 
deliberately misleading this House. I’d ask you to rule on that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to inform the members that the 
statement made by the minister was an inference and could be 
construed as such, so I would ask you to withdraw that remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I do not believe it was an 
inference. I said, I do not know. There is no inference there. I said, 
I do not know. That’s what the record said. That does not infer 
anything. I said, I do not know if the member is trying to 
deliberately mislead. There is no inference there. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I think that perhaps an unwritten rule of this 
legislature is that no members are to cast aspersions upon any 
other members, and I would stand by my original ruling that the 
inference can be so construed, and I would ask the minister then to 
withdraw that remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose we could go on 
arguing, but you are the chairman and if you rule that way, I 
withdraw. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I just want to go back to the previous question. How is it . . . Let’s 
buy your argument that those seven positions were abolished; five 
people took early retirement or took deferred retirement. 
 
Kam-Kotia gave the instructions, Mr. Minister. How can they give 
those instructions? How can they make decisions to early retire 
people or fire people or whatever it is that you say that they’ve 
done if they don’t have the legal right to be there because you 
haven’t yet completed all of the legal work necessary to close that 
deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
knows very well. She was at Chaplin the day that the 
announcement was made, then we were out talking to the people 
in Chaplin. She was there, present. She knows that the next day 
that Kam-Kotia took over the operation of the mine the next day. 
 
You know also, I’m sure, if you have done any business dealings, 
that there are a number of documents, things that have to be in 
place. You come to an agreement of understanding, and if there’s 
a take-over, you finish the rest of the legal work. 
 
So I guess the question would be: why would they be in a position 
to take over prior to all of those final "t’s and "i’s being dotted. 
Well that’s just the way that the deals work, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
sure you’re well aware of that, and the member knows. She was 
there the day . . . and you were well aware that the next day 
Kam-Kotia would take over 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2627 
 

the operation. And I’m sure, in all fairness, you realized that day 
that every aspect of the deal would not have been completed. This 
is common in striking large deals. 
 
I know the member for Meadow Lake who spearheaded the 
Weyerhaeuser deal, there was . . . it went on and took place for a 
long period of time, and there’s often a lot of after-closing 
documentation that has to come into place, and that is the situation 
with Kam-Kotia. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I find it quite surprising that 
Kam-Kotia took over the day after you went out to consult with 
the workers because in a newspaper magazine article, or news 
article in the Leader-Post dated Saturday, March 19, 1988, this is 
what you said about privatization: 
 

We want to see an adequate opportunity for consultation and 
discussion with those people affected. We don’t want there 
to be any surprises. 

 
Mr. Minister, is one day prior to the time that Kam-Kotia takes 
over Sask Mineral, is that adequate consultation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I guess one can question what is 
adequate consultation. I can refer to the situation in Meadow Lake 
where I believe there is very adequate consultation, and you were 
there. You chose to come out and try and make it a political 
forum, much to the chagrin of some of the people of the area, 
because the political forum for you and I to debate the whole 
aspect of public participation is where we are this morning. 
 
But certainly we were out there, consulted with them. I went up to 
Carrot River, talked to the employees and the people there, so I 
think as you look, as we unfold the public participation initiatives, 
there’s been a lot of consultation and discussion on the Power Plus 
bonds, so I think there is a lot of consultation as well as the 
meetings that I’m having around the province. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I find your answers totally 
inadequate. You refuse to answer the questions; you refuse to table 
the documents; you refuse to table the appraisals done on these 
properties; you refuse to table the audit for Weyerhaeuser to 
ensure that we are in fact getting a proper return on this so called 
debenture that you negotiated; and you refused to table the 
documents and information with regard to Decima polling. 
 
You’re the minister that has gone from one end of this province to 
the other saying that this is going to be public participation, that 
this is going to be a public process. yet the members of this 
legislature, who are duly elected by the people of this province to 
represent their interests, don’t have the opportunity to have a full 
disclosure by your government on these documents. You are 
doing nothing other than stonewalling. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to review for the record some of 
the privatizations that have taken place to date by your 
government, and I want to talk about Weyerhaeuser. It is clearly 
noted that in 1980 and 1981 under an NDP government, PAPCO, 
a publicly owned forest corporation, made $47.6 million — $47.6 
million. And under your government it lost over $60 million, and 
yet 

you have the audacity to go around this province and say that 
PAPCO lost $91,000 a day under an NDP government when that 
is a blatant untruth, Mr. Minister. It’s a blatant untruth. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this is a sweetheart deal. No money down; 30 
years to pay; preferential interest rate; no payment required in 
years when Weyerhaeuser doesn’t make profits of more than 12 
per cent, or less than 12 per cent. The province is required to build 
32 kilometres of forest roads each year for Weyerhaeuser, and 
Weyerhaeuser has agreed to build a paper mill but required an 
$$83 million loan guarantee from the province. That seems to be 
the way you people attract business to this province. 
 
And Weyerhaeuser — let’s talk about Weyerhaeuser. 
Weyerhaeuser made profits in 1985 of $124 million. In 1986 when 
the pulp industry started to turn around, $221 million; in 1987, 
$522 million. And this is a company, Mr. Minister, that needs loan 
guarantees by the provincial government? — this is a company? 
Hardly, Mr. Minister. 
 
And then we have Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation which you folks are busy privatizing. Here’s a 
company that made over $60 million last year for the people of 
this province and returned a dividend to the people of this 
province of $30 million. And this Conservative government’s 
going to privatize a hard rock mining company in northern 
Saskatchewan that is just starting to return to the people of this 
province, returns on resources, and you’re going to privatize it and 
sell it off to your Tory friends. 
 
And then we have SED Systems. Here’s another little lovely 
privatization. SED Systems is sold by the provincial government 
and other principals to Fleet Aerospace of Ontario . . . Not even 
sold. In fact what really happened is we didn’t get any cash, we 
just exchanged our shares in SED Systems for share in Fleet 
Aerospace. And Fleet, within months of that privatization, laid off 
70 working people in the city of Saskatoon and threatened to fire 
more staff if the province of Saskatchewan didn’t buy a building at 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon. And what did we do? We bought a 
$10 million building. Some business deal, folks opposite, some 
business deal. 
 
And then we have Saskoil. Saskoil in 1982 made a $1.5 million 
profit, in 1983 it made a $30.9 million profit, in 1984 it made a 
$44 million profit, and in 1985 it made a $40.6 million profit, and 
then it’s privatized. And what happens within one year of that 
privatization — and this minister talks about public participation 
and all of us owning shares in this corporation — 25 per cent of 
the shares are owned by people inside of Saskatchewan, and 75 
per cent of those shares are owned by people outside of 
Saskatchewan. And in 1987 when Saskoil declares a dividend of 
$22.6 million, even though the Government of Saskatchewan has 
a minority shareholding in Saskoil, do they receive one dividend? 
Do they receive one cent of that profit? They don’t receive one 
cent. And who receives the dividend? Where does that money go? 
Seventy-five per cent of that money goes outside of 
Saskatchewan. Those shareholders don’t pay taxes inside of 
Saskatchewan. That’s money that has left our province for people 
outside, and that’s resource money that is 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2628 
 

revenue that is permanently lost to the people of this province to 
pay for health and education. 
 
And the list goes on and the list goes on and the list goes on. 
 
Now I just want to review for the public records. This government 
has trotted around this province saying that the Crown 
corporations under the NDP were mismanaged. And I just want to 
talk about that. And I have the economic and financial position of 
the province of Saskatchewan, dated July, 1982. It’s presented by 
the hon. minister of finance at the time, the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
And let’s do a little review, a five-year review of what happened 
under an NDP government with regard to Crown corporation 
revenue. The net earnings in 1977, $42,843,000; in 1978, 
$67,804,000; in 1979, $107,658,000 in 1980, $182,604,000; in 
1981, $119,120,000 — that was revenue garnered under an NDP 
government. The Crown corporations were making money and 
they were returning money to the treasury of our province to pay 
for health and education, when these members opposite are busy 
cutting back on various public services. And we didn’t have a 
deficit at the time. 
 
Now let’s just review what happened under the Tories — 1982, 
this is the first year the government came to power, they lost 
$125,994,000; lost. Those are the business people; these are the 
people that know how to run business. Their first year of operation 
Crown corporations lost $125,994,000: 1983, $55,887,000; 1984, 
they made a little money — $66,992,000; 1985, $79,245,000; and 
in 1986, $128,214,000; lost. 
 
(1200) 
 
Now this is the government. Let’s compare the record. No deficit 
under a New Democrat government. When it came to the 
operations of the day to day funds of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, no deficit. In fact, when we left office we left a 
surplus. Five years prior to this government taking office, every 
year, profits from Crown corporations. Under this government 
they haven’t had one balanced budget since they came to office, 
and they have consistently lost money in the Crown corporation 
sector And they say the Crown corporations aren’t efficient, they 
say the Crown corporations are money losers, but they’ve only 
been money losers under this government, only at that time. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we have seen a lot of money flow into the 
provincial government, so we’re told, in terms of these sell-offs. I 
want to know what you’re doing with that money. is it going to 
reduce the deficit, or where in fact is it going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well if there’s a sale of an asset that is held 
by CMB, the money goes to the Crown Management Board. It is 
not unusual for transfers from time to time from the Crown 
Management Board to the Consolidated Fund, and the 
expenditures of the Consolidated Fund are used for supplying 
education, health, social services — all those facilities that make 
our society a very good society, a very compassionate and caring 
society. 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you sold off Saskoil — $75 
million apparently was raised at the end of 1985. I want to know 
where that money went. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, those type of questions are apropos 
to the Crown Management Board because that’s where the money 
would go, to Crown Management Board. And I just explained that 
Crown Management Board will use their resources for Crown 
developments, or there can be transfers across to the Consolidated 
Fund which finds its way into the delivery of public services such 
as health, education, social services, highways, parks and 
agriculture. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve just received 
30-point-some-odd million dollars from Weyerhaeuser — where 
is that money gone? You’ve just received less than $16 million for 
Sask Mineral, and Sask Mineral should have been valuated at a 
much higher rate — where did that money go? Where did the 
shares go that you got in Fleet Aerospace? Where is the money 
going to go that you get from SaskCOMP? Where is the money 
going to go that you get from SaskPower? And can Saskatchewan 
people expect that their provincial deficit of over $3.7 billion is 
going to be lowered, and can they expect a decrease in their taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I said the same 
answers as I did previously, that assets sold by the Crown go to the 
Crown Management Board. Certainly, as we have seen, many of 
these transactions have resulted in a considerable job increase, and 
I won’t go through them all again. We’ve been over them and over 
them — Weyerhaeuser, Meadow Lake, so on and so forth, 
WESTBRIDGE. The list goes on and on. 
 
And of course if there’s people working in the province, they are 
taxed and there’s revenues coming into the Consolidated Fund. 
There’s supplies being bought. I mentioned $35 million of 
supplies for Weyerhaeuser, so I don’t think it takes too much 
understanding to realize that if you have economic activity you 
have jobs. Jobs are where people are paid. People who are paid, 
pay taxes. People who build, buy supplies, contracts. All of these 
things add to the economic activity of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no. We can wrap it up here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m going to wrap it up and be done in 10 
minutes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll withdraw those 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I will accept that withdrawal and revert back 
to Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. I’ll just close this off 
then, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
I think what I want to say to the minister of privatization is this. In 
Crown corporations meetings with the minister, 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2629 
 

the Deputy Premier, who’s responsible for SMDC, I asked him 
and my colleagues asked him what sort of revenue we could 
expect from SMDC once it was privatized; could we expect a 
minimum next year of $30 million? And the answer to that, Mr. 
Minister, was no. That with royalties and taxes that will now be 
paid, that the amount of money coming into the treasury would be 
a little over $15 million. That’s not a good deal for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Now these Crown corporations that you have busily sold off, Mr. 
Minister, returned a goodly sum of money to the people of 
Saskatchewan. SaskCOMP had a 37 per cent return on equity last 
year. Sask Minerals has consistently made money. SaskPower . . . 
It makes no economic sense to sell off the Poplar River coal mine 
to Manalta Coal, and the drag-line, and then buy it back over a 
30-year period or rent the drag-line. That makes no sense, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And if you look at all of the privatization deals that have taken 
place, they have made no sense. And you haven’t been prepared to 
table any of the details in order that we could scrutinize them, 
because from a public policy point of view, from just watching 
what you have to say in this House and in the media, these deals 
make no sense. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have set up for your department a list of 
objectives, and those objectives talk about full benefit from the use 
of public assets to increase employment and create economic and 
investment opportunities for Saskatchewan people. And I just 
wanted to review for the record what that objective has meant and 
whether or not you have met that objective. 
 
Here’s what happened thus far in terms of increased employment. 
The privatization of highways maintenance work has meant a loss 
of over 20 jobs. In fact, some people say it’s closer to 400. 
 
The privatization of Saskoil has meant the loss, within one year 
after that privatization, of 25 per cent of Saskoil’s work-force here 
in Saskatchewan. That is a failure, Mr. Minister. 
 
Within one year of the privatization of SED Systems in Saskatoon 
to Fleet Aerospace of Ontario, 770 working people were laid off 
by Fleet Aerospace. That has not meant increased opportunities 
and increased employment for working people. 
 
The privatization of the school-based children’s dental program 
meant that 411 workers have lost their jobs in this province. 
 
And the privatization of Sask Minerals has meant that seven 
positions were eliminated at Chaplin and Fox Valley. Clearly, Mr. 
Minister, even by your own objectives and the test that I have just 
completed, you are not meeting the objective of opportunities for 
working people and employment. 
 
Now I want to talk about the opportunities for individual 
ownership, which is another objective that you have. Privatization 
of Sask Minerals has not meant increased opportunities for 
individual ownership for people in Saskatchewan. That company, 
Sask Minerals, was 

privatized and sold to Premier Cdn from Quebec and Kam-Kotia 
of Ontario. 
 
The privatization of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser has not meant 
increased individual ownership for Saskatchewan people. It has 
meant the sell-off of a huge resource, our forests in northern 
Saskatchewan, to a company that’s owned in Tacoma, 
Washington. 
 
The privatization of other assets of SaskPower, particularly the 
drag-line and the coal mine to Manalta Coal of Alberta, has not 
meant increased individual ownership for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And the privatization of Saskoil, Mr. Minister, has meant that 
three-quarters of those privately held shares are owned by people 
outside of Saskatchewan and not by people inside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And then you talk in terms of meeting your objectives about 
public services as a good way of providing a good value for our 
money and they have to be effective and efficient. And I just want 
to review that. The privatization of our Highways equipment, and 
the send-off of working people — public sector Highway workers 
— off to the private sector has meant deteriorating highways. It 
has not meant a better public service. 
 
The privatization of the school-based children’s dental program 
has meant the closure of 338 dental clinics in rural Saskatchewan. 
That has not been an improvement in public sector programs. The 
privatization of SaskPower assets has meant an increase in our 
utility rates. And now you’ve just put SPC into four separate 
corporations, which I believe, Mr. Minister, and a good number of 
people believe, will lead to further steep increases and poorer 
services. And your privatization of our provincial parks has meant 
higher service costs, and it has meant reduced services. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, those are your objectives. I’ve just outlined 
very clearly whether or not you’ve met your objectives, and my 
response, and my answer, Mr. Minister, is no you have not. Your 
privatization has failed in this province, Mr. Minister, and I think 
it’s time that you said to the Premier of Saskatchewan and to the 
Deputy Premier and all of your back-benchers and cabinet 
ministers, that to set up a department of privatization makes no 
economic and social sense for the people of this province, and that 
it’s time to eliminate your department and go on to bigger and 
better things as the minister in some other field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No I won’t. Mr. Chairman, I listened with 
interest to the member opposite, and she would not once mention 
the merits of the Meadow Lake deal — by all standards, by 
anyone who’s looked at public participation — perhaps one of the 
best deals that has taken place in the province of Saskatchewan, 
involving employees, involving native Indians. In fact, if you look 
at the press reports from Meadow Lake, the Meadow Lake 
Progress, it says, “Privatization brings jobs and industry”. That’s 
what they think in Meadow Lake. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2630 
 

I hear the member opposite not give any credit to the deal at 
Weyerhaeuser, new jobs, new industry, new value added. I hear 
the member criticize WESTBRIDGE, 50 new jobs in Regina 
already, $6 million in contracts in the two months it’s been 
operating outside the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I could go on and on and list the virtues of 
privatization and the jobs and public participation, the jobs that 
have been created in this province, but we’ve been over and over 
that ground and I’m not going to bore the Assembly with that, 
because I think it is well understood, as the Decima poll indicates, 
that the majority of people in Saskatchewan understand. 
 
I do want to share one parting bit of information that I think will 
be interesting to my colleagues on this side of the House, and I’m 
sure to some of the newly elected members on the other side of the 
House, and I’m sure even the critic for Public Participation. And 
that is that there was a Saskatchewan holdings and reinvestment 
incorporated. It was called SHAR — S-H-A-R. 
 
The member from Regina Centre doesn’t want to hear this 
because he knows what I’m raising. It was called SHAR — 
S-H-A-R. And it was . . . the information was dated — get the date 
— January 14, 1982. All right? January 14, 1982. You know what 
the objective of SHAR was? It was — listen to this — it was to be 
a holding company which would issue shares to the Saskatchewan 
people and raise equity for new capital projects. 
 
And do you want to know what the principles . . . would you like 
to know what the principles of SHAR was? Here are the 
principles. Number one, to provide an investment mechanism, to 
provide an alternate source of capital, to create the sense of a 
partnership between the provincial government and the 
Saskatchewan people, and to develop Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Now how do you square that, as big critics of public participation, 
when the member for Regina, East, the minister of Finance at the 
time in the Blakeney government, was one of the architects of 
this? And they have the audacity to stand in this House and 
condemn every public participation initiative brought in by the 
Devine government when they had the blueprint to do it 
themselves if they hadn’t been turfed out by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the question is, Mr. 
Minister, was it . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. Order. I’m calling for 
order, please. Order. I would ask all members to contain their 
enthusiasm a little bit and let the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
please proceed. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well it’s very difficult to proceed with all of the 
noise in the House, Mr. Minister. And I’m surprised that the 
members opposite would yell and scream in such an unseemly 
fashion, particularly, particularly when the minister . . . the 
Premier of Saskatchewan lectured us the other day about the kind 
of 

behaviour we should have in Saskatchewan and in this legislature. 
And all of the school children, if they were here, would be quite 
shocked with the behaviour of the Conservative members 
opposite. 
 
(1215) 
 
Now . . . oh the member from Maple Creek wants to talk. Well 
here let’s . . . you know she hasn’t been here much this session and 
I’ll . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I would ask the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana to withdraw that last remark about the absence 
of the member from Maple Creek. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Sorry. I withdraw that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Keep going. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well . . . I will though, because she’s had a lot 
to say this morning. I will sit down and she can continue the 
debate. 
 
The member from Maple Creek, the minister responsible for 
SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) 
chooses not to get on her feet, but has a great deal to say from her 
chair. And we will listen with some interest when the member 
participates in any debate in this House, and I would hope that our 
members of the legislature will provide some courtesy and 
kindness to the member from Maple Creek in order that she can 
provide some information to the people of Saskatchewan, in order 
that she can participate in this legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister of privatization, can you tell us whether the 
little piece of paper that you read from a few minutes ago ever 
became the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan under an 
NDP government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, you got turfed out before you could put 
it in place. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 47 agreed to on division. 
 

Supplementary Estimates No. 2 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Public Participation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 47 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, I just had one final question 
for the minister. I have noted, Mr. Minister, in the last couple of 
days when we’ve been coming to the legislature that there is only 
the British flag, the Union 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2631 
 

Jack flying over the Legislative Assembly building and no 
Saskatchewan flag. And I wonder if that is some indication of 
Oliver Letwin and Margaret Thatcher and Madsen Pirie . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. There is no substantive 
motion on the floor at the moment so I rule that question out of 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to thank my officials for the assistance they gave me 
during these estimates. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chairperson, I’d like to join the minister in 
thanking the officials who have accompanied him today and 
yesterday on the privatization estimates. 
 
You really do have our sympathies because I think you have a 
terrible job to do in terms of the sell-off of Saskatchewan assets. I 
can’t say I appreciate . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. There is no substantive motion on the 
floor and I believe that you are getting into debate. There is no 
room for debate. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 165 — Statutory 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Are there any questions? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to ask the minister a few 
questions. I don’t intend that this will take a long time. Hopefully 
before lunch we can wrap it up. But I would like to ask the 
minister a couple of issues about the staff, officers, and senior 
management of the corporation. 
 
As indicated in the annual report that was tabled here in the 
House, I believe, yesterday, 1987 annual report, could you indicate 
for the positions under officers and senior management whether 
there have been any changes to date in that group. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There were only two changes. The 
chairman of the board is now Wolfgang Wolff; and the senior vice 
president, Ron Rogers, has been there for only a few months. So 
those are the only two changes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could get for 
me too, the salaries and remuneration for the officers and senior 
management. Do you have those with you? I mentioned to you 
earlier that I’d be wanting them. Have you got those here with you 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, and I’m prepared to, as has been the 
long-standing policy, to provide the member with the aggregate 
sum of the management team. That’s been a policy of government 
since 1976 as I reported to this House some time ago and in 
Crown Corporations Committee, and I’m prepared to provide that 
kind of information as it has been historically provided. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s a . . . I really wonder 
why that is the policy of the government. I want to 

ask you particularly about the president of the corporation, Mr. 
Gibson. Can you give me that individuals’ salary, remuneration, 
whether or not there’s an automobile attached to the position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose we could spend a lot of time 
going through this, but since 1976 it has been the policy of 
government, a policy that I didn’t invent but one that I agree with, 
and we will simply follow past practices. We’ll provide you with 
the aggregate sum of the management team at CMB (Crown 
Management Board of Saskatchewan), the aggregate sum of the 
salaries. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I asked for salaries, remuneration, 
automobiles, and also trips taken by any of these individuals or 
expense allowances that would have been incurred. And I guess 
. . . I’m not going to get into a long debate, either, on this issue, 
because we’ve gone around this one before. But if you give me the 
commitment on those four areas, Mr. Minister, then we can move 
on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m quite prepared to give the 
information as has been the past practice. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to ask for clarification. That 
would include then, salary, travel expenses, and any other 
remuneration that would be paid to these individuals. I just want 
that for clarification because that has been, I believe, just so we 
know that we’re talking about the same thing, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’re talking about aggregate sums in 
past practice. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to turn now to an 
important area, and it’s been discussed for some time in this 
session and in the Assembly. And it deals with the privatization of 
your government, the policy that very much affects the statement 
of the Crown; we’re now dealing with CIC (Crown investments 
corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
I would like to ask, in the area of your privatization mechanism 
and the process that you’re going through, can you give me an 
outline of how the money comes into the government? We know 
you’ve sold off parts of SMDC and parts of SaskPower and parts 
of Sask Minerals, all of Sask Minerals, and on and on. Can you 
tell me how that process works? And if you could, in total, give 
me the total aggregate amount of moneys that was rolled into the 
government and where it came in, in terms of the privatization that 
occurred in the past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It would be reflected, Mr. Chairman, in 
the consolidated statement. Each one is treated to satisfy its unique 
characteristics. We are prepared to put together a document to set 
out the proceeds and forward that to you. And they’re treated 
differently because they are different. Some, the debt may be held 
by the Crown, individual Crown; some, the debt may be held by 
CMB; some, the debt may be held by some branch of government. 
So each one is treated to satisfy its unique characteristics. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you give 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2632 
 

me the total for the year as I asked? Have you got a total for the 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I haven’t got it here, but I’ll get it for you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You don’t have it with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, I should apologize and explain. I just 
got the president off an airplane about five minutes ago, and he 
hasn’t had a chance to go back and get all that material. But I will 
undertake to get that number. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, it’s interesting that your 
adviser who sits beside you, who just got off the airplane, is 
pointing out in the annual report some figures to you which failed 
to give to the committee. But we can continue to play your game, I 
guess, or we can get on with the main issue here, and that is that 
the province of Saskatchewan under your management . . . and I 
think you have to take, at least in part, credit for the terrible 
economic situation we’re now in in Saskatchewan, being the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
But I want to say to you that the question people are asking all 
around the province is how can it possibly be that this program of 
privatization, where supposedly millions of dollars are being 
obtained by the government through the sale of assets, Crown 
assets, how can it possibly be that while we’re getting that money 
for the sale of parts of corporations or all of corporations, 
supposedly, that we’re raising taxes to record numbers. Sales tax 
up to 7 per cent; income tax, where we now have two levels of 
provincial income tax. All sorts of taxes going up, from taxes if 
you go to buy a licence, taxes if you go to buy cigarettes, if you 
buy booze. Everything at record levels, and on top of that, a record 
deficit. This is what the people in the province are asking. 
 
How does that work? How can you be such rotten managers of the 
province that you could have record taxes, record sale of assets, 
and record deficits at the same time. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, you would know in your operation, and many 
farmers know, that it’s not possible to have record income from 
taxes, record income from the sale of machinery or the sale of 
land, and run up a record deficit at the same time unless there’s 
terrible job of management being done. And that’s basically what 
they’re saying, is that you people are collecting tax dollars like 
drunken sailors at every turn, and the list is . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’ve noticed that some of the terminology is 
perhaps not quite parliamentary, and I’m going to just caution you 
to watch that, please. You may have the floor. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — We’re lucky the session’s coming to an end 
because, I mean, this term has been used in the House over and 
over again. I’m not questioning whether or not your interpretation 
is right. But I just find it completely unbelievable, as do the many 
thousands of 

people who indicated their support for a different party than the 
Conservatives in the recent by-elections, that you can possibly 
have a government that’s so inept, so totally incompetent, that it 
would continue to raise taxes to record levels, continue to sell off 
the assets of the province and still have record debt. And I use, for 
example, even in the Crown corporation of SaskPower, the debt in 
that Crown alone has risen to over $2.5 billion under the 
mismanagement of this government. 
 
Now if you just think about that for a moment, in one Crown alone 
the deficit is now 2.5 billion. Yes, there was a deficit. It was 1.1 
billion — 1.1. And that has gone up to 2.5 in six years. 
 
Now the member from Morse would realize what would happen to 
his farm if he mismanaged it like that, where the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well I think he has, hasn’t he? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well he may have mismanaged, but I don’t 
know the state of his farm. 
 
But I’ll tell you that any farmer or any business person who 
mismanaged his operation, that the historic debt up to 1982 was 
one level, and six years later it had more than doubled, simply 
because of change in the management, which is basically what’s 
happened. What else could have changed, except the government 
changed in 1982, that we are having a great deal of trouble 
understanding, Mr. Minister, how you can be mismanaging the 
province as badly as you are? 
 
And in your report of Crown Management, you talked about 
turning it around and that you’re now making a profit. Well the 
only reason there’s any sign of a profit is because of the sale of 
Crown assets. Now it wouldn’t make sense if a farmer said, well 
I’m doing well; I’m not getting anything . . . any more for my 
wheat and I’m not spending less; in fact, I’m taking holidays all 
over the world, but I sold half of my farm so I’m showing a profit 
this year. That’s total nonsense. 
 
And what you’re doing is living off the heritage of the past 
generations who built up, through the Crown corporations, a 
legacy that would mean that our future generations, our children 
and our children’s children, would have money to spend in terms 
of education, health, and social services. And what you people are 
doing is spending it off, spending off the legacy of this province in 
order to try to maintain your power and your control in the 
province. 
 
You’re not going to be able to do it. So you may as well quit 
selling off now and at least walk away with it, with some 
semblance, I suppose, of character, that at least you saved, in the 
Crown, something for the next generations. Because what you’re 
doing right now, in fact, I believe is immoral, and that’s selling off 
assets that over the last 50 years have been built up for future 
generations. 
 
And the young people, believe it or not, in the high schools when 
we go around and talk to them about it, understand what this 
government is doing. They understand that it’s got nothing to do 
with control by 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2633 
 

people of the province of the Crown corporations, as has been 
indicated with Saskoil, where that control has now shifted from 
the people of the province — 75 per cent now out of province. So 
you can’t use that cover; it isn’t working. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the most angry people at the election time, as 
indicated in the by-elections, are going to be the young people of 
this province who see the debt that you people are building up for 
them to pay off. You’re spending it and they’re going to have to 
pay the Bill. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, how can you possibly 
do the three things at once — increase taxes to record levels, sell 
off major portions of our province’s heritage, and run a record 
deficit? How does that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this . . . Mr. Chairman, this 
may be an interesting debate, but it’s certainly not a new one. And 
let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this government has given record 
levels of support to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, record levels 
of support to the agricultural community in very, very difficult 
times, numbering in the billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, over the 
last few years of difficult times because of commodity prices and 
drought and grasshoppers, and so on — record levels of support. 
Record levels budgeted for health care, Mr. Speaker, record levels 
budgeted for health care. 
 
We are the second lowest taxed people in Canada, and that’s been 
put on the record by the Minister of Finance. We have a record 
number of exemptions under the sales tax regime in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. No other province comes close, with 
the exception of Alberta. 
 
And let’s talk about SaskPower for a moment, Mr. Speaker. The 
debt has significantly increased at SaskPower. No doubt about 
that. I don’t know how many hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, we have spent in rural gas distribution program, but it’s 
significant, in support of the rural community here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to that, in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, capitalized into 
SaskPower’s debt since we took office, that was committed by the 
previous administration, was about $500 million for Coronach, the 
second unit at Coronach. I don’t recall, but over 3 or 400 million 
for the project committed by the previous administration at 
Nipawin — committed by that government, Mr. Speaker. And I 
don’t criticize that government for building those projects. They 
were necessary and needed. 
 
But let’s talk about management during those buoyant times. 
During those buoyant times, let’s take a look at the seven years 
preceding April of 1982. During that seven years, Mr. Speaker, 
there was an equivalent interest calculated, and so on, of $300 
million taken out of SaskPower dividends through the 
Consolidated Fund, number one. 
 
Number two, in addition to that, the rate increase on the electrical 
side during that seven-year period was 100 per cent, give or take a 
couple of points below that. The seven years comparing apples to 
apples, seven years following 1982, there was zero dollars taken in 
dividends, number one; and number two, the rate increase for that 

seven-year period was less than 50 per cent. 
 
So don’t talk to me about management. Compare apples to apples. 
You guys simply don’t stack up. It’s an interesting debate, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chairman, but not a new debate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Minister, there will be few in the 
province who will believe that the deficit that now has been 
incurred by SaskPower, and I say again a record $2.5 billion, can 
be blamed on Allan Blakeney and his administration. You may go 
out on the hustings and try to say that, but there will be few who 
will believe you. And to say that it’s because of increase in 
agricultural spending, in the estimates here there’s $10 million less 
being spent than there was last year. 
 
So I say to you that the statement that you have record levels of 
taxes, record levels of taxes, record levels of sell-off of assets and 
record levels of deficit, stands. And I say to you that that is very, 
very difficult for the people of the province to understand. Just as 
if a young farmer had been left a farm, totally paid for — let’s use 
15 quarters of land totally paid for — not owing a cent, and it’s 
turned over to the son. The father had been a good manager. Let’s 
compare that to Allan Blakeney’s administration. Turns it over to 
the son, the now Premier, and six years later the whole place is in 
shambles. The weeds have grown up, he’s selling off land to keep 
up his bar bills and flights to Hawaii, and that’s what’s happened 
in this province. And we’re selling off the assets of the province. 
We’ve record taxes and we have record deficit. That going from 
1982 where the bills were paid — there was no deficit in the 
Consolidated Fund — to where we are today, 12 billion in debt 
overall. 
 
And I say to you we’re deficiting the heritage of this province. Our 
children’s children will be paying for your mistakes and 
mismanagement, and I say to you that you should at least have the 
courage now to admit that you’re on the wrong track with your 
privatization — move away from it, and get back to the 
fundamental principles that built this province, namely, a mixed 
economy where the Crowns are allowed to produce, as did Sask 
Minerals for many, many years. 
 
But you won’t do that. Your blind ideology is destroying you 
politically, as well as the economy of the province. And I can’t for 
the life of me understand why at least some of the people in the 
back benches don’t come forward and say, look, you birds in the 
front row are out to lunch on your economic development. You 
must be able to read a budget. Some in the back row must be able 
to read a budget. And why wouldn’t some of them come forward 
and talk to the minister of privatization, the Deputy Premier, the 
Minister of Justice, and say to them, look, you’re on the wrong 
track. This used to work in the past, it could work again. Why 
don’t we give it a try. 
 
And I just say to you, Mr. Minister, that I think you’re making a 
big mistake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I want to apologize to the 
Assembly for calling this an interesting debate, because I don’t 
think it’s that either. I think that we’re on a course that could take 
us for a very long time without 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2634 
 

finding agreement. 
 
I just want to make one point. CMB, in the annual report before 
you, CMB has reported a decrease in consolidated debt of 
approximately $500 million when ’87 is compared to 1986. And 
that’s the first time in years, Mr. Speaker, that there has ever been 
a decrease in consolidated debt at CMB. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Agreed. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Vote 152 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, I’m delighted that we have this 
opportunity to talk about the potash corporation for some time this 
morning. I had thought that we might have to wait until the Crown 
Corporations Committee got to your annual report in order to 
discuss some of these matters, but this provides us, I think, with a 
useful forum in which to discuss the Cory lay-offs and obtain from 
you some of the answers to questions that are outstanding. 
 
The question that I want to ask you, Minister, the important 
question is: why? Why did the potash corporation find it necessary 
to give these lay-off notices, the effect of which is that 200 
employees of the Cory potash mine are going to be off the job 
permanently as of mid-July? 
 
Now I find it necessary to ask that question because frankly the 
answer has not been clear up to this point. Different people have 
been saying different things. We’ve had at least three reasons 
advanced so far. One was that there was an over-production by 
PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) and that adjustments 
had to be made, and this is the adjustment that you chose. 
 
The second one, which was the one that you seem to be advancing 
most often in question periods in this House, was that PCS had too 
much capacity and therefore you had to reduce some of that 
capacity. 
 
And the third reason, which I picked from Mr. Eisler’s article after 
an interview with a Japanese business man, was that this was an 
effort by the potash corporation to limit the supply or control the 
supply of potash and in that manner prop the price up, keep the 
price up. 
 
So I ask you this in all sincerity, Minister, to take this opportunity 
to make a precise statement about why this decision was taken. 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — You can discount the last one in that the 
capacity of the potash corporation is still so extensive that any 
reduction in production at Cory will not have any effect on price. 
 
The potash corporation, again, succinctly, and we have been 
through this debate, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan for 
various reasons, going back to 1979, has enough capacity basically 
to supply the available world market. That’s that one company 
alone. It has simply far too much productive capacity. It can 
produce far too much potash than we can sell even in record years. 
 
Having said that, within that corporation some difficult decisions 
were made, and as I’ve freely acknowledged on several different 
question periods, yes, we could have cut all potash mines, 
divisions of the potash corporation down to basically nine months 
of the year operation. That has some serious disadvantages to 
particularly smaller communities. For example, that would be at 
the margin; if you have extended lay-offs in addition to that 
permanent three months, then you virtually would close the towns 
of Esterhazy and Lanigan and towns of that nature. So we did try 
and concentrate the impact of the need to reduce production. 
 
(1245) 
 
Secondly, the Cory potash mine is producing a specialized product 
for which there is a market, and that will continue as far as 
markets are available for Cory to operate to supply that specialized 
product. Again, we’ve been through these arguments before, 
numerous occasions, and really the circumstances haven’t changed 
since the date of the decision. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — But my question remains unanswered, Minister, 
in the sense that why is it necessary for PCS to cut back their 
production of potash? According to the numbers that I have, 
which I admit are fragmentary and difficult to obtain, you’re 
selling all the product that you’re producing. 
 
By the Cory decision you are probably cutting back your 
production by 20 per cent. Why is it necessary for the potash 
corporation to cut back its production of potash at this time? Now 
if it is because you can’t sell all the product you’ve been 
producing, then I expect that you’ll say that and tell us what is the 
gap; what is the tonnage? What is the difference between what 
you have been producing over the months and what you’re able to 
sell? 
 
Now if you take it either way, if you’re cutting back Cory or if 
you’re reducing all the mines by three months, it still comes out to 
the same rationale in the end, and that is that on your argument 
you must have been producing more than you’ve been able to sell. 
Can you give us the numbers that justify that rationale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have the numbers with me, but I’ll 
undertake to supply them to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — But is that the case, Minister? Is there that gap? 
Is there a significant over-production as opposed to over-capacity? 
Is there a significant over-production in the Potash Corporation 
that you’re trying to get rid of? 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2635 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve had examples of over-production in 
the past, obviously, and prior to 1982 election was a prime 
example. We have — and I’m just giving the general guide-lines 
to the hon. member — we are trying certainly to bring production 
in line with sales. We do not think that there’s any advantage to 
price or to the potash corporation to have extremely high 
inventories. And I don’t have those numbers, but I think we can 
try and find for the hon. members what may be a reasonable 
inventory, that we would like to maintain in the future, if I can use 
that phrase. 
 
But remember as well that other mines owned by the potash 
corporation have had constrained production or/and employment 
over the last several years, so we’ve still got a tremendous excess 
capacity. We still could produce, if need be, you know, a 
significant portion of the needs of the potash corporation from 
Lanigan, without the others. We just simply have too much 
capacity, we have too much ability to produce potash, and we 
have made some difficult decision to try and bring those in line, 
and that’s what we’re trying to do. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I wonder, Minister, if you would agree to give 
me that information in letter form. The information, just to remind 
you, is the recent numbers, say the numbers over the past year, 
where you compare PCS production with PCS sales, so that I can 
get a firm grasp on what is the extent of the over-production that 
you’re attempting to resolve with the Cory decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — If that finishes the questioning, that concludes 
the statutory items then. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 


