


















































April 7, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 7, 1988 
 

393 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of Students at The 

University of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, before supper, Mr. Speaker, I was making the point to 
the House that never before in Canadian history have we seen 
back-to-work legislation forcing faculty members at a 
university, who are on strike, back to work. Mr. Speaker, I was 
also making the point prior to supper that neither of the parties 
in this dispute have requested the legislation that’s currently 
before us. Both parties have expressed a desire to settle the 
dispute between themselves rather than having government 
intervention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that this Bill should not be supported, 
not only for the reasons I just mentioned, but also because the 
root cause of the problems at the University of Saskatchewan, 
namely the chronic underfunding of the university, has not been 
addressed by this government. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the PC 
government has refused to respect the collective bargaining 
process and, as I pointed out, has disrupted the work of the 
conciliator by threatening intervention in the dispute as early as 
eight days ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you examine this Bill, you find that it 
provides no meaningful way for the current dispute to be 
genuinely resolved. All it does, in effect, is hamper future 
collective bargaining. It even goes so far, Mr. Speaker, as to 
interfere with the academic autonomy of the University of 
Saskatchewan by giving the mediator that is to be appointed 
under this Bill the authority to interfere with the internal affairs 
of the university, and specifically, to recommend to government 
and to report to government on the question of faculty input into 
academic appointments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at this Bill, I feel that this Bill 
inaccurately presumes that faculty are to blame for the current 
problems at the University of Saskatchewan, in an attempt to 
divert attention away from the fact that the real problems of the 
University of Saskatchewan rest with the PC government’s lack 
of support for post-secondary education in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite have talked about a 
pending emergency. Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that while 
I do not in any way want to diminish the very serious 
inconvenience that the faculty strike would have if it went into 
next week on examinations, that the government can hardly call 
this a public emergency. 
 
I want to give the Minister of Education and the members 
opposite the latest statistics on examinations that are available 
and not available to students at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
On Saturday, all exams are currently in and available for 
students to write. On Monday in the morning, only nine out of 
70 exams are not available at this point, Mr. 
 

Speaker; 63 out of 70 are available. For the 2 p.m. examination 
period in the afternoon, every single exam is already in and 
available, Mr. Speaker. For 7 p.m. Monday night, only five out 
of 59 examinations are not available; the other 54 are already 
available and in the registrar’s office. For Tuesday, Mr. 
Speaker, only 28 out of 98 exams are not available and not in 
the hands of the registrar at the present time. For the afternoon 
on Tuesday, every single exam is already available and at the 
registrar’s office. For 7 p.m. on Tuesday evening, 45 out of the 
50 exams are available; only 5 are unavailable. 
 
Now if members opposite call this a public emergency, Mr. 
Speaker, then I’m hard pressed to find any credibility in their 
comments whatsoever. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the question of funding, 
and funding of the University of Saskatchewan. And I want to, 
Mr. Speaker, point out to all members of this House and to the 
general public that for years and years now the president of the 
University of Saskatchewan has been warning the public and 
warning this government that underfunding of the University of 
Saskatchewan was getting to the point where the quality of 
education available at the university was inevitably suffering 
seriously. And I went back to my files on the university and 
looked at some of the articles that have been written under 
President Kristjanson’s reporting on statements that the 
president made. May 1983, Mr. Speaker, the headline is, 
“Deficit forces cuts at the University of Saskatchewan,” and 
goes on to talk about the president’s concern with respect to 
that. October 1983, headline is, “University fears more funding 
cuts”. August 23, 1984, “University of Saskatchewan calls grant 
inadequate,” and again the president goes on at some length to 
talk about how the institution is suffering as a result of 
underfunding. 
 
This continues on. I have a whole series of articles, Mr. 
Speaker, but I want to turn to October 24, 1986. “Give-aways 
hurting education,” the president complaining about how 
money from the home program, the Tory home program — that 
there’s money for that while the University of Saskatchewan’s 
funding is hung out to dry. 
 
May 20, 1987, “Funding cuts focus of graduation exercises.” 
Again the president warned the government that the institution 
was suffering badly from underfunding and the government has 
failed to take note of the president’s concerns. And this goes on 
and on, Mr. Speaker. Almost in every month in the 
Star-Phoenix there’s been an article of this sort. One turns to 
October 24, 1987. “Older poor students hurt by limits,” the 
enrolment quotas that had to be imposed on the College of Arts 
and Science at the University of Saskatchewan as a direct result 
of this government’s refusal to put even a few more hundred 
thousand dollars into the university to avoid the need for quotas. 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, any student with less than a 76 per 
cent average will not be able to get into the College of Arts and 
Science at the University of Saskatchewan because of the 
enrolment quota that has become unavoidable as a result of the 
policies of this government. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

394 
 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we have April 2, 1988. “Increase to 
University of Saskatchewan declined in real terms — 
Kristjanson.” And finally, Mr. Speaker, and I think of real note, 
we have the headline in today’s paper, “Back-to-work 
legislation attacked by Kristjanson.” Clearly the president is not 
supporting your back-to-work legislation; the faculty aren’t 
supporting your back-to-work legislation; the only people, Mr. 
Speaker, who are intent on forcing their will upon the university 
and intervening in an inappropriate manner are the members 
opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite failed to listen to the 
warnings of the University of Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Speaker, 
in the same way, the members opposite have failed to listen to 
the warnings of faculty who again and again, year after year, 
have been trying to tell your government that funding and 
underfunding at the University of Saskatchewan is now in a 
desperate state. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to know why 
faculty in this province are on the picket line at the University 
of Saskatchewan, they are primarily on the picket line because 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for calling the 
member to order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members are . . . The faculty are not primarily 
on the picket line, contrary to the opinion of members opposite, 
because they’re primarily concerned about their salaries. They 
are primarily on the picket line because they are concerned 
about the deterioration in the quality of teaching and the quality 
of research that is possible at the University of Saskatchewan 
because of government underfunding, Mr. Speaker. They are on 
strike, Mr. Speaker, they are on strike because they love the 
university, because they are concerned about the quality of 
instruction that students at the university are getting. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is what this strike is primarily all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I think if the hon. 
members wish to get into the debate, they have that opportunity, 
and at this time I would like to ask you to allow the hon. 
member from Saskatoon University to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for calling the 
member for Wascana to order. 
 
I want to say to the member for Wascana and all members on 
the government side of the House that the . . . I want to just 
outline a few statistics that in a summary form point to the 
chronic underfunding problem that the University of 
Saskatchewan faces. Mr. Speaker, if you look at what has 
happened to the operating grant at the two universities since 
1982-83, it has increased from only $117.9 million in ’82-83 to 
$146.4 million in 1988-89, Mr. Speaker — yes, only — 
because, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education says “only,” 
and I say to the Minister of Education that when you look at the 
inflation rate during 

that period of time and when you look at the increased 
enrolment at the university during that period of time, operating 
grants have dramatically declined on a per student basis, Mr. 
Speaker. In 1982-83 the real operating grants were $9,016 per 
student. In 1987-88 that had declined from $9,016 per student, 
Mr. Speaker, to only $6,907 per student. That explains why 
tuition fees have been escalating and that explains why we have 
seen such a deterioration in the quality of education at the 
university, including an inability of the University of 
Saskatchewan to hire additional faculty and additional staff in 
colleges where enrolment was steadily escalating. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to members opposite for 
their information that the increase in enrolment has been very 
substantive, up from 12,107 undergraduate and graduate, full- 
and part-time students in 1981-82 to 15,200 students at the 
University of Saskatchewan in ’87-88. Mr. Speaker, a 25 per 
cent increase in enrolment with no corresponding increase in 
funding from this government. 
 
So what have the results of that been, Mr. Speaker? The results, 
Mr. Speaker, at the University of Saskatchewan have been that 
class-rooms, particularly in the Arts and Science faculty, are 
severely overcrowded, equipment is deteriorating badly on the 
university campus, library facilities — and particularly the main 
library — are under great pressure, and the quality of service 
that’s available to students and faculty has declined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many areas the underfunding has meant that 
when vacant faculty positions occur, those faculty positions 
cannot be filled. Colleges like the College of Education on the 
University of Saskatchewan campus have lost eight or nine 
faculty members in the last four or five years, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s one of the main reasons why professors in the College of 
Education are on the picket line, for the information of 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s this underfunding and the corresponding 
decline in faculty salaries not keeping up with the inflation rate 
at the university has meant that it’s become harder and harder 
for many colleges, colleges like the College of Engineering at 
the University, to attract and to retain the best academics in the 
country. Because the University of Saskatchewan is not 
competing for faculty members on a Saskatchewan market — 
for the information of the members opposite, it’s competing on 
a national and international market for faculty members, and it 
has to be able to offer competitive salaries. And as a result of 
your underfunding, it’s simply not able to do that, and therefore 
it’s no longer in a position to attract the best academics in the 
country to come and teach at the institution, with the results 
inevitably, Mr. Speaker, that the quality of education declines. 
For some students and faculty members, they’re forced to work 
in deplorable physical conditions, which inevitably lead to a 
decline again in the quality of education. 
 
The students . . . Well the member, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy 
Premier, is saying, “really long hours,” if I’m quoting him 
accurately, and yes, he’s nodding his head. And I want to tell 
him, Mr. Speaker, that despite the fact that he may view faculty 
members at the university as having easy lives with the disdain 
that he does, I say, Mr.   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

395 
 

Speaker, that at the University of Saskatchewan we’ve got some 
of the hardest working academics in the country who think 
nothing of putting in 70 or 80 hours a week in terms of their 
teaching, in terms of their research. And the member opposite 
laughs. 
 
Well we’ll see what happens, Mr. Speaker, to the party of the 
members opposite on the east side of the river in Saskatoon 
after the next election. And in Saskatoon Eastview after the 
by-election I predict that members opposite will go down to 
defeat, Mr. Speaker, in that by-election, as a result of the kind 
of arrogance that they’re showing in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the situation has gotten so bad 
on the campus that we’ve got many, many disciplines, Mr. 
Speaker, like in political science, where you’ll have a class of 
30 and they’ll be using facilities designed for a seminar of 10 or 
12 people. Space allocations, Mr. Speaker, for faculty and for 
graduate students and for sessional lecturers are highly 
inadequate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this brings me to the final point that I want 
to make. And that is that because the underlying reason for the 
current breakdown in negotiations between the two, between 
the faculty association and the administration at the University 
of Saskatchewan, is directly tied to the thoroughly inadequate 
operating grants that this government has been giving the 
university for the last several years — meaning that the 
administration are unable to meet even the reasonable demands 
that faculty may make — then, Mr. Speaker, one has to ask 
what has happened in terms of the contribution that the 
province has made to the university over the last several years. 
And now I’m talking not just about the operating grant, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m talking about the provincial dollars in the 
operating grant, because this gets right at the nub of the 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, in the last few years, is a 
consistent trend by this government to take federal dollars that 
are coming from the federal government for post-secondary 
education and to plough them into the University of 
Saskatchewan without putting forward the corresponding 
amounts of provincial money. So that what has happened, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the provincial share of moneys going to the 
University of Saskatchewan in the form of an operating grant 
has dropped from 25 to 30 per cent six or seven years ago to, I 
would argue, Mr. Speaker, now less than 10 per cent in the 
fiscal year 1988-89. Less than 10 per cent of the University of 
Saskatchewan’s operating grant is coming out of the provincial 
treasury, and more than 90 per cent of the University of 
Saskatchewan’s operating grant is coming from the federal 
treasury, and simply being passed along by this government to 
the University of Saskatchewan. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
this gets at the real nub of the problem. 
 
The real nub of the problem is that this government refuses to 
put provincial dollars into the university, and therefore when 
you have a budget freeze, Mr. Speaker, 

what you’re really talking about is an increase in federal 
funding to the university and a decrease in provincial funding to 
the University of Saskatchewan. And it’s simply hidden by the 
fact that the federal dollars come into the provincial treasury 
and then are passed along from that provincial treasury to the 
University of Saskatchewan. That gets at the nub of the issue, 
Mr. Speaker, and it shows the unwillingness of members 
opposite to demonstrate any commitment to post-secondary 
education in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this, we cannot support this 
back-to-work legislation. Because this back-to-work legislation 
is predicated on the notion that the problems at the university 
are somehow irresolvable and are of the making of faculty and 
administration, when the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
problems at the University of Saskatchewan, while not 
exclusively the making of the provincial government, are 
primarily the making of the provincial government; are 
primarily the making of the provincial government’s 
underfunding of this great academic institution, one of the 
jewels of the province that members opposite have no regard, 
no respect, and no appreciation for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that lack of regard, that 
lack of appreciation, is shown throughout this Bill, in the lack 
of any desire to provide a mechanism for resolving the dispute; 
in a lack of commitment by the Minister of Education to bring 
the two sides together; in a lack of appreciation that this Bill 
should not but does interfere with the academic autonomy of 
the University of Saskatchewan; and, Mr. Speaker, above all, 
with the lack of appreciation that the underfunding of the 
university is at the core of this dispute. And therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, members on this side of the House cannot support this 
uncalled for intervention into university affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to at this point move, seconded by my 
colleague, the member for Nutana, the following motion: 
 

That all words after the word “that” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
This Bill not now be read a second time because: 
 
(a) it fails to address the serious erosion of education 
quality caused by provincial government underfunding of 
our universities; 
(b) it fails to make any provincial government 
commitment to improve the quality of education services 
for the future of Saskatchewan young people; 
(c) it sets a dangerous precedent regarding government 
interference in the internal affairs of the university; and 
(d) it constitutes an arbitrary and unwarranted intrusion 
into the free collective bargaining process. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by my colleague, the member 
for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

396 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — First of all at the outset I want to indicate to 
those people who are listening and to the members of the 
government side of the House that I will not be supporting this 
back-to-work legislation and I will be supporting this 
amendment as put forward by my colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
First of all, let me say that this is a sad day for the people of this 
province. This is a sad day for the University of Saskatchewan; 
it’s a sad day for education; it’s a sad day for academic 
excellence. And if the members opposite would care to listen, I 
will tell them why. 
 
This is a regrettable Bill and it’s unnecessary. This Bill is 
unnecessary and it should not be passed. This dispute, Mr. 
Speaker, is about underfunding of the University of 
Saskatchewan. This dispute is about the underfunding of an 
institution that provides academic excellence for the people of 
this province. It provides a place where our young people can 
go and study; it provides a place where those who are involved 
in the academic field can teach and do academic research. This 
dispute is about the systematic underfunding of the University 
of Saskatchewan by the Conservative members opposite. 
 
Last week we heard from the members opposite that the 
University of Saskatchewan would receive a 1.9 per cent 
increase in funding. If you look at what’s happened to the 
University of Saskatchewan since those members came to 
government, we will see that in real terms, in real terms, in 
constant dollars, the grants per student have declined from 
$9,016 per student to 6,907 per student — a decline of 23 per 
cent. And with that decline, Mr. Speaker, has come an 
extraordinary amount of pressure on the men and women who 
work at the University of Saskatchewan, the faculty and staff, 
and on the students who go to the University of Saskatchewan, 
and on those people we’ve given the task of administering and 
managing the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
This dispute is about underfunding. It is not about whether or 
not professors want more money. It’s not about the university 
management being dug in and inflexible in terms of their 
position. This dispute is about underfunding, and it’s important 
that the people of this province realize that. 
 
This dispute is also about enrolment quotas. We have young 
people in this province that have the academic qualifications to 
go to the University of Saskatchewan and they cannot get in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was a young person in 1970, going into the 
university, you required a 65 per cent average to get into the 
Arts and Science. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How did you get in? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And the members opposite ask me how I got 
in. I got in because I was able to obtain a grade 12; I applied to 
the University of Saskatchewan, and because 

my average was 65 per cent or more, I was eligible to attend the 
university. That is no longer the case — that is no longer the 
case. 
 
There are young men and women — people who live in the 
minister’s riding of Weyburn, people who live in 
Kelvington-Wadena, people who live in the Premier’s riding 
and the Deputy Premier’s riding — who have applied to the 
University of Saskatchewan, have all of the criteria, they are 
eligible to enter the university, but they can’t get in because of 
enrolment restrictions. And those enrolment restrictions are 
coming about because more and more people are going and 
wanting to get into the university, and I suspect that’s because 
young people can’t find jobs. 
 
The Minister of Education regularly talks about meeting the 
21st century, being ready and able to meet the 21st century, 
having the skills and the expertise and the technology to meet 
that century. But if you people continue to underfund the 
University of Saskatchewan, we will not have the skills and the 
knowledge and the expertise to meet the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Last night I was over at the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation reception. I was speaking to a number of 
teachers. And teachers there had been speaking to academics 
and teachers in the country of Sweden. And that country, not 
unlike Saskatchewan and Canada, is also experiencing 
economic difficulties. But do they cut back in education? Do 
they cut back in education in tough times? No, they do not. 
They put their resources into education because the economy 
will turn around, and we have to have the skills and technology 
and ability to meet the time when the economy will recover. 
 
I think you people are living in yesterday’s world. You are 
living in the past. You are living in the 1950s or the ’60s . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
You know, I would ask the member from Wilkie if he has so 
much to say, which he regularly does — he sits and chirps from 
his seat — to get on to his feet and get into the debate. He rarely 
has enough gumption to get out of his seat and respond to 
matters of significant importance to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is also about dividing and conquering 
different groups in our society. We have seen, we have seen 
how this government has gone about driving wedges between 
groups of people. They have done it effectively when it comes 
to women. We have the Minister of Social Services who 
regularly attacks the women’s movement in this province. 
We’ve had the Premier talk about gay people. We’ve the 
Minister of Social Services, yesterday in this church, condemn 
the United Church . . . or in this Assembly, condemn the United 
Church of Canada. And this once again, here we have a 
back-to-work legislation that is about dividing the faculty, the 
professors at the university, from the administration, from the 
people, from the students. And what you people really need to 
do is start providing some leadership — start providing some 
leadership. It is   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

397 
 

incumbent upon you to bring people together, to resolve 
differences. That’s what leadership is all about; that is what 
government is all about. 
 
But what do you do? What do you do? Eight days ago the 
mediator was meeting with the university faculty, the 
professors, and the administration, and the Minister of 
Education made it quite clear that he was prepared to introduce 
back-to-work legislation. And once you do that, Mr. Minister, 
because I’ve had some experience being involved in labour 
disputes, once someone who has the ability and the power to 
order people back to work interferes and intervenes, the 
negotiating process breaks down. And I think, Mr. Minister, 
that you let down the people of this province by getting into the 
dispute at too early of a stage. You let down the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will not resolve the problems at the 
University of Saskatchewan. It will not solve the problem. The 
class-rooms will be crowded tomorrow. The labs will be 
crowded tomorrow; the labs will still be deteriorating 
tomorrow. We will have a library that still will not have 
resource materials and journals that are necessary to keep 
students and faculty up to date and informed. Professors will 
still be demoralized tomorrow about what’s been happening at 
the University of Saskatchewan. Students will still be 
short-changed. Enrolment quotas will still exist. Young people 
will still be turned away. 
 
(1930) 
 
You, members opposite, the men and women of the 
Conservative Party, can order the professors back to work 
tonight, or tomorrow, or whenever, but it will not solve the 
problem. You can take a sledge-hammer to a symptom. It’s a 
symptom that you have created. That symptom has come about 
because of a much larger problem, and that’s the problem of 
underfunding. 
 
Will your back-to-work legislation mean everyone who’s 
entitled to an education in this province will get it? The answer 
is no. Will your back-to-work legislation mean that professors 
will be attracted to the University of Saskatchewan? The answer 
is no. Will your back-to-work legislation mean that our library 
will be up to par? The answer is no. Will your back-to-work 
legislation improve morale? Will your back-to-work legislation 
mean a quality and accessibility post-secondary education at the 
University of Saskatchewan? It will not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the legislation. The legislation 
does not resolve the fundamental problems facing the 
University of Saskatchewan. The fundamental problem is that 
you people are prepared to spend money on Peter Pocklington 
and Fleet Aerospace of Ontario and all of the other kinds of 
patronage groups that you like to pay homage to. 
 
Your legislation will not resolve the problem because we will 
still have the Rafferty dam project to a cost of $1.1 billion; we 
will still have $35,000 a day of taxpayers’ money going out to 
pay for empty office space so you can reward some of your 
friends in the real estate industry; we will still have those, those 
issues, that mismanagement, that incompetence. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support the legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not happy to have to 
enter this debate on this Bill because we shouldn’t be here 
debating whether or not we should be sending the university 
faculty back to work, or any other group back to work, but 
particularly, Mr. Speaker, not this group. 
 
We should and would not be facing this Bill today if the 
government truly had a commitment to education. If there was 
anything more than hollow rhetoric, empty words, and 
meaningless phrases, we would not be here today. The 
university problem is that clearly of underfunding, 
underfunding, Mr. Speaker, that started in 1982. I’m not going 
to stand here and tell you that everything was all skittles and 
beer, as a former leader of our great party once or several times 
was fond of saying. Things were not all just peaches and cream 
in the university system under New Democrats, but they were 
10 times better than they are today. 
 
We’re faced with the prospect of legislating — for the first 
time, I believe, in Canadian history — legislating university 
professors back to work. That should tell the members opposite 
that you’re treading on some ground, that all of the anti-worker, 
anti-union governments in Canada historically have never had 
to tread on this same ground. There should be a clear message 
there for you. You have fouled the situation up so greatly that 
we’re sitting here tonight debating whether or not we should be 
sending university faculty back to work or not. 
 
The underfunding, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned started in . . . or 
started to very much accelerate in 1982, and indeed former 
colleagues of mine have pointed out how the decline in funding 
per student, real operating grants, has declined from $9,016 per 
student in 1982-83 to, in real terms, $6,907 per student, for a 
decline of 23 per cent — 23 per cent per student, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m not talking the global budget but the per student budget. We 
see the total enrolment at our universities has gone up in that 
same period of time, but we see the lack of commitment of the 
government members opposite, total lack of regard for students, 
total lack of regard for faculty, total lack of regard for our 
higher education system. 
 
Because of their lack of commitment, we are here today talking 
about this arbitrary Bill, this Bill that is unnecessary, it’s 
hypocritical, and it’s just simply a bad Bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
terrible Bill, and it really causes me a great deal of discomfort 
that the government would have allowed this situation to get to 
the desperate state it is today where we have students fearing 
whether they’re going to be able to finish their examinations 
and complete their academic year. And we also have faculty 
that are scratching their heads and wondering, what does it take 
to make this government open its eyes. What does it take, Mr. 
Speaker, what does it take? They ask that question, and they 
have every right to ask it. Indeed, I would be asking the same 
question if I were in their place. 
 
This legislation . . . I listened as the minister gave his weak 
excuses and his rhetoric and his justifications, but it was   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

398 
 

interesting, Mr. Speaker — I did not once hear him say that 
either side in the dispute had asked to be legislated back to 
work, nor had they asked the other side to be legislated back to 
work. In other words, neither the faculty nor the administration 
is asking us to introduce this legislation. That call has not come 
to us. Instead it’s just some decision that this government, that 
has long run strictly on the public opinion polls of the day . . . I 
think they did a little telephoning last week, stuck their finger 
up, and decided the wind was blowing this way, so that’s the 
way they’re going for now. It would be interesting to see which 
way they’re going next week. 
 
I’m wondering if the minister could say that the faculty 
association asked for this legislation. I don’t think so. I don’t 
think he can say it. But I’m also wondering if he could say that 
the president of the university has asked for this heavy-handed 
and wrong-headed Bill. Again, I don’t think that would be the 
case. 
 
What we’ve got here is a collective bargaining dispute. We 
have a collective bargaining dispute, which is not unusual when 
you understand the very nature of collective bargaining, Mr. 
Speaker. It is by its very nature an adversarial role. You cannot 
come to a mutually agreeable decision until you mutually set 
out your particular causes and cases. Both sides in this dispute 
have placed their desires on the bargaining table. They have 
tried, they are working towards reaching an agreement. And 
what do we have here? We have a minister that stands up and 
says, well it doesn’t really matter what they do at the bargaining 
table, we’re going to just send them back to work. We’re just 
going to legislate them back to work. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if I were in the university faculty, I would 
be so deeply annoyed at the government members and 
particularly any of them who support this Bill, I would be so 
particularly annoyed at them that I think I’d be tempted to get 
active politically against them, in Eastview hopefully, in the 
case of the Saskatoon people. It just seems ludicrous to me that 
we could have a negotiating process taking place . . . And the 
minister some days ago announcing, it doesn’t matter what you 
decide at the bargaining table, you’re going to be legislated 
back to work, puts no onus whatsoever on either side, quite 
frankly, to bargain — certainly not to bargain in good faith. It 
takes all of the impetus from that collective bargaining totally 
away. 
 
It’s not like, Mr. Speaker, we have a life endangered or it’s not 
like this strike has been going on for weeks and weeks. It’s 
certainly a serious . . . It’s a serious concern for some 24,000 
university students. It is certainly a serious thing not entered 
into lightly, I can assure the minister and the members opposite. 
It’s a very serious matter for the faculty, because when you are 
out on strike, not . . . I mean they may be striking partly for 
more wages, that sort of thing, but for the duration of the 
withholding of services there is no pay cheque coming through, 
Mr. Minister. This is why a withholding of services or a strike 
by any name is not something that working men and working 
women enter into lightly. They think very, very seriously about 
it before they dash into a work stoppage. And if you look at the 
history of the University of Saskatchewan you have to look a 
long, long ways to find a work stoppage, a 
 

situation where the faculty has withheld their services. 
 
The Bill before us now, Mr. Speaker, illustrates what has 
become a conscious and consistent policy of the PC 
government. That policy, of course, I am referring to is a policy 
of Devine and conquer — or is it divide and conquer? I’m not 
sure whether it’s divide or Devine and conquer. In this case 
what they are attempting to do is to divide the faculty at our 
university from the students. And the real problem — the 
students know it, the faculty know it — the real problem is that 
of underfunding. And the real proof of a good and caring 
government, a good and caring political leadership, is whether 
there is an objective of consulting with people, of finding ways 
to unify people, to tie them together, to build bridges between 
people that feel that they are being torn apart. Clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is not in the mood to build a bridge. 
Clearly they’re not. It certainly showed up in their Highways 
budget, but more on that at another more appropriate time. 
 
By any test of bringing people together, this government clearly 
fails. It is tearing people apart; tearing them apart every single 
day and in every possible way; trying desperately to say, gosh 
we’re with the majority on this issue. And we on this side are 
saying, gosh, who’s next? Who’s the next minority? Who next 
are you going to speak out against? Who’s next? That’s part of 
our objection to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the underfunding of the university is somewhat 
analogous to the underfunding if somebody were to start up a 
new business and undercapitalize that new business. It is only a 
matter of time, no matter how rosy the sales projections are. In 
fact, to drive the point home about this starting up a new 
company and how it’s underfunded, to drive that point home 
I’m going to use a specific example, that of Canapharm. 
Because I think the underfunding of Canapharm as it started out 
is directly analogous to the underfunding of the university. And 
if you’ll bear with me, Mr. Speaker, I will point out how that 
occurs. 
 
Canapharm was set up as a venture capital corporation in 
Wolseley — the then minister of Health’s riding. Set up as a 
venture capital corporation with much hoop-la, a lot of blue 
paper, a lot of Tory blue ads in the newspapers about what a 
wonderful thing this is — Canapharm. Perhaps . . . Not perhaps 
— it is a good idea to manufacture intravenous solutions as 
much as possible in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’ve said it before. You haven’t 
been listening. The present Minister of Health says, first guy to 
ever say it. 
 
I’ve said it before, I’ve said it publicly; I’ve said it in meetings 
in Indian Head-Wolseley, more specifically in Grenfell; I’ve 
said it in this House; I have said it before. The idea of 
manufacturing intravenous drugs in Saskatchewan is a good 
idea. But what they did is that they immediately assumed that 
they would have 100 per cent of the intravenous drug trade in 
Saskatchewan. Despite the fact that the Minister of Health and 
his officials have been directly ordering people who purchase 
intravenous solution to purchase, to buy Saskatchewan — in 
other words, Canapharm because   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

399 
 

that’s the only option — despite that, they had great difficulty 
breaking the 40 per cent of market, great difficulty because of a 
number of technical problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1945) 
 
Then what happened? The Minister of Health brings in $4 
million — he’s now suddenly the minister of Sedco 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), minister 
responsible for Sedco — brings in $4 million in aid. The 
government recognized the underfunding in Canapharm — and 
this is my point, Mr. Speaker — they recognized the 
underfunding in Canapharm, recognized if they didn’t chip in 
with some money, Canapharm would cease to exist. So what 
did they do? Out comes $4 million. 
 
We have a crisis situation in our university that has taken six 
years to achieve. Six years the government members opposite 
have had an opportunity to recognize the underfunding, the 
ongoing and continual squeeze that you’re placing on our 
higher education institutions, and yet, what are we doing here 
today? Debating a Bill, trying, trying, that you want to put the 
faculty back to work, legislation back to work, all because of 
underfunding. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to carry the Canapharm situation a 
little bit further. Shortly after the $4 million loan, Canapharm 
was still into problems because they were inventing new 
start-up problems, a new problem every week or every month, 
and the firm continued to have problems. So then, the now 
minister of piratization is the same ex-minister of Health, 
ex-minister responsible for Sedco, now the minister of 
privatization — obviously he can’t keep a job — but 
Canapharm keeps following him around. And we’ve got a 
situation where for $4 million, they got 40 per cent ownership; 
for $2 million, a Montreal pharmaceutical firm has 60 per cent 
ownership. 
 
And the universities and their underfunding, it just seems so 
strange to me. We’ve got $4 million for Canapharm; we’ve got 
nothing for the universities. That’s what the government 
members opposite are saying. Four million dollars for a good 
firm, for a good idea — maybe saying it’s a good firm is putting 
more words in my own mouth than I should — but $4 million 
for basically a good idea, but nothing for 24,000 students. No 
additional . . . not a dime, nothing for the faculty members at 
the universities. Instead they offer $4 million to Canapharm; 
they offer back-to-work legislation for the people at the 
university. It’s not fair, simply put. 
 
Another area of underfunding, just to tie it in as another 
example, Mr. Speaker, so that other people perhaps not as 
familiar with the university will have a better grasp of what 
we’re about here tonight, is that of highways. We see the 
government saying the same thing in highways that they’re 
saying with respect to the universities. They’re saying, our 
funding is increasing, we’re spending more and more and more 
money. And yet what do we have? We have a situation — I 
raised it earlier in the House today — from the minister’s, the 
Minister of Highway’s construction projects. They’re . . . Great 
deal of hoop-la about spending more money in 1988-89 than in 
’87-88, yet despite this, despite this, oh we’re 

spending more money, and oh, we’re getting good value, the 
total number of kilometres in grading has dropped from 386 
kilometres last year to 307 this year. Surfacing, same, the 
amount has dropped. 
 
What is happening, Mr. Speaker, is in university they’re saying 
the funding is expanding and yet clearly it is not. Clearly we 
have a situation where the administration at the university’s 
hands are tied — clearly tied. They have been unable to 
negotiate in the kind of good faith that I’m sure they would 
desire. I’m sure that all sides of this dispute would desire that 
the university administration had some leeway, had something. 
 
And they would have that leeway, Mr. Speaker. Had the 
members opposite at least once in the last six years funded the 
university to the level of inflation for that year alone, even that 
would have been a very, very welcome addition of money. It 
would have been a pretty significant addition. 
 
Instead, what we have is the ever-tightening financial squeeze 
on our university. Because of that, we’ve seen our university, 
our tuition fees, going up and up and up. I don’t believe there’s 
been a year in the last six where the tuitions have not risen. 
From 1982, university tuition is significantly higher, and what 
that does, Mr. Speaker, is it says to the people of Regina North, 
it says, if you come from a fairly well-to-do family, you have a 
good academic standing, you can perhaps attend university. But 
heaven help you if you don’t come from money — heaven help 
you. 
 
What this underfunding of universities is doing is causing poor 
people not to have an option. University is not an option for 
many, many poor people in our society today, and that’s a crime 
because we’re losing some very, very good minds. We’re losing 
them from the academic field. Some of them certainly are going 
on and making successes of themselves in other areas, but we’re 
missing a significant amount of brainpower because of the 
policy of underfunding at our universities. 
 
We’ve also, as a direct result of the underfunding, Mr. Speaker, 
we have quotas in many of the colleges at university. First time, 
to my knowledge, first time in Saskatchewan’s history that 
we’ve ever had quotas placed on university entrance — quotas 
where you say, if there’s 1,000 people want to get into a 
specific college, that college says, no, we are only taking 670. I 
use those numbers . . . I assure you, Mr. Speaker, I pulled them 
totally from the air. I’m not using a specific college, and I want 
to make that plain and clear so that nobody thinks I’m trying to 
manufacture numbers. In this case I’m not; I’m simply using it 
to illustrate how a quota system works. You have a given 
demand, and yet the college says no, it’ll be the demand less, 
because we only want this many people, and that’s what’s 
happening. So for the first time in Saskatchewan history, we 
have people who have the academic ability, have the smarts to 
be going to university, people who have the ability to arrange 
for the funding one way or another, and yet they cannot attend 
the university because of the underfunding, the very 
underfunding, Mr. Speaker. That is why we are up and debating 
this Bill, this Bill legislating faculty at the university back to 
work. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

400 
 

Underfunding. You’d think that by now the government 
members would be starting to get the message. You’d think that 
they would have collected their thoughts a little bit, and you’d 
think that someone over there has got a thought that’s germane 
to this issue — at least one person. What have we seen? How 
many speakers from that side? We saw the minister introduce 
the Bill and not one of them has had the courage, not one of 
them has stood up in this House to defend this Bill. Why not? 
Because they know they cannot, Mr. Speaker. You can’t defend 
the indefensible. 
 
We have underfunding. The government claims it’s in a 
financial crisis. You bet they are. This government is one that 
couldn’t manage a three-house paper route and it’s amazing to 
me, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve got $20 million plus for the Peter 
Pocklingtons of this world, nothing extra for the university. 
 
They’ve got $6 million each and every year from the 
Department of Highways budget to build roads, logging roads 
for Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, $6 million each and 
every year guaranteed in writing, and not one extra dime for the 
universities — not one dime for 24,000 students in this 
province; not one dime for the fairly significant faculty at those 
universities, yet $6 million for Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington. 
 
I say it’s a government that has its priorities all wrong. There’s 
$4 million . . . I talked of Canapharm now owned 60 per cent by 
Mag-Tech, $4 million this government came up with just like 
that — $4 million for a company now based in Montreal, $4 
million — not a dime for the university. Where is the priority? 
It’s not much wonder they can’t get up . . . It’s not much 
wonder none of them will get up and speak on this issue, not a 
solitary one. I think it’s a shame. 
 
I wonder where the leadership of the once great — well, never 
great — of the government, I wonder where the leadership 
really is. Clearly it’s not in this legislature tonight because all I 
see is people sitting there, kind of stunned looks on their faces 
and thinking, my gosh, what did we get ourselves into — my 
gosh. 
 
We’ve got tuition increases; we’ve got quotas now on 
enrolment at university. We’ve got money handed, just buckets 
of money, for Peter Pocklington, for Weyerhaeuser, for 
Mag-Tech from Montreal, and the list goes on and on — 
$36,000 per day for empty office space; $36,000 per day for 
empty office space, Mr. Speaker. Not so much as $1,000 a day 
for the university. 
 
What this government is saying is that it places a greater value 
on this cube of empty air than it does on a single university 
student. Is that ever disgusting. Is that ever a shame. And that’s 
exactly why, Mr. Speaker, you see speaker after speaker on this 
side getting up, speaking on this Bill, this hard-hearted, cruel, 
wrong-headed Bill that we shouldn’t even be discussing. We 
shouldn’t be discussing and we wouldn’t be discussing had the 
underfunding not gone on for so long. It’s tragic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and I will be 
voting against this Bill, but I want to reiterate that  

government members opposite should pay particularly close 
attention. This is the first time in Canadian history that we have 
a situation where we’re legislating professors of a university 
back to work. First time in history of Canada. Boy, you break 
new ground, but it just never ceases to amaze me how you can 
think that that’s good politics. How can that possibly be that 
you can act so fast to break ground in this area? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and voting 
against the legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It will be a 
surprise to few and certainly a surprise to me, Mr. Speaker, that 
we are dealing with a Bill like this in this session that was 
tagged some two and a half weeks ago as the mad-dog session 
of the PC government of 1988. 
 
We’ve seen a number of mad-dog initiatives already, and I use 
the term figuratively, Mr. Speaker, and this one is not out of 
character. We’ve seen in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, a reflection of 
the characteristics, three of the characteristics of the 
government that we have operating — the Government of 
Saskatchewan — certainly not in the best interest of the people 
of this province, in my view. We have in this legislature and 
sitting on the government side, individuals who are committed 
to operating in a mean-spirited kind of way, Mr. Speaker, 
mean-spirited in terms of the conduct of affairs in 
Saskatchewan. And certainly this Bill reflects that 
mean-spirited attitude of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have in this province, Mr. Speaker, a government which is 
either unwilling or afraid to consult. I’m not sure whether this 
government is unwilling to consult or afraid to consult, but the 
failure to consult has clearly become a characteristic of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The dental therapists of this province know about the 
characteristic of this government’s failure to consult. Social 
workers all across this province, for years now, know about this 
government’s unwillingness to consult in terms of dealing with 
programs for people in need. 
 
I got a letter just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, from a constituent of 
mine who works in the health care profession, and she points 
out and uses the phrase, “this is a government that does not 
know how to consult,” and I say she’s right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Workers, Mr. Speaker, workers know that this is a government 
that fails to consult in terms of looking for ideas to co-operate 
and provide ventures, together with people with ideas and 
entrepreneurs, as a way of creating employment. 
 
(2000) 
 
And most of all, Mr. Speaker, as we address this Bill, the 
people in the faculty at the University of Saskatchewan and the 
people in the administration in the University of Saskatchewan 
know that this is a government that is either unwilling or afraid 
to consult. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

401 
 

And I would add to that as well, Mr. Speaker, it has become a 
characteristic of this government in this session, since we’ve 
come two and one-half weeks ago, that it is unwilling to defend 
its proposals for the solutions for the people of Saskatchewan. 
In fact, one could probably say more accurately that this 
government is more a part of the problems than a part of the 
solutions of Saskatchewan. And maybe that is why, maybe that 
is why we have in the province today a government that is 
literally unwilling to defend the solutions it asks Saskatchewan 
people to accept. 
 
As my colleague pointed out just previously, in this debate on 
this vicious Bill, mean-spirited Bill, we have had one 
government member stand. The minister who introduced it 
spoke to it for about five minutes this afternoon, and that was 
the only comment that has been made by any member on that 
side of the House in defence of this Bill. Oh, we’ve heard the 
yipping and we’ve heard the yapping and we’ve heard the 
barking and the hooting and the chirping, but we’ve not heard 
— other than the Minister of Education very briefly and very 
timidly — a member from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
stand to defend this Bill, stand to describe this Bill in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan. It’s, get the Bill into 
the House, sneak it in and sneak it out and back to the bushes, 
hiding from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
A government unwilling to defend its proposed solutions to the 
people of Saskatchewan, unwilling to defend this Bill, and 
unwilling, interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, unwilling to even 
defend its own budget. We saw on Monday night in this 
Assembly after the Minister of Highways finished remarks that 
he had begun before the supper hour, an entire evening session 
in which not a single government member stood to defend the 
proposals for the budget — along . . . consistent with this 
unwillingness to defend. 
 
We saw again on Tuesday night of this week, Mr. Speaker, the 
government in this Assembly move and then stand in their 
places one after the other to adjourn the House to prevent 
debate again on Tuesday night in this Assembly. And it has 
become typical of this government, Mr. Speaker, in this session, 
in this mad-dog session, this government that is mean-spirited, 
unwilling or afraid to consult and unwilling to defend, 
unwilling to defend its own plans. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, this is a sad day, this is a sad day for 
me, I believe, for all members of this Assembly. Certainly every 
member on this side who has stood has used that phrase in some 
way, shape, or form. Are we to assume that that is not a part of 
the feeling of the members on the side of the government, as we 
deal with this vicious Bill before us tonight? 
 
It is a sad . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, there’s the 
member from Wilkie, and he’s barking from his back seat. The 
people of Saskatchewan await you, sir, to stand and share your 
brilliance and your solutions to the problems of Saskatchewan. I 
await that. I await that. It will be mystifying, I am sure, if you 
will cease yapping from your seat and stand and account to your 
constituents for the proposals that you are a part of putting 
forth. We look forward to that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have, I believe, before us in this Assembly 
now, we have what is yet another example and the result of a 
government committed to a blind, ideological shaping of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And it is merely part of a bigger 
picture. We have to understand . . . if we want to understand the 
context of this Bill, if we want to understand the meaning of 
this Bill, we have to put it into the context of what is taking 
place in Saskatchewan today. Because when we understand 
what is taking place in Saskatchewan today, and we look at the 
realities of this Bill and the circumstances that led to it and are 
going on in the province at this very minute, it is not hard to 
understand, Mr. Speaker, it is not hard to understand where this 
government is coming from. And it is not . . . it would not have 
been hard to predict that we should be standing in this 
Assembly today debating this shameful Bill, this unnecessary 
Bill, this mean-spirited Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a Bill that, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, comes as a result 
of having failed to consult. And how do we know that? I ask the 
Minister of Education or any one of those members on that side 
of the House to stand and tell me who has asked for this Bill to 
be introduced. Has it been the faculty members at the at the 
University of Saskatchewan? Clearly not, Mr. Speaker. They 
have made it very clear that they have not requested, nor do 
they want to see this Bill before this House. Is it the 
administration from the University of Saskatchewan? And 
they’re on record, Mr. Speaker, clearly on record as being 
opposed to the introduction to the very existence. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that nobody has asked for it. Nobody has asked 
for it. This Bill is before us because it meets the agenda. It 
meets the agenda of the Government of Saskatchewan today. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, when I sit in my place and I watch 
the proceedings in this Assembly, and I observe with as much 
understanding and responsibility the actions of this government 
and the conduct of affairs in the province of Saskatchewan 
today, I must admit that, although I am not a member of the 
government today, there have been times, Mr. Speaker, when I 
have felt shamed. I have felt shamed to be in an Assembly in 
which some of the vicious things that have taken place over 
these past weeks and months have been perpetrated by people 
charged with the most noble of responsibilities, charged with 
the responsibility to address the issues of concern to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and most importantly, the issues of concern to 
the people of Saskatchewan who are least able to determine 
their own fates and futures and fortunes. 
 
And what have we seen? What have we seen from the people 
who have been elected, and most ashamedly of all from those 
who sit in the front benches and are entitled legally to the term 
“honourable” — to be called honourable in the province of 
Saskatchewan — perpetuating a tax on minorities and people 
who are least able to defend and stand for themselves in the 
province of Saskatchewan? And I am ashamed, Mr. Speaker, to 
sit in an Assembly in which that kind of government-led 
activity is taking place in the attack of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And so, and so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, there’s   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

402 
 

the member from Wilkie and he chirps some more. He’s got 
lots of advice from his back seat, and I ask you, sir, I ask you: 
when will you cease to be a part of these shameful acts 
perpetuated by your front-bench leaders? When will you stand 
up for what is right? And when will you bring forth some 
common sense solutions with sensitivity and compassion for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it typical? Isn’t it typical that 
what we have here, introducing a shameful Bill — the failure to 
defend — and yet the powerful member from Wilkie sits in his 
back seat and yips. And that’s the level of conduct of debate 
that takes place in the Assembly, takes place in this Assembly 
when we bring in a precedent, when this government brings in a 
precedent-setting Bill — in many ways a precedent-setting Bill 
— and that’s the level of debate and conduct and decorum that 
is exemplified by the government members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so it seems to me, it seems to me that we have this Bill 
before us for several reasons that are part of the bigger picture, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re part of the bigger picture. We have this 
Bill before us because this government does not want to deal 
with its responsibilities, fiscally and otherwise, its 
responsibilities to the University of Saskatchewan, to the 
faculty of that university, to the administration of that 
university, but most importantly of all, Mr. Speaker, in the long 
run to the students of that university today, and more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, to the university students at the 
University of Saskatchewan tomorrow. And that’s who this 
government is failing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — That is who is being denied their rights in the 
province of Saskatchewan through this as an example of a 
blind, ideological agenda that is on the plate of the Government 
of Saskatchewan today. 
 
There is another part of the agenda here too, Mr. Speaker. This 
Bill is designed in my view to send a message, to send a 
malicious, vindictive message to working people in 
Saskatchewan, working people both organized, Mr. Speaker, 
and unorganized in the province of Saskatchewan. This Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, is designed to send a message to working people 
in Saskatchewan, to working people and families in every 
community across this province. And what is that malicious 
message, Mr. Speaker? That message is this — the message is 
this: don’t expect a lot, don’t expect a lot. That’s the message 
that is being sent to working people across this province. 
 
And why are people across this province being sent out 
messages not to expect or ask for a lot? Because it meets the 
agenda of two major initiatives of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, that meets the agenda, Mr. Speaker, of 
piratization and free trade. That’s their agenda. That’s what this 
is all about. And I say shame on the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that we 
come back again to piratization and free trade. When you 
 

try to understand and you try . . . when common sense, caring 
people try to make sense out of what this government is doing, 
they have a difficult time, Mr. Speaker. They say so much of 
what this government is doing doesn’t make sense to me. And 
of course it doesn’t. If you are a caring person, concerned about 
your families and your neighbours and the present and the 
future and the opportunity for children and grandchildren in this 
province, and you try to figure out what this is all about, it 
doesn’t make sense, because you’re starting from the wrong 
point of view. That’s the problem. When you start, Mr. Speaker, 
when you start, Mr. Speaker, from a blind, ideological 
commitment, to the two exercises of piratization and free trade, 
then all of a sudden, all of a sudden all of this dogmatically 
initiated activity, Mr. Speaker, starts to make sense. 
 
And another signal has been sent. This Bill is intended to send 
another signal to organized working people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the signal that this Bill is intended to send, 
Mr. Speaker, is this: is that from this point forward, from this 
government, in this province, you can expect inconvenience. 
You can expect inconvenience to be the criteria to take away 
one of the basic rights of collective bargaining. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we will all have different opinions as to 
what defines necessary service, and people of Saskatchewan 
have and will continue to and always will, I suppose, have 
debates about what is necessary service, and when is it proper 
for the Government of Saskatchewan to intervene. But always, 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of initiative is undertaken because there 
is a definition in the mind of the government that a necessary 
service has somehow been threatened. 
 
But that’s not the case after this Bill. This Bill sets a new 
precedent in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The 
new precedent is that if people are inconvenienced then that 
justifies taking one of the most basic principles of collective 
bargaining away from working people. And as that affects 
organized working people, so too, do I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
does it affect the security of unorganized working people and so 
too, do I believe, Mr. Speaker, the security of ma and pa 
businesses all around the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The implications of this Bill, Mr. Speaker . . . It may seem to 
some that we’re dealing with a Bill here that is designed to take 
some University professors and shoot them back in there so that 
some folks can write their exams at the end of the year. And I 
understand that, but there’s so much more. There is so much 
more to this Bill. And to quote a phrase . . . Maybe we’ve 
reached that point, Mr. Speaker, to quote a phrase that was 
fluttered up and down the province of Saskatchewan back in 
1982. We’ve reached that point where truly every member on 
the government side of the House of the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan can say, “There is so much more we can be.” 
 
(2015) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill also represents an intrusion into the 
autonomy of the operation of the University of Saskatchewan. 
Now that may seem to be kind of a   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

403 
 

high-faulting, airy-fairy, academic sort of idea, Mr. Speaker, to 
some. But it is an important principle, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
important principle that in the province of Saskatchewan, as 
with any other jurisdiction that offers post-secondary education 
in this country of Canada, that those institutions must have the 
autonomy to be able to determine what are the best qualities, 
the criteria for the best quality of education, for their people, 
and to make the decisions about the balance between research 
and instruction and tutorials and the whole kind of guidance as 
we try to shape the futures and the opportunities of the young 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. And for the 
universities to have that ability, that autonomy protected, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very, very important principle and this, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill, represents an intrusion — an intrusion into 
the right of the universities to make autonomous decisions 
about the education of Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, earlier, my leader, the member from 
Riversdale, who — I would add, contrary to, in my opinion, 
contrary to another leader who sits in this Assembly — is a man 
of vision, a man of compassion, and a man of understanding 
who is willing to consult and to listen . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The people of Saskatchewan earlier this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the Premier of this 
province, heard the Leader of the Opposition, a man of 
compassion and vision, stand in this House and speak and speak 
eloquently and speak with passion and with concern and with 
intellectual soundness about his concerns about this Bill. And 
I’m proud to stand with the member from Riversdale who I 
believe the people of Saskatchewan will recognize in 1990 or 
’91, and the people of Saskatoon Eastview and the people of 
Regina Elphinstone on May 4 will recognize provides the best 
leadership in terms of political direction in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And they will send a message, Mr. Speaker; 
they will send a message to the Premier of Saskatchewan that 
they like the kind of leadership that has been exemplified by the 
member from Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And as he stood on his foot in this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, and talked about the importance of the role of the 
universities in Saskatchewan life, two things that he referred to, 
Mr. Speaker, were the quality of education and the accessibility 
to education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the importance of excellence is part of the 
requirement that is necessary to provide quality education that 
requires the autonomy that this Bill interferes with. And this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, also sends yet another signal from the 
Government of Saskatchewan about intrusions and conduct of 
university affairs that has to do with accessibility. And we’ve 
seen that already. We’ve seen the Government of Saskatchewan 
interfere with the University of Saskatchewan’s ability to be 
accessible to all Saskatchewan people because they have been 
forced by the actions of this government, Mr. Speaker, to assign 
quotas to the number of students who are able to attend 
university. In Saskatchewan you can no  

longer attend university only on the basis of having the required 
marks, because there’s not enough room any more. There’s not 
enough room. Necessary resources have not been made 
available by the Government of Saskatchewan to allow the 
University of Saskatchewan to do its job. So that’s made higher 
learning less accessible. 
 
And the other factor, Mr. Speaker, is that again for the same 
reason, through lack of funding, tuition fees are increasing. And 
we’re beginning to see a move, I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that is 
exemplified again and characterized in this Bill, a move where 
higher learning will be available not just to those with the 
highest marks, but also only to those with the greatest means, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I don’t know about the Premier of Saskatchewan, I don’t 
know about the Minister of Education, but I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, in my view, the people of Saskatchewan are best 
served with our post-secondary education when the people of 
this province are guaranteed quality education and have access 
to programs that they can get into because they can afford, and 
the room is there to take them. And that seems to me, Mr. 
Speaker, to be the sign, to be one of the signs of a healthy 
university. 
 
Well this Bill is further characteristic of this government’s 
attack on the right of the university, the responsibility of the 
university, to provide quality accessible education to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have before us a Bill that, not only 
does it not provide solutions to post-secondary education 
problems, not only does it not provide solutions to those 
problems faced by the University of Saskatchewan, it doesn’t 
even provide solutions to the problem that faces us today — not 
even that. 
 
And so we have, Mr. Speaker, in my view, a Bill that is coming 
forward without place but is clearly a part of a malicious and a 
vindictive agenda that is all part of a blind, ideological support 
for the exercises of the piratization and free trade, and that’s 
what it all comes back to. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, part of that same agenda, and it’s 
exemplified here again in this Bill, that larger agenda in 
Saskatchewan today, is to drive a wedge. We have the 
Government of Saskatchewan today, intentionally, as part of 
their political agenda, setting out to drive wedges between the 
people of this province. We have seen the Government of 
Saskatchewan attempt to drive wedges, Mr. Speaker, between 
rural people and urban people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Clearly that was part of the agenda in the gerrymander Bill that 
we saw in the last session. Clearly that is part of the agenda in 
the language that is used by our sometimes Premier, sometimes 
Agriculture minister, who said in this House just the other day, 
Mr. Speaker, that the farmers of Saskatchewan should be 
pleased with his actions because over half their income is gifts 
— gifts, to use his word, gifts from the government. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 
attempting to drive wedges between rural and urban people in 
the province of Saskatchewan.   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

404 
 

We’ve seen this government, both its Premier and its Minister 
of Social Services, leading the way in attacks on minorities in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And sometimes it gets harder 
and harder to figure out where the Premier leaves off and the 
Minister of Social Services picks up. But the thing that has 
become a characteristic of those who are entitled to the term 
“honourable” in this province is that they are leading the attack, 
today, on minorities in the province of Saskatchewan — clearly, 
clearly part of a political agenda to drive wedges between the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, as part of the piratization initiative in 
the prescription drug plan, the beginnings of a user-pay health 
care scheme, Mr. Speaker. And what is that but another attempt 
to drive wedges, a wedge between the sick and the healthy; an 
attempt to get those who are not sick — the healthy — to begin 
to resent the sick for using the health care system that is being 
. . . that is costing too much. And have we ever heard that 
phrase being used from this government. Why? Because it is 
part of an agenda to drive wedges between people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen, as part of an agenda to drive wedges, the 
government’s handling of a Bill to deal with French language 
rights in the province of Saskatchewan. And in my view, Mr. 
Speaker, a repeat of a characteristic of this government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’d like the hon. member to relate his remarks 
to the Bill, to the amendment under discussion. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning of my 
address, to understand the implications of this Bill and the 
meaning of this Bill in the province of Saskatchewan, we have 
to look at the bigger picture. 
 
Oh, here’s the Minister of Health now, he’s chirping up and he 
looks as though he’s just ready to plunge right into debate, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s ready to get in and share his wisdom and to 
defend this Bill and to tell his constituents and the people of 
Saskatchewan why he sees this Bill as such a wonderful 
solution to the problems that ail us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is this, is that this Bill is part of 
an agenda of driving wedges between people — wedges 
between faculty and administration, wedges between students 
and both, and wedges between those who are outside the 
university community and those who are within. That is part of 
the agenda in this Bill. I’m not saying that’s the whole agenda, 
but it’s part of it in the same way. That’s a part of the agenda of 
so many other things that this government has done and is doing 
today, because driving wedges is on the agenda. It’s part of the 
political agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen other examples of it. We’ve seen, in terms of 
driving the wedge, we’ve seen the Minister of Education, before 
anybody would have suggested there is any sense to it at all, 
saying in this House that he was thinking about back-to-work 
legislation, while the two parties in the negotiations, Mr. 
Speaker, while the two parties were sitting at the table with a 
conciliator. Progress was being made. The Minister of 
Education stands in this House and says he’s thinking about 
back-to-work legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, anybody with common sense understands that 
doesn’t help those folks who are sitting at the table trying to 
solve their differences — solve them. What it says to those 
folks, anybody who uses their common sense, is that, well if we 
think back-to-work legislation might be in our best interest, 
then you just back off and you don’t work at reaching an 
agreement. Anybody would know that, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
part of the agenda of the government that’s before us today. 
 
We’ve seen that agenda to drive wedges between the poor and 
those who have the means to meet their daily needs. We’ve 
seen this government drive, attempt to drive wedges between 
the unemployed and those who are employed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Education, in 
an address that he was giving yesterday morning that was on the 
news last night, I saw, attempting to drive wedges between 
professional educators in the province of Saskatchewan. What 
was his comment to the members of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation? He talked about . . . I heard him on the 
news last night say that he thought, well they did not a bad job 
of involving themselves in negotiations and they were 
responsible. He said to them, but not like some faculty members 
in a university north of here. Those were his words. How did 
his audience respond, Mr. Speaker? They responded 
responsibly by booing the Minister of Education when he tried 
to drive a wedge between professional educators in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a large agenda that this Bill is a 
part of. We have a government before us that’s attempting to 
drive wedges and using this Bill as yet another example of that. 
My colleagues, Mr. Speaker, have already talked about choices, 
and this Bill is about choices. The Government of 
Saskatchewan would like to tell us it has no choice, it can’t 
afford, it can’t afford to have the University of Saskatchewan 
respond to the needs. My colleagues have spoken effectively 
and efficiently and eloquently, Mr. Speaker, about that, and it is 
clear to all people of Saskatchewan. And as was pointed out be 
the Leader of the Opposition this afternoon, it does have the 
choice, if it chooses, to make a solution the priority. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it has simply chosen not to. 
 
I’d just like to conclude, Mr. Speaker, with some very brief 
comments about the Bill itself, about the Bill itself and its 
ability to provide a solution to a very specific problem before us 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, there’s . . . Yes, there he is 
over there again, Mr. Speaker. He’s yipping and yapping, and I 
will wrap up and I’ll sit down and I’ll allow the member to 
stand and give his ideas as to how this Bill is in the interest of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But some quick comments, Mr. Speaker, some very brief 
comments about the Bill itself. I said before, Mr. Speaker, this 
back-to-work legislation that’s before us today is 
unprecedented; and it is. It orders back the faculty members, 
Mr. Speaker, but within the Bill, contrary to virtually any 
back-to-work legislation you would find anywhere, offers 
absolutely no assurances of some form   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

405 
 

of movement to solve the collective bargaining problem that is 
being faced at the University of Saskatchewan. That is 
extremely abnormal, Mr. Speaker, and fails to address the 
tensions and to provide any sort of immediate solution to an 
immediate problem there. 
 
It requires a mediator who will be appointed by the Minister of 
Labour, an individual, who in the minds of many Saskatchewan 
people is not the most sensitive in terms of judgement of 
equality and fairness for two sides in dispute with one another. 
And then it appoints a mediator, Mr. Speaker, who reports, not 
to one side or the other, but who reports only to the minister, 
without any requirement for anybody else to know what might 
be in that report,. and also, Mr. Speaker, without there being 
any obligation whatsoever for the Government of Saskatchewan 
to follow the recommendations of that mediator’s report which 
will be, presumably, submitted quietly and confidentially 
behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
(2030) 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s for those reasons, it’s for those 
reasons that I say this Bill itself, not only does it provide no 
solution to the long-term problems, it provides no solution to 
the immediate problems before us. 
 
So for those reasons and others, Mr. Speaker, that have been 
expressed by my colleagues, I will be standing in support of the 
amendment that is before us, and I will be standing in 
opposition to the Bill, Mr. Speaker. And I thank you very much 
for the opportunity to bring my remarks to this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I and other members of 
this legislature have sat here now for something the order of 
four or five hours and listened to four or five hours of debate 
from the opposition benches. And there’s been many 
remarkable things about that debate tonight, Mr. Speaker, but 
the one thing that we have learned tonight clearly, Mr. Speaker, 
is that the NDP opposition have come out clear in their 
opposition to this Bill. They’ve used words like unnecessary, 
unwarranted, unjustified, vicious, wrong — all those kinds of 
words, Mr. Speaker. And the advanced education critic for the 
NDP as well in his remarks asked this question: he asked which 
of the two parties involved in this dispute asked for this 
legislation. That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
critic. He asked which of the two parties involved in this 
dispute had asked for this legislation. And the member from 
Saskatoon University said, you know, go talk to either of the 
two parties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well what words, Mr. Speaker, did we not hear tonight coming 
from the NDP opposition in this debate? What words did we not 
hear? We heard unnecessary, unwarranted, unjustified, wrong. 
We heard the reference to the fact that there are only two parties 
involved in this dispute, Mr. Speaker. But what word did we not 
hear more than half a dozen times, Mr. Speaker, in five hours of 
debate? What word did we not hear come from the NDP 
opposition, Mr. Speaker? We did not hear the word 
 

“student.” We did not hear the word “student,” Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
bet you we didn’t hear that word six times. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, they didn’t even acknowledge the fact that the students 
are an interested party in this dispute. They talked about two 
parties. Not one member, Mr. Speaker, but more than one 
member talked about only the two parties involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole basis for this Bill is not necessarily 
because of the other two parties, albeit what has happened in 
the breakdown has brought us here tonight. The basis for why 
we are here tonight, Mr. Speaker, is because it is the interest of 
that other party that is paramount — the student, Mr. Speaker. 
That is why we are here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We are here tonight, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is those young people who do count if they are the 
innocent victims, the third party; and somebody must stand up 
and speak for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They didn’t talk tonight. The NDP opposition didn’t talk 
tonight about the students’ educational lives that will be 
jeopardized if we do not pass this Bill. They did not talk about 
the students’ careers — in many instances, first careers — that 
would be jeopardized if we do not pass this legislation. Mr. 
Speaker, they did not talk about the students’ postgraduate 
opportunities that would be jeopardized if we do not pass this 
legislation. They did not talk about the students’ investments in 
time and in money, Mr. Speaker, that will be jeopardized if we 
do not pass this legislation. And they did not talk about the 
students’ parents who have been supportive and have invested 
in their young people in their families over the years, Mr. 
Speaker. And they did not talk about the students’ stress and 
anxiety that they have gone through over the past year, and 
especially the last few days, Mr. Speaker, as negotiations broke 
down. “Students” was not a word to be found in opposition 
rhetoric tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then I ask you, Mr. Speaker, they’ve talked about what 
others have said in their minds about this legislation, but if you 
ask the students, Mr. Speaker, about this legislation, what do 
they say? What word do they use to describe this legislation and 
what it means to them, Mr. Speaker? What word did you and 
others, I presume, see last night on television, or as I heard this 
morning on the radio reports, when students were asked about 
this and some polling was done of the students? What word did 
they use to describe it? Did they use unnecessary? Did they use 
unjustified? Did they use vicious? Did they use wrong, Mr. 
Speaker? No, the word I consistently heard is they were 
relieved. That is the word I heard consistently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They were relieved because it meant the end of the stress. It 
meant the end of the anxiety. It meant the end of uncertainty. It 
meant the end of detention. It meant the end of the threat of job 
loss, Mr. Speaker. It meant the end of the threat of delayed 
summer jobs. It meant the end of the threat of lost postgraduate 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this Bill meant to the 
students, and they were   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

406 
 

relieved that it was over, not happy that it had come to this, as 
none of us are happy, Mr. Speaker, but relieved that somebody, 
even in the face of all this, was prepared to act in their best 
interests at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What other arguments did we hear advanced today, Mr. 
Speaker, albeit that we heard no one speak on behalf of the 
students. I was absolutely amazed at that, Mr. Speaker. What 
did we hear the opposition leader say? He talked about in his 
view of universities, the three triangles. He talked about his 
vision of the three triangles: on the one point, accessibility; on 
the other point, academic excellence; on the other point, 
autonomy. 
 
And he said somehow through all of this, accessibility has been 
jeopardized, in his mind, because of government underfunding 
and those kinds of things, at least in his mind. Well it seems to 
me, Mr. Speaker, he’s touched the issue, he’s got the right 
issue, but he’s got the wrong reasons behind it. The issue 
certainly is accessibility here. The issue is certainly accessibility 
with this legislation. To follow the NDP strategy would be to 
deny access, access for these students to their courses and to 
their exams, and that is 18,000 young people who would be 
denied access, Mr. Speaker. That is the why of this Bill. 
Legislation is being put forward to let the students finish their 
exams, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A second issue that was raised, as I said, was the issue of 
funding. They did not care to talk about the fact that over the 
last five or six years this Progressive Conservative 
administration, Mr. Speaker, has increased both operating and 
capital funding to universities in this province by a greater 
percentage increase than any other university in western 
Canada. And that’s a record that we’re proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — But be that such as it may, Mr. 
Speaker, be that such as it may, I would ask the question: is 
there any straight-line relationship between government funding 
and wage settlements at universities anyways? If there were, it 
seems to me that in the face of a zero per cent increase or 
decrease — in other words, a hold the line revenue source in the 
face of the fact that last year we asked the universities to hold 
the line on spending, there was neither an increase or a 
decrease, the budget was zero per cent, Mr. Speaker — if there 
was a straight-line relationship, they you would have thought 
wages would have been held at zero last year, but they were not. 
In the face of a zero per cent increase in the budget last year, 
Mr. Speaker, at the universities, the faculty had a 4 per cent 
raise. So there’s no straight-line relationship there anyways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And besides, you know, the opposition leader went on to 
suggest that we would be interfering with their autonomy. Well 
that is the whole point, Mr. Speaker. We do provide moneys to 
the university, and it’s up to them to sort out whether they use 
that money for salaries, pay raises, programs, buildings, more 
faculty. That is what they have to sort out, Mr. Speaker. So to 
say funding is the issue, simply is not the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Indeed in the early days of this saga, Mr. Speaker, in the early 
days of this saga did the faculty association, did the faculty 
association come before the people, at least as I saw it, did they 
come before the people and say that the issue here was 
government underfunding? I didn’t hear that, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact what I heard in the early days in this saga was the fact that 
the university had this fat surplus, not too little money. They 
had this surplus salted away and that’s what they should use to 
give a pay raise with. They didn’t talk about underfunding; they 
talked about surpluses three different places. 
 
Well, as you and I know, Mr. Speaker, and as was proven later, 
that whole question of surpluses was in fact an erroneous 
argument. Yes, there’s a surplus in the one account, as I 
understand it, which is prudent management. And anybody that 
suggests that you start making pay raises out of account 
surpluses in the first place is not prudent management, by 
everyone’s analysis, but the point is, Mr. Speaker, not to get 
into a debate on the analysis of the surplus account or their 
existence or the lack of existence, the point is the attack by the 
faculty association was relative to the fact that there, in their 
minds, was a surplus, not an underfunding situation. So I would 
suggest that that belies the opposition argument that funding is 
the question. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, this budget that was presented in the 
House just a very few days ago in this province, in this 
legislature, belies the opposition rhetoric as well on the question 
of funding. This last budget showed that the Progressive 
Conservative government’s commitment to education is 
unshakeable. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because in this last 
budget four out of every five new program dollars available to 
spend on behalf of the people of this province went to health 
and education, our two major areas, Mr. Speaker, our two 
priorities. Those were the areas that got the money, the 
increases, Mr. Speaker, and if one looked at the commentary 
after the budget, headlines like “Budget pleases teachers, 
trustees in light of restraint”; “We’re pleased that there is an 
increase,” said Fred Herron, a well-known representative of the 
teachers in this province; Ray Matheson, chairman of the 
Regina Board of Education said he was delighted at the support 
Finance minister Gary Lane’s budget speech had. Considering 
the economic times we’re in, education has fared well, he said. 
 
And that was the kind of commentary, Mr. Speaker, we had as a 
result of this last budget, because the commitment was there 
again this year as it has been in the past. Our commitment to 
education, Mr. Speaker, is unshakeable, and this last budget just 
affirmed that in the people’s minds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, the reality is, if you 
listen to the opposition members, including the Leader of the 
Opposition, to hear them talk about funding, and that it . . . 
Listening to them, you’d think the university could barely run. 
You’d think there was no programming going on, in fact. It was 
a doom and gloom scenario. And the reality is, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the funding there are many fine things going on at 
that institution and many fine graduates coming out of that 
institution, Mr. Speaker. That is the reality. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

407 
 

The third argument that was raised, Mr. Speaker, is that 
somehow I and other members of our government, with 
whatever statements we may have made along the way, that 
somehow this interfered with the process; this caused a 
breakdown of negotiations, or a breakdown of conciliation, and 
all those kinds of things that we heard, Mr. Speaker; that 
somehow I, with my statements, inflamed the situation. At least 
that’s in their minds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well what did I say, Mr. Speaker, in the formal statement that I 
made to you and other members of this legislature, earlier this 
week? What I said then, Mr. Speaker, was, and I quote: 
 

I talked earlier this week with representatives of the 
faculty, the administration, and the students. I asked both 
faculty and administration to find a way either to conclude 
the negotiations, or, failing that, to call off the strike at 
least until the exams are over. 

 
That’s what I said, Mr. Speaker. And I went on to say here, to 
give the why. I said: 
 

The issue here is one of timing and the impact of job 
action on the lives of some vulnerable young people. I am 
hopeful that this request will lead to at least a temporary 
postponement of the strike, or preferably to a successful 
outcome of the negotiations . . . 

 
That is what I said, Mr. Speaker. When I walked outside this 
House, on every occasion when questioned by the media, on 
every occasion, I never varied from that commentary — not 
once. We made constructive suggestions and we stuck by those 
because that was our preferred course. Not once did I or any 
member of this government ever make reference — ever — Mr. 
Speaker, until the day I introduced this Bill about back-to-work 
legislation, about essential services legislation — I never, ever, 
uttered those words, Mr. Speaker. None of that was ever uttered 
by any member of this legislature, despite the fact that on many 
occasions the media would try and lead you on and say, well, 
what if. My answer consistently was, that’s a hypothetical 
question. Our preferred is that they solve it themselves. We’ve 
given some constructive suggestions on how to do that, and that 
was consistently our rhetoric. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, anybody on those benches who 
suggests otherwise is either trying to distort the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, or simply is trying to build some political rhetoric and 
grandstanding and trying to throw a smoke-screen into a 
situation where it doesn’t exist. Some say both are true. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there was no talk ever of back to 
work, no talk ever of essential services, only talk that students 
must sit their exams, and to use every means possible to ensure 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s suppose that I, over the last week or two, 
and my colleagues — in the face of 18,000 students 
 

having their exams jeopardized — had sat on our hands and sat 
in our places and said not one word. Let’s suppose, Mr. 
Speaker, over this last 10 days, not one word had been uttered. 
Let’s suppose we had taken that approach, Mr. Speaker, that 
there had been no statement in the House, no statements outside 
the House, nothing had been said. And we’d merely would have 
. . . if asked questions, would have said, well, the university is 
autonomous and of course we wouldn’t want to interfere, and 
that’s . . . you know, that’s the whole situation, we have nothing 
to say. Suppose we had taken that course. I ask you, what would 
the opposition have been saying? What would they have been 
saying? They’d have been saying, you’re the Minister of 
Education, why aren’t you doing something? Why aren’t you 
meeting? Why aren’t you asking for third-party intervention? 
Why aren’t you doing something? They would have been 
asking and calling for intervention as sure as I stand here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You see, this is simply a case of doublespeak, of wanting to 
have your cake and eat it too, Mr. Speaker. Well, I’m telling 
you, I’m calling their bluff tonight. I’ve told you what I’ve said, 
and I stand by it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — But having said all that, Mr. Speaker, 
it seems to me that the 18,000 students and their moms and their 
dads out there had every right to expect the Minister of 
Education and the Progressive Conservative government to be 
interested in this. It would have been absolutely blasphemous if 
we had sat on our hands, Mr. Speaker. This was too large an 
issue here; there was too much at stake, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 
tell you, I am not going to stand on the sidelines as some 
disinterested, gagged Minister of Education when there’s the 
livelihoods of 18,000 young people on the line. And I won’t 
apologize for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — But they said, Mr. Speaker, that all 
along I had a motive, that all along I had a motive, an ulterior 
motive that I wanted to come with this big stick; all along that I 
wanted to be here in this House with this legislation. Well I say, 
nonsense, Mr. Speaker, nothing is further from the truth. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, we waited until the very last hour before 
introducing this legislation because the conciliator threw in the 
towel. Mr. Speaker, we waited until the very last hour. Exams 
are upon us this Saturday, Mr. Speaker. We have to have this 
legislation through as quickly as possible. 
 
It’s been delayed unnecessarily already by the NDP. They’re on 
record as saying that they will fight it every step of the way, Mr. 
Speaker. What a tragedy for our students. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, yes, we had a motive. Yes we 
had an ulterior strategy, if you like, and that strategy is the same 
today as it was 10 days ago — and that is, the strategy always 
has been to stand up for the interest of the students in these 
universities, Mr. Speaker. And that is our strategy today, to 
stand four-square behind the students. That is our motive, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

408 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — So in summary, Mr. Speaker, this is 
not a funding issue. This is not a question of the right to strike 
or not, because there’s a cooling-off period, and if they can’t 
solve the mediator, after May 12, if they want to go back out on 
the pavement, they can do that, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not a 
funding issue; it’s not a question of the right to strike or not; it’s 
not even a partisan question, Mr. Speaker. And yet tonight 
we’ve heard reference to Pocklington and Rafferty and 
by-elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any time that I’ve been in this House or that I’ve 
watched it in the past, any time that a situation was so grave and 
so serious that people had to bring in this kind of legislation — 
governments or whatever stripe had to bring in this legislation 
— it almost always enjoyed unanimous approval, Mr. Speaker, 
because it was never, ever seen as a partisan issue. And yet 
tonight we’ve had the debate range all the way into the 
Pocklingtons and the Raffertys and the by-elections and 
multinationals and all that kind of thing, Mr. Speaker. The issue 
is not funding; the issue is not a question of the right to strike or 
not; the issue is not apart as an issue, Mr. Speaker, the issue is 
simply the students’ right to finish their exams. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members, I ask the NDP opposition 
to please rethink your position, do not oppose this Bill; support 
the Bill; stand up for the students just this once, Mr. Speaker; 
stand up for 18,000 young people and their families in this 
province, Mr. Speaker; that’s what I ask — rethink your 
position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2058) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Schmidt Martens 
Hodgins Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Britton 
Pickering  
 

Nays — 15 
 
Romanow Simard 
Prebble Kowalsky 
Rolfes Atkinson 
Brockelbank Hagel 
Shillington Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 

 
Solomon Trew 
Mitchell  
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of Students at The 

University of Saskatchewan 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I have with me, to my right, Lawrie 
McFarlane, Deputy Minister of the Department of Education; 
and behind me and to my right, Darryl Bogdasavich and Larry 
Anderson, both from Justice, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
might make a remark that this is the first Bill that we are 
debating in the legislature in this session, and it’s an unusual 
situation because we are debating this Bill during the budget 
debate, Mr. Chairman. And I would welcome you for this first 
particular session. 
 
Now I want to make another point, Mr. Chairman about this. 
We are debating this Bill because this side of the House gave 
leave to debate this Bill. This side of the House gave leave. And 
I want to make that comment because the minister opposite 
made a big to-do, a real big to-do about his commitment to 
students and our lack of commitment to students. 
 
We have demonstrated our commitment to students by granting 
leave to get this Bill through, to let them pass this Bill. We 
think it’s a bad Bill — we know it’s a bad Bill — but I don’t 
want the minister coming through and saying that we are 
against the students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairperson, this Bill would never have been 
introduced without our commitment, and that is our 
commitment to the students of Saskatchewan. We know that 
there is a great concern and a lot of tension on the part of 
students. We know that there are very few students who have 
. . . there have been none that have missed exams, and there are 
very few that are threatened to miss exams. But the very threat 
of it is a stress, and we’re acknowledging that stress, and we 
want to help relieve that stress even though we don’t believe in 
the method that he’s doing it. The whole thing could have been 
done away with if this government had dealt with it in the 
proper manner. 
 
Now my question to the minister is this: Mr. Minister, will you 
acknowledge right now, here in this House, that you would 
never have brought this Bill in yesterday without leave, and 
today without leave of members on this side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman,   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

409 
 

rather, as I said in second reading debate, the introduction of 
this legislation: (a) was never the preferred solution in terms of 
dealing with the dispute. Because we wanted every other 
option, to have full opportunity to perhaps work without having 
to resort to this, we left it right to the last minute. Although 
recognizing that the last minute, I suppose, could have been 
Saturday — or could be still I suppose, depending on what the 
opposition do, given that they’re against this Bill — when the 
exams start. If you take it right to that very moment, I suppose, 
9 o’clock Saturday morning, that hardly leaves time for 
notification to students of what exam is on and what isn’t on. 
And albeit we could have perhaps moved this legislation 
through the House yesterday, but the opposition have chosen 
not to have that kind of expeditious passage, Mr. Speaker. Yes, 
we’ve had leave on a couple of occasions, including tonight, to 
get us to the stage that we’re at, and I’m hopeful that we can 
continue along that line, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman it is our intention to complete 
debate on this Bill tonight so that the matter will be expedited. 
There are quite a few questions we want to ask yet. I would ask 
the minister, first of all . . . First of all, I would thank him for 
acknowledging in his sort of roundabout way, that yes, we did 
grant leave. So I know it’s very difficult for him to do so, but 
I’ll accept that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question about who was it that 
asked you; who asked you to introduce this Bill? I know that 
when I consulted with the faculty association and when I 
consulted with administration, they didn’t ask for it. I had 
students that were concerned; they knew that their exams were 
threatened, but I didn’t have anybody really say legislate them 
back to work. I want to know who asked you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I suppose the basis for . . . The 
question was, Mr. Chairman who asked? Who asked for this 
legislation? I don’t know how many dozens or hundreds . . . I 
don’t know how many calls, Mr. Chairman that I had 
personally, and as well to my office and departmental officials. 
All I can tell you is that when this first broke that the strike vote 
had been taken and they were going to exercise the mandate on 
Monday morning — that broke Friday night, I think it was, Mr. 
Speaker, last week. I know before I was out of bed on Saturday 
morning I already had had a call to my home . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — At noon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I didn’t get out of bed at noon 
that day, Mr. Speaker, it was more like . . . or, Mr. Chairman it 
was more like 7 a.m. that I had the first call that Saturday 
morning from a very distraught parent, typical of the example I 
use this afternoon in second reading debate. Her daughter, six 
years in college, a job, even further exams to sit, very distraught 
that all this might be jeopardized. So if you’re asking me who? 
Parents, students, they were the ones that came forward saying, 
what are you going to do if this happens or if that happens or if 
they don’t go back to work, what are you going to do? We had 
those calls all along, and in fact Wednesday it picked up, if you 
like, in so far as the tempo of the calls, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, when negotiations are 
interrupted by an outside authority like a provincial government 
or a federal government, the experience that I have had from it 
is that as soon as there is any type of interruption, or some type 
of outside statement, that the whole procedure is thrown off 
balance — off balance, because there is a certain procedure that 
negotiations go through. And you know the arguments that are 
made in negotiations; there’s two parties, and they both have 
their particular sides; they’ve got to go through this balancing 
act, and they get angry at each other. and it’s just like a good 
marriage — once in a while you get angry at each other, but if 
you keep working at it you will eventually work it out. 
 
When you have an interruption like this — and here in your 
particular case the interruption’s going to last over a prolonged 
period of time; you’re actually asking to suspend negotiations 
— what do you think the effect of this is going to be on the 
relationship between the two parties? How can you get that 
relationship between the two parties back together as long as 
you’ve got your finger in the pie here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, in addition to some of 
the rationale I talked about in debate earlier tonight, I’m also 
advised that many provinces have as a standard part of 
legislation intact, and not having to be brought forward in 
situations like this where there is standard — as part of the 
legislation — that there is cooling off periods there. It’s nothing 
new in some provinces apparently. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — You’ve got the Bill expiring, Mr. Minister, 
on May 13, ending May 12th. Why that particular day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the majority of exams 
are over on that date. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now what do you expect to happen to the 
other exams that are not over? What’s going to happen at that 
stage? The strike could conceivably resume; exams could be 
withheld. The date seems very arbitrary, Mr. Speaker. Why not 
the 11th? Why not the 10th? Why not the 21st? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — This was actually to try and respond 
— albeit that it was used by the opposition, including your 
leader, argued this point from both sides — he said first of all, 
he ought not interfere, and then he said, well, but if you’re 
going to interfere, why don’t you interfere and wipe out their 
rights, if you like, right through to convocation. Right through 
till convocation, that’s what he said. Right through to 
convocation. That is exactly what you said, right through till 
convocation. 
 
And what the idea here was to put in place . . . because we 
looked at all these dates, you know, what’s the last possible date 
— you know you can get into intersession, I suppose, and all 
those kinds of things — but what was the last possible date that 
you could cover the most off without jeopardizing the right to 
strike, if you like, for the least amount of time. So there was the 
whole . . . 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

410 
 

The convocation was looked at. Some of the smaller colleges 
maybe hadn’t totally finished by this date, the summer student 
and all of that. At the end of the day we’ve tried to put 
something that would cover all of the objectives, if you like, in 
terms of the students’ interests, but with a minimum of . . . but 
keep the period to a minimum because it is very serious and 
sobering legislation. 
 
So the short answer is, to keep their period of interference, if 
you like, to a minimum. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well it’s one of the shortcomings of the Bill 
is that it deals with most of the students, but it doesn’t deal with 
all of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I noticed that in the Bill, here you are asking the 
Minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment to 
appoint a mediator. Now that must have been a strategic 
decision on your part, but why you would choose this minister, 
the member from Melville, to choose a mediator is beyond me. 
Can you explain that irrational move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — He’s the minister responsible for 
labour relations. It was felt that if I had retained the capacity to 
appoint the mediator in the event that the two parties couldn’t 
agree with one, some might have — I wouldn’t have — but 
some might have viewed that I had a vested interest, and that 
might distort and bias my thinking, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I could ask this question under a clause by 
clause, but I’d prefer to do it this way; it gives us a little more 
flexibility, Mr. Minister. 
 
But with respect to clause 5(1) where you’re talking about the 
duties of the mediator, and you’re saying: 
 

The association and the employer shall co-operate with the 
mediator. 

 
Shall co-operate. Now you know that co-operation involves an 
attitude. And I’m wondering how in the world do you expect to 
be able to legislate an attitude? How can you demonstrate 
co-operation? How can you do that? How can you legislate that 
somebody should co-operate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — All we’re asking is that they meet and 
a presumption of reasonableness. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to deal with the purposes that you’ve 
stated in the Bill. And you’ve indicated here that in the first 
case you put in the Bill that the purpose is to provide a 
temporary cooling-off period. Now, Mr. Minister, the problem 
in this case is not that we’ve got hot heads; it’s not that we’ve 
got hot heads. So I can’t understand why that should be a 
purpose that’s stated. The problem here, and really the problem, 
the only problem — and you acknowledge it, and I 
acknowledge it — is that there is a group of students whose 
university career is threatened somewhat. I acknowledge that, 
and you acknowledge that, and we agree with it. I’m wondering 
why you saw fit to put in here that somebody needed a 
cooling-off period? Because what I’m afraid of, Mr. Minister, is 
that they’re going to cool-off so much that 
 

it is going to destroy the entire negotiations process. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The term cooling-off is standard 
terminology, and its derivation, I suspect, is because it tends to 
reflect accurately the fact that this is a temporary, as opposed as 
to something permanent, that goes on ad infinitum. So it’s 
pretty standard terminology in the area of, in the world of 
labour relations. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Could you indicate, Mr. Minister, what the 
scope of the mediation is going to be? Will the mediator be able 
to liaise with the faculty? Will there be any government 
interference with the mediator? Will you be talking to the 
mediator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the member has raised the very 
point that I was addressing when he asked earlier, Mr. 
Chairman, why I didn’t appoint the mediator, as opposed to . . . 
and rather than the Minister of Human Resources and Labour 
was doing the appointment. And that’s the reason, so that I am 
not involved and not . . . because I might be seen to be having a 
vested interest, so that’s the same answer. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In clause 8, Mr. Minister, you . . . And I 
have to read part of this, just to get the context: 
 

. . . the term of that agreement is extended to include the 
period commencing on July 1, 1987 and ending May 12, 
1988, and the terms and conditions of the last collective 
bargaining agreement remain in effect between the 
employer and the association for that period. 

 
I want to know what will happen to the employees’ pay scales. 
Will they be frozen by virtue of that clause? Will they be frozen 
by virtue of that clause, according to the existing agreement, in 
the event there’s conciliation takes place, or mediation, or some 
type of negotiation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, this is there to . . . This 
section is there to protect the employee, to make sure that the 
wages that he has been getting, if you like, will continue to be 
paid during this cooling-off period. However, I think that the 
point that the hon. member is trying to get to, and I’ll answer it 
while I’m on my feet, is that while if there was a settlement 
during the cooling-off period, and it was indeed retroactive till 
the end of the last settlement, could that be put in place? And 
I’m advised, yes. So it’s there to protect the employee and at the 
same time, if there is a new agreement reached, which I would 
hope there would be during this period, that can be activated, if 
you like. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know how 
you see this disagreement between the faculty and the 
administration being settled. How do you see this matter being 
resolved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman the question is how do 
I see this being settled. I think it would be unwise for me and 
improper for me to speculate on how it might be solved, quite 
frankly. We have obviously . . . 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

411 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it would be unwise and also 
impossible for you to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to suggest to you that you have really 
skewered the faculty association with this Bill. This Bill, most 
of these back-to-work Bills also provide a mechanism for 
settling it — yours does not. Yours simply lifts the whole 
problem up, transplants it beyond May 12 when a strike would 
have any effect, and then throws them back into the bear pit. 
What you’re saying is, I don’t want anything to happen till May 
12, and then, have at it, boys and girls, and may the best side 
win. 
 
My criticism of this, Mr. Minister, is you provide no 
mechanism for settling it. You have skewered the faculty 
association. You have skewered — do you want me to spell it? 
— you have skewered the faculty association. As of May 13 
they have no real mechanism. It’s going to be very difficult for 
them to get their members out again for another strike when 
there will be no real pressure to settle, Mr. Minister, it seems to 
me that you’ve left the faculty association with the worst of all 
worlds — no settlement of the thing in the Bill, and no means 
of settlement on March 13. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
suggests that the Bill skewers the faculty, I think, was his 
terminology. He says why didn’t . . . it puts the faculty at a 
disadvantage, in his mind. He says why didn’t the legislation 
enforce a settlement. 
 
Now here is the doublespeak of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
Enforcing a settlement would be maximum interference. This is 
why the cooling-off. We don’t want to suspend their rights for 
ever and enforce something on them; that would be major 
interference. We said, let’s just have a cooling-off period, 
suspend the strike until exams are over. And even then we said 
just for the shortest time possible; we didn’t take it into 
convocation or anything else — for the shortest time possible 
suspend it, provision for a mediator. And we didn’t want to get 
into that kind of massive interference is what I’m saying, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well do you not admit, Mr. Minister, that 
the faculty association have no effective bargaining tools on 
May 13? It is completely unrealistic to suggest that they can go 
back out, that the faculty will go back out again on strike at that 
point in time, having gone through a difficult strike which did 
not resolve the matter. They may anticipate that if they ever got 
the administration in a difficult position you’d legislate them 
back to work again. 
 
From the point of view of the administration, I suggest it’s 
equally bad. They have no money with which to settle the 
matter, and the strike and the after-effect and the ongoing 
labour dispute, I suggest, will poison the atmosphere among the 
teaching staff at the university. It’s not the kind of morale 
which builds a good university. 
 
I just saw some headlines in which some members of the 
administration were upset about the Bill; I can well see why. 
You’ve solved nobody’s problem, except students who have to 
write, and that’s maybe a major exception. But you’ve solved 
neither the administration’s problem nor the faculty’s problem. 
If you were going to come forth with this administration, with 
this Bill, Mr. Minister, it 

strikes me that given the circumstances in this case you should 
have provided a means by which the outstanding issues would 
have been settled. To have failed to settle them, but to have sent 
them back until May 13, provides nobody with mechanism for 
settling it and is going to mean that the dispute will be ongoing, 
poisoning the relationship, and destroying whatever morale may 
have been possible to attain at that university. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman the member is right in 
one of his statements. He’s right in this statement, in that we are 
with this legislation only trying to solve the students’ problem. 
That is the whole point — the title of the Bill says that clearly. 
 
Now if he’s suggesting we should use the heavy-handed 
approach and the kind of legislation his party wrote in the ’70s, 
well than I suppose you could bring in an amendment for it, if 
you so wish. But the whole point of using this temporary 
suspension is that because we want the faculty on May 13, if the 
situation so warrants, to have . . . not even if the situation so 
warrants. In fact, on May 13 the faculty will have the same 
rights that they enjoyed yesterday, or before this Bill passes — 
that’s the whole point. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what you’re missing is, they 
may have the same rights, but do you not agree that their 
position will have changed drastically on May 13? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Are you suggesting that the students 
should be used as some kind of pawn or lever? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, if you’re going to take 
away from them their right to bargain collectively — which 
you’re doing — if you’re going to take that away from them, 
you should settle the dispute. To take away their right — and 
you’ve effectively taken it away for a good time to come — if 
you’re going to take away their right, Mr. Minister, for them to 
bargain collectively, you ought to have solved the problem. 
 
In this case you have not solved the problem, but you have 
taken away their right for the indefinite future. It’s ludicrous of 
you to suggest that they can go back on their strike on May 13. 
It just simply is not possible for them to do it; it won’t happen; 
you’ve effectively left them without any remedy at all. 
 
You have given them, Mr. Minister, the worst of all worlds by 
failing to provide the administration with any money to deal 
with it. You’ve given them the worst of all worlds, which is a 
situation in which the dispute’s going to go on indefinitely. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I 
believe the comment made by my colleague from Regina 
deserves an answer from the minister. He has not provided an 
answer. May I put the comment or the question in a different 
perspective. 
 
I ask the minister the following. Isn’t it correct to say that on 
the moneys, the rather poor moneys provided by the 
government to the University of Saskatchewan, that the offer 
made by the board of governors and the administration, the last 
best offer to the faculty   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

412 
 

association, strained the university’s financial capacities? That, 
I think, is a fair statement. And that last best offer was rejected 
by the faculty association. That, we know, is a fact because we 
know that this back-to-work legislation is imposed because of 
that circumstance. 
 
Now here we have the situation of no more money to the 
university board and no possibility of a settlement because 
they’ve rejected and gone to the wall on the legislation based on 
the current developments today. What do you intend as a 
solution after May 13 with no change in the circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, I’ve already said — and your 
colleague agreed — that I ought not speculate, and indeed it 
would be unwise to speculate. But I would just reiterate some 
comments that I made in the debate earlier today that somehow 
you have the view that there is a straight-line relationship 
between percentage grant increases and faculty salary increases. 
And that clearly is not true because we saw last year where 
there was a zero per cent increase and the faculty had a 4 per 
cent increase. That’s exactly . . . And I agree with the fact that 
the university, because they have autonomy, should make the 
decisions about the money they get, whether it goes for 
increased salaries or more staff or more buildings or more 
programs or whatever. That’s their autonomy. That’s the 
autonomy that you didn’t want me to interfere with, so I will 
not. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Minister, that is not the position 
that I adopt, that there should be an automatic straight-line 
increase to faculty based on a straight-line increase that your 
government should grant this university or any university. 
That’s not my position. The fact of the matter is that over the 
last little while the level of funding by your government to this 
university or to the whole educational system has been so tight 
and so difficult that any increases given the faculty association 
in previous years comes at the expense of other functions and 
other teaching obligations and other teaching opportunities for 
the young people. The result is, of course, that after a while the 
whole system stops because there is no more juggling that’s 
capable of being made. That’s exactly the predicament that both 
the faculty is in, and the University of Saskatchewan Board of 
Governors and administration; the result being this very, very 
disputatious and emotional dispute that takes place. 
 
That’s not the issue. The issue is the level of funding; and the 
level of funding of your government has been, I think proven 
demonstrably so, to be parsimonious and very poor. 
 
I want to make one point about students if I can. The member 
opposite talks about concern for students. I think everybody in 
this House has concern for students. There’s no doubt about 
that, but how does the minister opposite explain away the 
president of the university’s comment about this legislation 
today, his own statements today by the headlines, which tell the 
entire story, “Back-to-work law attacked by Kristjanson,” and 
in the body of the story the same kind of attack by the faculty 
association? There are no comments by the students’ 
associations in this particular newspaper article; let’s leave 
them aside for the moment. 

(2130) 
 
Is it suggested by attacking the legislation as the president has 
done, and as the faculty association has done, that they don’t 
have a concern for students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member raised a couple 
of issues there. The first was the whole question of funding to 
our universities, Mr. Chairman. And my officials have provided 
me with what governments give to universities of comparable 
size across Canada, Mr. Chairman. And this is expressed as a 
number of dollars in the grant per student that’s made available 
to universities. 
 
Well, are we as high, Mr. Chairman, as Dalhousie? They 
provide $8,993 per student — their government, the 
government there. Are we as high as Memorial University, Mr. 
Chairman? No, they’re at 8,054. Are we as high as Calgary? 
No, they’re at 7,559, Mr. Chairman. But in fourth place — and 
this is for universities of a comparable size across Canada — in 
fourth place is Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we’re not first, I admit, but we’re not last, because in fifth 
place is Manitoba. So we’re ahead of the NDP in Manitoba — 
well the NDP for a short time, till April 26th I guess it’ll be, Mr. 
Chairman. And we’re ahead of Guelph and Ottawa and 
McMaster and Concordia and Carleton and Ryerson. 
 
So I would suggest to you, yes, we’re not first, but, by golly, 
we’re in very good shape across Canada, Mr. Chairman. And as 
relates to Dr. Kristjanson’s or the head of the faculty 
association’s comments on the legislation, it’s not for me to 
explain what they have said. You can ask them yourself. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has a not very 
glib way in avoiding answers to important questions. The 
proposition that he advances is that because members of this 
Legislative Assembly see fit to oppose the Bill in principle for 
the reasons advocated, or other reasons perhaps that others 
might have, that somehow that is anti-student. 
 
I want to point out to the minister again that the president of the 
university himself, the faculty association itself, and the 
members of the faculty, similarly oppose this legislation. They 
oppose it for reasons, some of which are reasons which we’ve 
articulated, some of their own reasons. My question to you is: 
how can it be argued, or do you argue — I’ll put it to you 
bluntly — do you argue that Mr. Kristjanson and the faculty 
association have no concern for students even though they 
oppose this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, what I said tonight was I said 
what the NDP in this legislature had said. And I’ll tell you 
what, Mr. Chairman, I think everything I said tonight was 
absolutely accurate. And I sense that, and I say that because the 
first thing the education critic got up and said in this committee, 
Mr. Chairman was he made reference to the students and don’t 
let anybody think that we aren’t behind them, despite the fact 
that there was none of the talk about him being behind the 
student in his remarks this afternoon. And similarly, because I 
listened carefully   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

413 
 

to the Leader of the Opposition, and there was none of that. 
 
There was no talk about the stress and the anxiety and the 
uncertainty and jeopardized opportunities — all those things — 
in his speech either. And now he, too, makes reference 
specifically and carefully to try and get himself back on the 
record on this one. And I say I think I may have hit a nerve 
there tonight earlier, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to assure the minister 
opposite, hardly likely, and I don’t intend to get into a debate 
with him about what the record will show with respect to 
concerns of students and who said what about students. But I 
tell you, Mr. Minister, that your record as government shows 
the level of concern, demonstrated concern, that you have for 
students, because this is the first time, the shameful first time in 
the history of the province of Saskatchewan, that there has been 
a strike. How do you analyse that? Why do you think this strike 
took place? You’ve given them all the money according to you 
— fourth or number five in Canada. You’ve given all these 21st 
century solutions. You and your government are very generous 
in your approaches to education. 
 
What is the minister’s answer? How does he speculate the 
reasons for this dispute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m not . . . I have never tried to 
publicly analyse the reasons for why we are here tonight. The 
basis for why we are here tonight, from our side — our 
analysis, totally, consistently, always, and to this very moment 
— has been because of our interest for the student. That’s the 
only thing that we’ve ever had uppermost in our minds, and it 
continues to be there. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman that answer is about as 
phony as a $3 bill. As phony as a $3 bill. This minister would 
come to this House on a precedent setting Bill, one which 
challenges the autonomy of the university, and he has no 
answer or any thought as to why it is, for the first time ever in 
the history of the province of Saskatchewan, it took a Tory 
government — a Tory government — to bring back 
back-to-work legislation. 
 
We’ve had Ross Thatcher governments; Liberal governments. 
We’ve had CCF and NDP governments. We’ve had difficult 
times in the past. Every government has had their shared 
concern for the students, but it took you, sir, and the Premier, 
the member from Estevan, and all your aide-de-camps and 
cohorts, for the first time, to come to this shameful date with 
this back-to-work legislation. And he is unable to give any 
speculation as to why that took place. No. Not speculation. 
 
He gives us the defence that there’s no good reason for it. He 
says we’re fourth in funding. He says we’re doing this with 
respect to programming. Look at all the benefits that we’re 
doing with respect to the administration and the organization of 
the universities and education generally. And yet he can’t 
explain the strike. Why does the strike take place, Mr. Minister, 
if, in light of all of your benefits, these have been spread around 
amongst the university people and the students? Give me an 
answer to that. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’d like to, in fact, I’d like to read 
back into the record my view. You see what the hon. member 
would like me to do, Mr. Chairman, what he would like me to 
do is somehow ascribe some responsibility — try and sort of 
pick on this, or pick on that one, or set some sort of scenario as 
to what I thought might have been the reasons for why we’re 
here tonight. 
 
I want to read into the record again what I said earlier today. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let me close with a plea to my many friends 
and former colleagues at my Alma Mater, the many fine 
professors and administrators I have known through my 
professional and political career. I realize that there is 
genuine discomfort on both sides. I do not wish to place 
responsibility for this strike action on either side. 

 
Period, Mr. Chairman, and that’s where I stand. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister is dead right. I 
do want him to ascribe some responsibility in this dispute. I 
want you to admit that you and your government is at fault 
because of the lack of funding and all the foul-ups in this whole 
operation. That’s the responsibility I want to ascribe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You’re dead right. And I suppose that I’m 
also dead right by saying that it wouldn’t be in your capacity, or 
in your make-up, or in this government’s make-up — arrogant, 
out of touch, mean-spirited, personal — to ever admit error or 
fault. I understand that, too. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Chairman, the record is absolutely clear. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You bet. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You bet, the member from Regina says. The 
record is absolutely clear that given the level of funding — he 
can compare it to Dalhousie or anybody else he wants — that 
there is over the period from 1983 to 1987-88, under this 
administration, a decline of 23 per cent real operating grants. I 
stand to be corrected by that. He has his officials beside him — 
if I’m in error on that computation, I’d like to hear that 
correction. Yes, I do want you to accept responsibility where it 
falls — right on your shoulders; right on this government’s 
shoulders — for this very sad day. 
 
Now, I want to ask another question, if I might, Mr. Minister, in 
an unrelated area. It’s related to the Bill, but in a different area. 
How is it, will the Minister advise the House, that the offenders 
under this Bill are going to be identified? On whose shoulders is 
the responsibility to identify those faculty members who should 
refuse to obey — I hope that none do — this back-to-work 
legislation. How is that reported? Whose responsibility is it to 
identify the offender? Who’s the policeman here? 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

414 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the employer. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The employer, now, the employer, as 
defined in the legislation; is that the answer? The minister can 
nod or . . . that means the University of Saskatchewan. That’s 
all the legislation says. But to give some meaning to the term 
“University of Saskatchewan” you contemplate that it will be 
the management personnel, from president and vice-presidents 
and deans, as the employer who will be the policeman, if I may 
put it that way, to report on colleagues who might not follow 
this back-to-work legislation. Do I understand that correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And is it contemplated by the minister that 
if there should be an errant faculty member who does not want 
to follow the law — again I repeat that I hope everybody does 
— whose responsibility is it to launch legal proceedings? Is it 
also the responsibility of the employer, namely the 
administration of the university? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — They would make application to the 
Crown. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It would be by application by the Crown . . . 
to the Crown. But who makes the application? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The employer, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I’ll make just a brief 
intervention here, but I think this is important to this series of 
questions and answers because what we have here by this 
legislation — this is what’s contemplated by this legislation — 
is that it’ll be the employer roughly defined, as I put it to the 
Minister, from the president right down to the deans or at some 
other supervisory level, whose job it will be under this 
legislation to monitor whether or not the professors go back to 
work. And get this — it’ll be their job also to launch legal 
proceedings against their own colleagues, according to the 
Minister’s interpretation, if in fact that colleague is breaking the 
law. I ask, Mr. Chairman, the Minister: is this the government’s 
idea of trying to restore calm and peace and unity to the 
university? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that it’s pretty standard 
procedure, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, actually my colleague from Regina 
has asked the question I want. The Minister says it’s standard 
procedure. Where’s the precedent of back-to-work legislation 
for university people in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, if you’re asking is 
there a precedent relative to this . . . if he’s asking me if there is 
a precedent for this kind of clause in any other legislation that’s 
been brought before the legislature of Saskatchewan in its 85 
years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, because we’ve never 
been involved in this kind of thing at the University of 
Saskatchewan before. 
 
If you’re asking me is there any other legislation that has this 
clause in it that’s ever been used in this province 
 

before in a similar situation but not at a university, the answer is 
yes, and I would refer the hon. member to The Dairy Workers 
(Maintenance of Operations) Act, section 12(1). 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So what the minister is indicating . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I was not there when it 
happened, but nevertheless, Mr. Chairman, the minister is 
saying that it is unprecedented as far as the world of academia 
is concerned, he acknowledges that, but that it is precedented in 
other areas. Now all right, I’ll accept that answer that it may be 
precedented in other areas. 
 
I come back to the central theme of my questioning in the point 
that I made in my second reading remarks this afternoon. We’re 
talking about a unique institution, Mr. Chairman, the university, 
any university; we’re talking about a unique institution which is 
built on collegiality and professionalism and the search for 
truth; it has to be done in terms of administration and 
responsible administration the University of Saskatchewan has 
carried out. Any organization of that nature, in the light of the 
volatility of this dispute which has imposed upon it by 
legislation, no less, Mr. Chairman, the obligation that the 
supervisory academics — if I may put it that way, those for the 
time being in charge of administration — should act as the 
police officers and the prosecutors — and the prosecutors — I 
say to you, Mr. Chairman, is indeed a scandalous piece of 
legislation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So is professors going on strike. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And the member says, so the professors are 
on strike. Well, you see, the hon. member opposite, this is an 
example of Progressive Conservative thought; this is a 
relatively new phenomenon in some limited circles of the PC 
Party. There used to be a time, I say to the hon. member . . . 
Where is he from, who is he . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Kelvington. The member from Kelvington. 
I tell the hon. member from Kelvington there used to be a time 
in Saskatchewan where the biggest supporters of university 
professors and universities were farming people who you 
represent. And they still are, and you do not represent those 
farming interests by your attitude, not at all — not at all. 
 
You think you can go around and score off some points on 
universities. Of course that is the style of this government. The 
style is out there to go to rural Saskatchewan and say: oh, those 
university professors; or those working guys in the city; or you 
know, those homosexuals; the member from Melville . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . or the United Church, or the United 
Church. That is what is contemplated by this Bill, Mr. 
Chairman. That’s what’s contemplated by this Bill, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
This is not a government which is seeking to resolve the dispute 
by specific sections in the legislation so that we can move on 
beyond May 13. No. We know already that after May 13 there 
can be some colleges of which the   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

415 
 

exams are not finalized. 
 
I don’t know how they propose to handle convocation, because 
convocation requires faculty to name those who convocate. If 
they’re back on strike after May 14, who knows what the 
outcome is going to be there. 
 
This is not a government that is seeking to heal the sores and 
the wounds and to try to work out to an equitable settlement; 
it’s not one that has the interests of the students at heart, 
because if it had the interests of the students at heart it would be 
trying to work for sensible, long-term solutions in this 
legislation. That’s what they’d be doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This is a government that’s trying to score a 
few cheap political points, in a by-election in Saskatoon. That’s 
what it’s trying to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, yes, a desperate government trying to 
score a few cheap political points in Eastview, that’s all. 
Nobody has heard a word about concern for students from these 
people opposite, Mr. Chairman, at any time prior to this dispute, 
none whatsoever. 
 
And the minister’s excuse is: well I don’t want to speculate; I 
don’t want to inflame the situation; I don’t have any further 
additional thoughts on it; I won’t tell you how we’re going to 
handle it after May 13; we’ll just sort of have it sneak up on us 
again. From the gang that couldn’t shoot straight opposite over 
there, they’re going to try another try if something goes wrong 
after May 14. The gang that can’t shoot straight over there, Mr. 
Chairman, that can’t do the job right. They’ve got a piece of 
legislation — we’re asking the minister why May 13, and he 
says: well, I don’t know; we want to limit the area. But it could 
have been, well it could have been any day, you know. We 
thought maybe convocation; maybe it could have been May 11; 
maybe it could have been May 27; I don’t know. Maybe that’s 
the reason why we pulled the date out. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman this is supposedly a responsible 
government. I say to the minister opposite, when he sets up a 
legislative mechanism where the offender is pursued and 
prosecuted by those with whom they have to work and make the 
university work, that is a sad day for this province and for the 
University of Saskatchewan, make no mistake about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I want to ask one other question. I want to 
ask the question to the minister, again relating to the member 
from Melville, why was it . . . Or I’ll perhaps ask it the other 
way around because the member has given us an answer; I want 
to be sure that I understand it. Is it the minister’s contention that 
the person whose job it is to appoint the mediator in this 
sensitive area — is it the minister’s contention that the person 
who has been named to name the mediator, namely the member 
from Melville, has been so named because it will be perceived 
 

that you, as the responsible minister for the legislation and the 
university, will be viewed as being “biased”? Is that your 
position, that you would be viewed biasedly, but the member 
from Melville, of all the members, would not be? Is that your 
contention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well it’s there because it’s his job, 
(a), and secondly, if I had written in the legislation that I should 
take it out of his hand and put it in my hand, as I said earlier — 
not that it would be the case — but some might have said that I 
would have been biased. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Let me just ask this then if I can of the 
responsible minister: surely you must have in mind . . . Now I 
don’t know whether to ask you; I have to because you are the 
piloting minister; maybe I should ask the appointing mediator 
minister. Knowing how strongly the member from Melville, the 
minister who will appoint the mediator — knowing how 
strongly he feels about the United Church and the supposed 
links to the NDP of the United Church, could I ask the minister, 
Mr. Chairman, does this mean that any future mediator cannot 
be a member of the United Church? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation . . . The 
Minister of Labour may well have absolutely no involvement 
here because the preferred course, and why it’s written in the 
Bill, is that both sides can choose the mediator, and that may 
well be the case. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman I just want to be absolutely 
certain that we have here a fair-minded minister who’s 
appointing a fair-minded mediator. Now we all heard the 
speech from the appointing minister. He dislikes the United 
Church. He dislikes homosexuals. He dislikes anybody who’s 
got an NDP connection. He dislikes anybody who has a 
French-speaking background in that context. He dislikes 
anybody who’s poor and on welfare. And he makes his points 
known to this House and to this government — not with 
casualness but with purposeful, deliberate provocation. 
 
I ask the minister of continuing education: can you honestly tell 
the university people that this is the right minister to be 
appointing a fair-minded, independent mediator? How can you 
take that position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If it comes to the Minister of Labour 
to make the appointment, it’s his job, and it will be done. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just two 
areas that I wish to question the minister in, Mr. Minister, the 
Bill sets up a mediation process to run basically between now 
and May 12. And reading the terms of the Bill, it would seem 
that the government is either presuming . . . Mr. Minister, either 
the government is presuming that the mediation is going to fail 
in that period of time, or it would seem to me that the 
government has made a technical but important mistake in the 
drafting of the Bill. I would draw the minister’s attention to a 
number of sections in the Bill that refer to   



 
April 7, 1988 

 

416 
 

that date of May 12, but most particularly to clause 11, that is 
the coming into force section, and it talks about the legislation 
being in force from the time it is given assent until May 13. 
 
And I would ask the minister: what if the mediation succeeds in 
the meantime? What if this process actually comes to a happy 
conclusion? I think, bearing in mind the circumstances of this 
case, that happy conclusion would seem to be rather unlikely. 
But what if it does succeed, Mr. Minister? Would you not agree 
that clause 11 should provide for the termination of this Act, 
either on May 13 or when mediation succeeds, if it does, 
whichever comes first. Would that not be a more appropriate 
provision to include in the Act, rather than saying the period is 
from now until the 12th or 13th of May, period? Would it not 
be advisable to provide in the legislation for the mediation in 
fact to be successful, or are you operating on the presumption 
that this whole thing is going to fail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. And the member has a legitimate 
concern, but he doesn’t have the full understanding of what the 
legislation is. It’s the Bill that dies on May 13, and perhaps you 
weren’t here earlier, but I answered essentially the same 
question from the NDP advanced education critic. Because I 
think your concern is, on the one hand do we want to make sure 
that we protect the faculty member, that the wages continue to 
come while this suspension is in place, but at the same time if 
there is an agreement reached will that — and is retroactive to 
whenever — you know, can that be processed and paid out and 
all that? And the answer is yes. 
 
And I mean I think your concern is a legitimate enough one and 
had it been . . . Technically you were right, and technically we 
were wrong. I would have prepared to act on it, but I’m advised 
that such is not the case. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Minister, on the same point, there 
are several points in the legislation where this date of May 12 or 
May 13 is referred to, and I think, for example, of section 8 that 
talks about the extension of the last agreement. And there are 
several other sections which, it would appear, would be entirely 
redundant if the mediation process is in fact successful. 
 
And I wonder if the Minister wouldn’t give a little more thought 
to this in what time remains and consider what is, I think, a 
fairly simple way of resolving this — adding into clause 11 the 
provision that this Bill, which will become an Act, that the Act 
expires either on May 13 or on the date upon which a new 
agreement is arrived at, if that date is in fact earlier than May 
13. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I said earlier, if your point was 
technically valid, I would be prepared to act on it. I have 
rechecked with my officials and they’re satisfied that whatever 
the scenario or the case may be that it can be dealt with and 
dealt with properly. And I remind you again that the clause that 
you are referring to, and even clause 8 when you referred to it, 
that’s there to protect the faculty in the face of this so that the 
salaries continue to come. And it’s the Bill that dies on May 13, 
and it’s got nothing to do with the settlements part. 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Then I would presume that all of the punitive 
sections of the Bill would die on May 12 or 13. Would those 
punitive sections technically remain in force after a new 
agreement is signed, if in fact there is one signed prior to May 
12 or 13? I know this may sound like a technical point, but I 
think it’s one that ought to be cleared up in a firm and final way 
before any legislation is finally dealt with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The Bill and all of its clauses die on 
the 13th. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — But I guess the corollary of that, Mr. Minister, 
is that the Bill and all of its clauses stand in effect until May 13. 
That, I think, is the flip side of the same coin. 
 
My point is, if the process you’re setting up here is successful, 
the provisions may be not just redundant but counter-productive 
if the legislation remains in effect after a dispute has in fact 
been resolved by a new contract being arrived at. And I think 
there could be potentially some negative repercussions if the 
Bill continues on to May 13, even though the dispute has been 
resolved in the meantime. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know as I’ve 
got any more to offer on this. I mean, technically if you’re right, 
you have a legitimate concern. My officials and I are satisfied 
that if there’s an agreement arrived at and it’s retroactive, pay 
cheques go, and all the rest of it. So I appreciate your raising it, 
but we’ve given it some fair consideration, some fair thought, 
and we’re satisfied that it’s technically correct. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I hope in fact that you’re 
correct on that point and that we’re not faced with some 
technical and unforeseen problems down the road three or four 
weeks from now if circumstances happened to unfold in a 
certain way. 
 
I would like to ask the minister just one or two questions about 
his intentions with respect to section 5 in the Bill, the section 
that establishes the mediation process. That section of course 
provides for the mediator to file a report before May 12 — May 
12. Does the minister have in mind that there would merely be 
one of those reports filed? Would he anticipate periodic 
progress reports as things go along? 
 
I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you anticipate hearing only 
once from the mediator? Or do you anticipate an ongoing 
monitoring of this situation which might result in your making 
your services available to the process in some constructive 
way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — This wouldn’t preclude them 
reporting before May 12 if that’s your concern. 
 
The division bells having run from 10:03 p.m. until 10:40 p.m. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

417 
 

Yeas — 29 
 
 
Duncan Martin 
McLeod Toth 
Andrew Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Schmidt Martens 
Hodgins Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Britton 
Goodale  
 

Nays — 14 
 
Romanow Simard 
Prebble Kowalsky 
Brockelbank Atkinson 
Shillington Hagel 
Tchorzewski Lyons 
Solomon Calvert 
Mitchell Trew 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I just 
have a few more questions on this Bill. I beg the indulgence of 
the House. 
 
I refer the minister . . . He doesn’t have his officials here. Do 
you want your officials? I’ll wait for a moment and then . . . I 
want to ask the minister to refer to the definition under section 2 
of the phrase “work stoppage”, and the words say: 
 

. . . “work stoppage” means a strike, lock-out, work 
slow-down or a refusal (now I’m skipping over words here 
for the point that I want to make in a moment) . . . to 
perform the usual duties of employment. 

 
What interests me, however, is the way the Bill is worded — 
work slow-down or a refusal or failure to perform the usual 
duties of employment. What happens if a faculty member falls 
ill and fails to perform duties because of that ? 
 
(2245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, under 
. . . If I refer you to section 7, subsection 2, that would be 
provided for in that. If you refer to section 7, subsection 2 of the 
Bill, you will find that, for example, sickness would be 
provided for under that section of the Bill. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 and 4 agreed to. 
 

Clause 5 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I just have again, a very few 
brief questions on this section. I will not remake my speech 
about my anxiety of the member from Melville, the Minister of 
Labour, being responsible for appointing the mediator here; I 
made that point before the division bells on clause 1. And I 
really commend to the Deputy Premier and commend to the 
Minister of Education, continuing education, that if he can find 
it at all in terms of common sense to delete the Minister of 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment, virtually to 
appoint almost anybody — perhaps even the Minister of Justice 
— you would find a greater acceptance of the mediator under 
the provisions than the current named person in this legislation. 
 
I suspect rather that you’re not going to change anything in this 
legislation, certainly not that. If I’m wrong, I’d be pleased to be 
so advised. That being the case, and it looks as though the 
Minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment shall 
exercise his judgement in the appointment of the mediator, will 
the Minister indicate whether or not both sides — or all sides, 
putting it that way — will have an opportunity to be consulted 
and react to possible mediators who might be appointed under 
this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, under the provisions of 
this legislation in that section, they have more than that. The 
two parties have the right, and they have five days within which 
to do it, to appoint their own mediator, to choose their own 
mediator. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I see that they have the right to choose their 
own mediator, but if that does not happen, my worry is not if 
there’s an agreed upon mediator; obviously that’s a good sign, 
and it’s a good step forward. But in the eventuality that that 
doesn’t take place and the Minister over there has to appoint the 
mediator, I ask: will the government allow the parties to the 
dispute to have some input as to who that mediator might be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There’s nothing much more I can say 
about this, Mr. Chairman, in terms of the territory that we’ve 
already been through, the debate. The first five days they have 
the opportunity to appoint their own, and then, if not, then the 
Minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment shall 
appoint a mediator, and that would be done in the usual 
objective fashion. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This is my last question in this area because 
I’m obviously not making my point, but I want to ask a very 
specific question to the minister. Will he undertake to this 
House that, if under subclause (2) of section 5, there has to be 
an appointment of a mediator by that minister, whether the 
government will permit consultation of names by the parties, all 
the parties involved? Will you make the undertaking that that 
will be circulated in advance of the appointment of the 
mediator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The Minister of Human Resources, 
Labour and Employment has advised me that he would give 
you his undertaking to look at lists that might be provided by 
both parties. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

418 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Just one question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, in section 5, subsection (3)(b), it says that the 
mediator: 
 

If the dispute has not been resolved before May 12, 1988, 
(is to) report to the minister (the Minister of Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment) mentioned in 
subsection (2) on May 12 . . . with respect to the status of 
the negotiations between the association and the employer. 

 
Obviously, Mr. Minister, this will involve the mediator 
reporting on aspects of the dispute that are clearly internal to the 
University of Saskatchewan. As an example, the aspect of the 
dispute dealing with faculty input into senior administrative 
appointments which is one of the issues in the dispute. And I 
would argue, Mr. Minister, that the mediator has no business 
reporting to the government on a matter that is internal to the 
university. And I’m asking you if you’d be prepared to change 
this section so that, in fact, the mediator does not report to 
government on matters that are clearly internal to the University 
of Saskatchewan and no business of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Would you be prepared to amend the legislation 
to accommodate that change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, and the reason, Mr. Chairman, 
and hon. member, that I say that is that the mediator will be 
reporting on the status of negotiations, not the scenario that you 
described. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just wonder, Mr. Minister, why the 
mediator would not follow the normal course of reporting to the 
parties, rather than to the minister? 
 
Of what relevance is it to you to know the status of the 
negotiations? On May 12 this whole process is out the window. 
Normally a mediator reports to the parties. Why wasn’t the 
normal course followed? I’m just curious. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think it’s implicitly understood that 
he — the very nature of a mediator — will be working with 
both parties, and should . . . must report by May 12. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, just a question to the minister 
again. 
 
Here in section 8, Mr. Minister, it’s very clear that under this 
legislation you’re extending the terms of the collective 
agreement to include the period commencing on July 1, ’87 and 
ending on May 12, ’87. Is it your intent under this Bill in fact, 
therefore, to freeze faculty salaries during that period? In other 
words, extend the existing collective agreement for another nine 
months, meaning a zero per cent increase in faculty salaries 
during that time. 
 
Are you attempting to legislate that in this Bill, or is that not 
your intent? And if it’s not, would you clarify that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, what this legislation does is it 
extends the terms of the previous agreement, and if a new 
agreement is reached it takes precedence over the previous 
agreement. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, as part of my education 
critic’s assignment I’ve been in continual touch with the 
situation that we’re discussing here that has caused this 
particular Bill to come forth. And I apologize for the members, 
but that is the reason for the delay over the last half-hour. And, 
Mr. Minister, I have it on reliable authority that as a result of 
discussions this afternoon and into this late evening, real 
progress is being made, and there is a real opportunity for these 
conciliation talks to resume early tomorrow. 
 
Now we hope that you will allow this to be solved internally if 
it is at all possible, Mr. Minister. And that’s why I ask at this 
time, in the interests of achieving a negotiated settlement, you 
will agree publicly now to delay Royal Assent by accepting this 
particular amendment to clause 11. I will move this amendment, 
seconded by the member from Regina North East: 
 

That section 11 of the Bill be deleted and the following be 
substituted therefor: 
 
This Act comes into force on a date to be fixed by 
proclamation. 

 
(2300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and hon. 
member, I too have been aware of discussions that have been 
going on over the last 24 hours. And the parties that I was in 
touch with, I had asked them to, if something broke, to call me 
at the earliest possible moment. And I’ve had no call and no 
particular assurance, and exams are upon us. For those reasons, 
I won’t accept the amendment, but what I will do is . . . what 
our government will do, is we will make provision to 
accomplish the same ends in the event that some agreement can 
be reached. 
 
We will delay Royal Assent till the normal adjournment hour 
tomorrow, and as well, this evening, I will call both parties and 
advise them that Royal Assent will be delayed until 
adjournment tomorrow. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of Students at The 

University of Saskatchewan 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

419 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 3, an 
Act to provide for the Resumption of Instruction, Teaching and 
Examination of Students at The University of Saskatchewan be 
now read for the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:07 p.m. 
 


