


















































April 8, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 8, 1988 
 

421 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly gives me 
a lot of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members assembled, a group of cadets from Wilkie 
constituency out of the town of Macklin. They are out of the 
601 Air Cadet Squadron from Macklin, Saskatchewan. They are 
from grades 7 to 12. They are accompanied by their chaperons, 
Mr. Skinner and Mrs. Logan and Mrs. Wandler. They are also 
accompanied by their teacher, Lieutenant Mychan, and Officer 
Cadet Stephens. Mr. Speaker, there are 28 of them, and I would 
like to welcome them in the usual manner, and I would ask the 
members assembled to help me do that. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, while I have your attention and 
still on my feet, I would like to also introduce to you and 
through you some more visitors very special to me; it’s my 
daughter and her husband, Ken Bast, and their two children, 
Keri and Chad, and their friend, Jodi Sperle, from Unity. 
 
The reason it’s very special to me today, Mr. Speaker, is my 
granddaughter, Keri, who is nine years old, is here to take part 
in the Telemiracle search for talent. She’ll be singing tomorrow, 
and needless to say I’m very proud to introduce to you my 
family . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 
and to all members of this House, three very important 
constituents of mine in the persons of David, Stephanie and 
Betty Calvert, and reflecting on the comments just made by the 
minister, it’s my hope that Stephanie Calvert will not sing in 
this Assembly today. I would ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these guests of mine. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Employment Situation in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment. Mr. Minister, the 
unemployment figures for March are out, and quite frankly I’m 
shocked. In the month of March there were 45,000 people out 
of work in the province of Saskatchewan — up 4,000 from a 
year ago. That’s a number equivalent, Mr. Minister, to 80 per 
cent of the population of Melville. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, I ask you: will you now admit that 
your government’s budget plans for employment are totally 
inadequate to meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly it has been a 
long winter, as happens every year in Saskatchewan, and 
unemployment goes up every winter, and it’s unfortunate that 
more people can’t be employed at this time. However, the 
record of employment of this government is quite good. 
 
I might say that, Mr. Speaker, for example, in the last year the 
retail and wholesale employment is up 7,000, services are up 
2,000, construction up 3,000, due mostly to the Saskatchewan 
home program — it was a policy of this government — and 
unfortunately agricultural employment is down 10,000. And it’s 
quite clear that the world economic situation is raising havoc in 
agriculture. The members of this side of the government realize 
that and have done a lot to assist agriculture, but that is the main 
reason for the increase in employment, is the difficulty in the 
agricultural sector. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
say your record is good; the numbers speak for themselves. The 
actual rate of unemployment in Saskatchewan today, Mr. 
Minister, is 9.2 per cent — higher than the national average. 
The seasonally adjusted rate for unemployment in 
Saskatchewan is 7.9 per cent, higher than the national average. 
Other provinces are doing better, Mr. Minister, and quite 
frankly your plans are not working. I ask you: will you tell this 
House what new initiatives your government is willing to 
undertake to create employment for the people in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing here 
with numbers; we are dealing here with people. These are not 
statistics; these are actual people we’re talking about. And for 
some people it is difficult because of the agricultural situation, 
but overall Saskatchewan is doing quite well under the 
circumstances. 
 
We are third in the unemployment race, or in the statistics. We 
are third best if you take it seasonally adjusted, when you allow 
for the winter season. We are now behind Alberta, that’s why 
overall we are fourth. We are now behind Alberta. Alberta is 
recovering, is down to 8.8 per cent; we are now at 9 per cent. I 
am pleased to see that Alberta is recovering. I am pleased to see 
that the energy industry is improving, and that is also happening 
in Saskatchewan under our policies, and you will see greater 
improvement as we go into the spring. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, let’s 
talk about young people. You’ve been known to brag about 
your government creating 4,000 summer jobs for students. 
That’s exactly the same number of jobs that were lost to the 
province of Saskatchewan in the last year. Youth employment 
in this province fell by 2,000 over the past 12 months. The rate 
of unemployment for young people . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Please get to the question, the 
supplementary. 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

422 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that the rate for 
unemployment for young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan aged 15 to 24 is now at 15.9 per cent 
unemployed — one out of every six — I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
will you now admit that your Opportunities ’88 program is 
woefully inadequate, and that stronger measures must be taken 
to ensure that our young people will have reason to stay in this 
province and not leave to other provinces in this country? Will 
you give that assurance to young people in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will give the 
assurance that students will have jobs this summer. They had a 
record number of jobs last year, and we will try to achieve a 
record again this year. But we will match last year’s 
performance this year because the economy outside of 
agriculture is strong, as strong as can be expected in an 
agricultural province. 
 
But what you should know, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 
policies, and one of them is freer trade. And the members 
opposite are opposed to that policy. 
 
You should also know that in the past year there are 4,000 more 
women employed in this province than there were a year ago. 
So women are doing very, very well. The unemployment 
problem deals primarily on the male side these days. And in 
that area we have to continue with the policies of freer trade and 
building the economy, and we will do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
the people in Saskatoon will take special interest in your 
initiatives for employment. You will know that today in 
Saskatoon literally one out of every eight people in Saskatoon 
are without work, and that’s simply not acceptable. I ask you, 
Mr. Minister: have you targeted any job creation programs for 
the city of Saskatoon, or do we just simply assume, do we 
assume that you and your government just don’t care about 
working people in the city of Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, for the past six years 
Saskatoon has been the fastest growing city in Canada. That 
would mean that Saskatoon has had more job creation than 
anywhere in western Canada. I don’t know if we can take on the 
city of Toronto where they have certain advantages that we 
don’t have in western Canada, but I can tell you that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member — Like free trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — As my member points out, they have 
free trade in automobiles, and we don’t have free trade in what 
matters to us. But the city of Saskatoon has grown so fast it is 
attracting people and job seekers. People go where the jobs are, 
and they have the same situation that Alberta had in their boom. 
In the boom, Alberta had fairly high unemployment because  

everybody who was unemployed went there. Saskatoon is a 
good place to be, and that’s where people are going. 
 

Travel Expenses for MLAs 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question I suppose 
now is to the Acting Deputy Premier, whoever that might be. 
And, Mr. Minister, it shows in the public accounts for the fiscal 
year ’85-86 that the member for Morse, who was at the time the 
Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Economic Development 
and Trade, and later to the Provincial Secretary, had taxpayers 
pay for 25 out-of-town trips, 22 of which took him to his . . . 
took him to Swift Current, the closest major centre to his home 
riding. He spent some $3,900 of taxpayers’ money travelling to 
his home despite the fact that he was paid, like all MLAs, an 
MLA’s allowance for such travel. 
 
And I ask, Mr. Minister: given your government’s tight-fisted 
approach to health, education, and other areas, do you think that 
this is fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of the exact 
details of what the hon. member raises. That is something that 
we can certainly look into, Mr. Speaker, other than to say this, 
other than to say this. I think members on both sides of the 
House will acknowledge that there are few members elected . . . 
in my 10 years in this Assembly there is few people elected that 
are not on the cabinet benches that work harder than the 
member from Morse, very few members that I’ve seen . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, that particular member is 
working on agriculture policy 12 months of the year. Now for 
the member opposite to stand up and raise a question like that in 
the face of, in the face of, Mr. Speaker . . . and what I 
understood, always understood the tradition of the legislature 
and question period to be, to raise the key and fundamental 
issues of the day, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that particular 
member could learn a lesson in the tradition of the legislature 
and how we deal with that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — New question, new question, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t disagree with the minister that that member 
works hard, as all members of this House work hard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I don’t disagree that he should 
have time to spend with his family, like all members of the 
legislature. That’s why all MLAs have a travel allowance. And 
the question here is one of members of the government being 
paid money on top of the travel allowance for trips home. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to just raise another case, and this is  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

423 
 

the member for Saltcoats in that same year travelled to his home 
in Spy Hill while he was Legislative Secretary to the Minister 
of Agriculture. He spent some $1,400 taking 16 trips to his 
home at Spy Hill. And again I ask you: why should the people 
of Saskatchewan be paying for these trips twice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 
the member from Regina Victoria, whose riding is across the 
lake, across the lake, Mr. Speaker, is being critical somehow of 
the members of this side of the House who are legislative 
secretaries. And what a Legislative Secretary is, Mr. Speaker, is 
somebody that does work over and above simply being a 
private member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Over and above, Mr. Speaker, members 
who are in fact simply private members or back-benchers, and 
that’s what their function is. Now somebody to do that, are we 
suggesting somehow that they should do that out of their own 
pocket? Is that what the hon. member is suggesting? 
 
An Hon. Member — Or that they should only be from Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Or that they should only be able to . . . a 
member like him, the government happens to be in the city of 
Regina, and the member happens to be representing Morse. 
He’s doing extra duties, Mr. Speaker, and we are being denied 
the right to have a trip back home, back and forth to his riding? 
Let’s be serious, Mr. Speaker — let’s be serious, Mr. Speaker. 
That is what they’re doing as a service to the people, and I think 
that is perfectly proper. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think 
most of the public in Saskatchewan is used to that minister’s 
tortured explanation of using government money for trips. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, in the year under question the 
member for Saltcoats travelled to his home town fair in Spy 
Hill, like any member of the legislature might do, whether 
they’re from North Battleford or Moose Jaw or anywhere. Mr. 
Minister, most of us would not say that we are representing a 
minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member is asking a supplementary 
and he is getting into a rather lengthy preamble, and I would ask 
him to get to his question. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question is, Mr. Minister, most of us 
would not bill $150 for such a trip. Can you explain why the 
people of Saskatchewan should pay for that particular trip? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let me explain to the hon. 
member how this institution works. There’s individuals who are 
members of the cabinet or the  

treasury benches, there’s members who are legislative 
secretaries, and there is private members, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the way it works. And the Legislative Secretary does work over 
and above what a private member does. And that work . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member yells about crop 
insurance . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
The member is trying to answer the question. There’s 
interference from both sides of the House. We’re on the verge 
of entering into debate with members from their seats. I ask the 
hon. members to please refrain from interruptions and allow the 
minister to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
shout and yell that somebody is working with crop insurance. 
Crop insurance over the last three or four years, for members 
that don’t happen to come from rural Saskatchewan, is a 
pressing and important issue. There is hundreds and hundreds 
of people wanting to see members, and the members that deal 
with that are dealing with that on a daily basis. 
 
Agriculture has been a critical and fundamental issue that we 
have to deal with, and the member is dealing with that. And I 
think it’s somewhat hypocritical for the member from Regina 
Victoria, who does nothing but simply sit here for 70 days and 
then go to his riding across the street, to somehow criticize a 
rural member who works day in and day out for the farmers of 
this province, and we should be proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Hunger Problems in Saskatoon 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Social 
Services, and whether or not the minister chooses to believe it, 
there are children going hungry in the city of Saskatoon. One 
group, the Friendship Inn, estimates it serves 14,000 meals to 
hungry children each year. About 45 per cent of those receiving 
assistance from the Saskatoon Food Bank are under the age of 
11. 
 
Businesses, service clubs, parents, and teachers have put up 
money to provide lunches for 30 to 75 students each day in 
Saskatoon schools, yet you still refuse to open up your nutrition 
program for children in inner-city schools in the city of 
Saskatoon. What is the reason for that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again the NDP are 
dealing with numbers. My duty as Minister of Social Services is 
to deal with children and to assist children. And the NDP keep 
up the rhetoric of hungry children, but never have they ever sent 
me the name of a hungry child. And I give the people of 
Saskatchewan this commitment: that if the name of a hungry 
child is referred to me, that child will receive food and will 
continue to receive food and care until it becomes an adult, if 
necessary, however long it takes. That’s all the NDP have to do. 
For once, send me the name of people who are in need, and I 
will help them. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

424 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if children are hungry their 
attention span is not the same, they aren’t able to learn, and they 
don’t have the same energy as nourished children. They are 
disadvantaged, Mr. Minister, from the beginning. Why won’t 
your government declare an all out war on child hunger in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this is astonishing. If the 
members of the NDP know children who are in need and refuse 
to send the names of those children to me so I can help them, I 
would say that is immoral behaviour. To know if there are 
children who are neglected and not to seek help for them and 
not ask me to go out and directly have my workers help those 
children is truly immoral on the part of the NDP. They are 
interested in these children for political purposes, but they are 
not interested in helping these children. I will help them if they 
will identify these children for me. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Along with hungry children there are also a 
lot of homeless people in Saskatoon, particularly homeless 
youths. Mr. Minister, you told a Saskatoon radio station that 
these people are homeless by choice. Mr. Minister, that 
statement is too ludicrous to comment. My question, Mr. 
Minister, is: where are your priorities? How can you spend 
$34,000 a day on empty office space in this province when 
there are children going hungry and there are kids on the street 
that don’t have homes? How can you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, every month this 
government spends $16 million on welfare to assist people. 
That would be approximately $500,000 per day, and included in 
that is the right of every citizen in Canada to come for 
assistance if they need it. And when they come, and if they need 
assistance, they are given money for food, shelter, clothing and 
the necessities of life. Included in that assistance is shelter, and 
everyone receives an allowance for shelter if they are in need of 
shelter. If these people will come to my office in Saskatoon, we 
will provide shelter for them. 
 

Contingency Plans for Drought Conditions 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of the Environment, in his responsibility for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
The minister will know that I asked him a question on March 31 
about the threat of very dry conditions across southern 
Saskatchewan this spring. And the minister in his answer 
indicated that contingency plans were being put in place to try 
to deal with that situation. 
 
I would like to ask the minister if he could provide some 
specific detail on those contingency plans. What will the 
components of that plan be, and when would the minister make 
the detail of that available generally to municipalities and to 
farmers and others who are very  

concerned about this impending crisis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thank you for that question. Yes, I don’t 
mind at all telling you what the plan is. 
 
The Department of Environment and the water corporation, 
together, have worked diligently over the past two and a half 
months, and what they’re doing is putting in place a map that 
will show the availability of water for almost every quarter 
section in the province, wherever there is water. Now some 
areas, there is no underground water than can be tapped. 
 
Any community or any individual who comes forward and 
indicates that they have a need of additional water supplies are 
being dealt with on a day-to-day basis. I believe that the 
corporation and the Department of Environment, by jointly 
working, have done a real good job in assisting people to locate 
alternate sources of water. We do have programs that provide 
for assistance in drilling of new wells if that’s the need. We 
have pipe equipment and pumps to pump water from one 
reservoir to the other if that is the need. So it’s an individual 
basis by community or by farm. As they bring forward their 
concern, we’re dealing with it, and I believe it’s been working 
very well up to this point. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister if he 
has in mind . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Is the member asking a new 
question or a supplementary? 
 
Mr. Goodale: — It’s a supplementary, Mr. Speaker, a 
supplementary. I would like to ask the minister if he has 
specific financial assistance in mind for this year beyond 
established ongoing programs, specific new financial assistance 
to deal with what is a new and unusual situation this year. And I 
wonder if the minister could direct his attention specifically to 
the village of Limerick where the reservoir is already dry, and 
they simply cannot afford the capital cost entirely on that 
village to find an adequate solution to their problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have a number of programs in place. 
We are not putting in place brand-new programs to deal with 
this issue, because I believe the department and the water 
corporation both have been working for a number of years to 
provide assistance to communities such as Limerick. 
 
My staff have been in Limerick a number of times and have 
worked very closely with the community. They do have a 
difficulty that’s very severe, and we’re looking at it. I believe in 
their circumstance they have located a source of water in a 
gravel pit that’s something like four miles or four and a half 
miles from the town, and they are now looking at what the costs 
might be to dig a well and to move that water that distance. I 
haven’t final figures, but they certainly are looking at Limerick 
as a community that needs help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Renovations to Sask Power Headquarters 
 

  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

425 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. Mr. Minister, we are informed that extensive 
renovations have taken place in the executive offices at SPC’s 
headquarters in Regina. Can you confirm to this House that one 
of the offices under renovation is that of the $200,000-a-year 
man, Mr. George Hill, former president of the PC Party of 
Saskatchewan, and can you tell the House the cost of these 
renovations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will confirm that there 
has been a renovation done on the 12th floor of the SaskPower 
building. I do not know the cost, but I suggest that it’s minimal, 
Mr. Speaker. And the reason that I say that is I was over there 
the other day to visit with the board and the president and the 
chairman of the board, and I noticed that in the renovation there 
were several more people moved up from the 10th floor, and 
the chairman’s office is a whole lot smaller than it once was, 
and the president’s office is a whole lot smaller than it once 
was, and the board room was moved down further to the end of 
the building to accommodate these people that were moved up 
from the 10th floor. Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the 
question and get some precise detail as to the renovations. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. In January 
of this year the same George Hill appeared on a television 
program, province-wide, produced by SaskPower. In that 
program he said the SPC, in order to get its financial house in 
order, had decided to eliminate all discretionary spending. 
Could you tell this Assembly, when you take notice again and 
when you come back, that if extensive renovations to Mr. Hill’s 
office was discretionary spending, and if so, why the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan should pick up the tab for his extravagant 
tastes in times when children are going hungry in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t understand this guy, Mr. 
Speaker. He talks about extravagant tastes and smaller offices, 
Mr. Speaker, I remember when the hon. Neil Byers and the hon. 
John Messer were ministers responsible for that Crown too, and 
they had a ministerial suite over in that building. Today there is 
no ministerial suite in that building, Mr. Speaker, and in fact the 
offices for the president and the chairman are smaller than they 
were only a few months ago. I don’t know what he’s talking 
about. He’s just out of touch with reality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to make a 
statement on an issue which arose yesterday. Yesterday before 
orders of the day, the member for Regina North  

East raised a point of order concerning firstly, whether the 
Deputy Premier had taken proper notice of the questions put to 
him the day before; and secondly, the length of the Deputy 
Premier’s reply to the questions taken on notice. 
 
It is the usual practice of this Assembly that when a minister is 
asked an oral question, he may answer it directly or take notice 
and bring back an answer on a later date. At the same time, 
however, some leeway has been given to the minister to make a 
very brief but general response while undertaking to bring back 
a specific answer another day. 
 
I have reviewed the verbatim records for April 6 and April 7, 
’88. It is apparent in the record that the Deputy Premier did take 
notice of a question asked during oral question period on April 
6. That day there were three questions asked by two members 
regarding delays in admission of patients for surgery. The 
minister made responses to all three, but only on the second 
question did he take notice. 
 
Notwithstanding his initial responses and the fact that he 
actually took notice of only the second question, the Deputy 
Premier rose in the Assembly yesterday indicating that he 
wanted to deal with all three questions. 
 
I find this a breach of the accepted guide-lines of question 
period. In effect, the Deputy Premier took the opportunity to 
answer the question twice, and used up time in question period. 
 
I want to address the length of the Deputy Premier’s answer. 
From the record it is clear that the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana’s question was posed in such a way as to provoke a 
lengthy answer. The Deputy Premier’s response was indicative 
of this, as he strayed from specific topic to speculate on the 
motives for asking the question. 
 
Having said that, I still find that the Deputy Premier’s response 
of a little over four minutes was inordinately long. For the 
reasons cited, I find the member for Regina North, his point of 
order well taken. I therefore urge ministers to clearly state to the 
House when he is taking notice of a question. When taking 
notice, comments should be brief. 
 
I also urge all members to ensure that questions and answers are 
not posed in such a way as to provoke debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

426 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of 
pleasure that I enter this budget debate here in the . . . now in 
the 10th year in this legislature, representing the people in the 
Meadow Lake constituency. And it’s with a great deal of pride 
that I do that once again, to stand and speak on their behalf in 
support of this very forward-looking and excellent budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words before I get into the 
substantive portion of my remarks as it relates to the 
Department of Health and all of the very many things that are 
going on there, to speak just for a few moments about the 
constituency that I have the honour to represent here. 
 
We had an example just this morning in the question period 
from the member from Regina Victoria, speaking about and 
asking questions and suggesting that members from outside of 
this city should not be using the government aircraft, members 
who have responsibilities which are far beyond the 
responsibilities of the members serving their own constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m one who represents a constituency which is a 
good long way from this city of Regina, this capital city. My 
riding, Mr. Speaker, to put that into context, the town of 
Meadow Lake, the largest in my riding, is the same distance 
from here as is Winnipeg, just so people will know that. The 
member from Morse comes from the area around Swift Current. 
There were questions asked about his use of government 
airplanes, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point here in all of this, and the point that 
always strikes a chord with me when those members who are 
very urban in nature . . . that urban member from Regina 
Victoria, who as the member . . . as my seat mate said, can just 
walk over to the other side of the lake and be home in his 
constituency. I take very great exception to that because I 
believe the people of this province, as I know very well the 
people in my constituency, very much want executive positions, 
extra work to be done beyond that which you do for your own 
constituency, to be done by members . . . not only members 
who are from proximity . . . in close proximity to the capital 
city, but to be done by members who are from all parts of this 
province, and therefore represent the feelings and the views of 
people from all parts of this very large province that we are very 
proud to represent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — So I take great exception to those 
questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this 1988-89 budget is a substantial indication of 
the priority our government places on the well-being of all of 
the people here in this province. It provides a meaningful 
balance between our social and economic structures, and is 
clearly designed to improve the quality of life for all of our 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an honest budget — an honest budget. It’s 
one that reflects our current economic state. We were willing to 
lay the facts on the line and to seek solutions to the issues which 
face our province in a partnership with our people. And because 
it’s an honest budget, I  

congratulate the Minister of Finance, my colleague, 
congratulate him for the way in which he’s approached this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as he said in the budget . . . in his budget address, 
and as others have said before in this debate, what government 
is about to a large extent, is making choices, Mr. Speaker, our 
Minister of Finance has made choices; we on these benches, 
this Progressive Conservative government has made choices in 
the development of this budget. And, Mr. Speaker, judging 
from the reaction in the province from the people representing 
the various sectors, they have been agreeing with the choices 
that we have made. So for that I congratulate the Minister of 
Finance for an honest budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this is a responsible 
budget. It’s one that recognizes the priorities that exist within 
our social structure. Equally, the Minister of Finance has 
reinforced our commitment to good management in this 
province. Once again, Mr. Speaker — choices. We made those 
choices and we made those choices, and he expressed those 
choices in his budget address with good management of this 
province very much in the forefront. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget of determination, one that clearly 
states the intent of our government to meet the challenges 
facing our people, not only now, not only in the present, but on 
and into the future. 
 
This is a budget that respects the right of our people to choose, 
encourages responsible decision making, and invites personal 
involvement in the affairs of our province. And that’s extremely 
important to all of our citizens, once again, Mr. Speaker, 
wherever they might live, for the benefit of those members who 
don’t have a sense of this province being beyond this city. 
 
This is a budget that boldly states the vision of our government 
for the future of Saskatchewan. That vision is one of 
partnership, of equality, and of the willingness to listen and 
respond to the needs and aspirations of our people in 
formulating government policy. We believe in the principle of 
government as the servant and not as the master, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s on the back of every card that every member of the 
Progressive Conservative Party carries proudly in this province. 
We believe in government as the servant and not the master. 
 
And in serving, Mr. Speaker, in serving in that way, we make 
choices. People will make choices. There’s no clear policy 
direction coming from those benches throughout this debate, 
Mr. Speaker, those opposition benches. No clear policy 
alternatives. 
 
My colleague from Indian Head-Wolseley said that very clearly 
in his contribution to this debate the other day. They are not 
offering alternatives. They are standing there with the same 
inflamed rhetoric that they have had for a number of years, 
scare tactics, hiding behind the anonymity of large numbers 
which mean nothing. What means something, Mr. Speaker, as 
my colleague said  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

427 
 

earlier in question period — individuals and the cases and the 
collection of those individuals. So there are no clear policy 
directions coming from over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget, as I said, represents choices that 
governments must make, and it represents the proper choices 
that I believe this government has made. 
 
Let there be no mistake, Mr. Speaker, solid, sound health care is 
and always has been our top social priority in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan people — that’s the nature of our people. It’s the 
nature of our people. We in Saskatchewan are committed to 
preserve and improve the quality and accessibility of health care 
services for our people, and equally committed to responsible 
management of the system — a very key point. 
 
Our record speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker. When we came to 
office we faced a system that was the victim of choices that had 
been made by another government that was here. I acknowledge 
when they were in government, as we must, they made choices. 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, and I have submitted to you in the 
past, they made the wrong choices. They did not make proper 
choices as it relates to the management of a very large system. 
 
Rehabilitation services. Some examples: drugs and alcohol and 
the abuses that go on there. They did not make the proper 
choices there; in fact, they ignored these things. A moratorium 
on the construction of nursing homes for our senior citizens — 
those were the choices that they made. 
 
Major hospital regeneration was needed. In some halcyon days 
— in some days when there was some money from potash, 
money from oil, agriculture was up — all of those things were 
taking place on the revenue side of the ledger, and they made 
choices, Mr. Speaker, and the choices that they made were . . . 
to a large degree ignore many of those things that I’ve just 
mentioned. Mr. Speaker, those were not responsible choices. 
The choices we have made have been responsible ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are basically two tracks that we must be on 
when something as large as this enterprise, this health care 
enterprise, any time we are developing a budget, and we’ve 
done it now for six years. And those tracks are the following: 
obviously there is the track of this budget in this fiscal year for 
the present, for the here and now, if you will. That’s one track, 
and it’s an extremely important one, and it is the one that will 
raise questions, and it is the one through which people will raise 
questions. And there will be debate as time goes on, and there 
will be a crisis here, and so on, as time goes on. That’s the case, 
and we know that, and we recognize that. 
 
But there’s another track which is very important, and a track 
which I submit we have approached in a very responsible way 
and that the former government did not. And that second track 
is a visionary one, it’s one of planning, it’s one of accepting the 
responsibility that comes with occupying these executive 
benches and saying, what will this enterprise, what will this 
health care system look like? How will it serve our people, not 
only now, but not in this fiscal year, or next Tuesday, or 
however, but how will it look in 1995, for example? What  

will it be like at the turn of the century, in the year 2000, 
because each of us who occupies these benches for whatever 
period of time has a responsibility to look forward? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that second track is the track which takes us to the 
regeneration of the hospitals. Some of the things that have been 
going on here recently, some of the building programs that have 
been going on, some of the recognition of the demographics of 
this province where we have our numbers of senior citizens 
rising and so on, that second track is extremely important, and 
the two tracks should never . . . either one of those should never 
be done in isolation. They should be done in parallel, and that is 
what we have done with this budget, Mr. Speaker, and that is 
what this government continues to do and will continue to do as 
long as this Progressive Conservative Party occupies these 
government benches, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1045) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, our government has taken 
a balanced approach to the funding of capital projects in the 
health care sector. In 1985, $275 million was allocated for a 
five-year hospital construction program. Since that time, new 
hospitals have been built at Lloydminster, at Maidstone, at 
Watson, at Hudson Bay and at Watrous. Integrated facilities 
have been established at Dinsmore, Fillmore, Gainsborough, 
Goodsoil, Lampman, Lucky Lake, Mankota, Nokomis, and 
Rabbit Lake, Mr. Speaker, a proud record. And in each of those 
communities that I’ve mentioned here today, there are a lot of 
folks who are extremely pleased with the facilities that have 
been built in their communities, a lot of people who have 
worked extremely hard to see those construction projects come 
to fruition for the service of their people, and I congratulate 
them for that, and also say to you, Mr. Speaker, that is a proud 
record for the government in the times that we’ve been facing to 
have that kind of a construction program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Regeneration projects have been 
completed in Regina for the Regina General and the Pasqua 
Hospitals. In fact, as I mentioned just a moment ago, our 
Premier and I had the honour to attend the official opening of 
Phase 3 of the Regina General project only two days ago — 
$30.2 million, Mr. Speaker, $30.2 million of commitment to the 
kind of hospital facilities that are needed, not only here in 
Regina but in all of southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. An 
excellent commitment, a commitment by a government that has 
a view to the visionary track that I spoke of earlier. 
 
We are proud to have funded the new $16 million cancer clinic 
in Saskatoon, another area that had been neglected for a number 
of years. This clinic will provide a much needed focal point for 
cancer research and treatment in this province. 
 
Major renovations have been completed at Melfort and Yorkton 
Union hospitals. Psychiatric wards have been  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

428 
 

improved at Saskatoon City Hospital and the University 
Hospital. We are in the midst of completing other important 
construction projects at Wascana Hospital in Regina and St. 
Paul’s Hospital and University Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our construction work at University and St. Paul’s 
hospitals will significantly increase space available to patients. 
These projects, in addition to the building of the new Saskatoon 
City Hospital, will have a positive effect on effective surgical 
waiting lists in Saskatoon. 
 
Last year alone, Mr. Speaker, we funded an additional 2,000 
operations in Saskatoon, and in July we opened a new day 
surgery unit with the capacity to perform 3,500 operations a 
year. Over $15 million has been targeted to reduce waiting lists 
for elective surgery, and the key word in that, Mr. Speaker, is 
“targeted” — targeted dollars at those specialties which were 
causing and which continue to cause, I acknowledge, the 
waiting list problems or the time that people will have to wait. 
 
We’ve already begun to see the positive results of our efforts, 
Mr. Speaker. The number of operations performed in Saskatoon 
has increased by 42 per cent since 1983. Our most recent data 
confirms a decrease of almost 12 per cent in the number of 
people waiting for elective surgery from September ’87 to 
February this year. And yes, Mr. Speaker, waiting times are 
decreasing as well — waiting times are decreasing as well. And 
the key in that, Mr. Speaker, the key in all of this — and when 
we hear the rhetoric from opposite, where they talk about the 
numbers of people on waiting lists that require services from 
our excellent facilities — the key in all of this, any time there’s 
a discussion of waiting for elective surgery, it is the length of 
time which is key, more so than the number of people who are 
waiting for particular procedures. The length of time an 
individual will wait is the key, and that is where we must target 
our dollars, and that’s where we are targeting our dollars. And 
I’m pleased to be able to say, to some extent we’re having some 
success there, Mr. Speaker, now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the choices made by those members 
opposite in the days when they occupied these benches, we’ve 
recognized and responded to the needs of seniors for specialized 
health care services. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, some 1,741 special care home beds 
have been constructed or approved for construction in this 
province. Compare this to the NDP record of 700-odd beds 
during their last seven years in office, from 1976 to 1982. Once 
again, Mr. Speaker, when the revenue side of the ledger was 
there and there was some money there to spend on it, did they 
make the choices to spend it on facilities and health care 
facilities for our seniors? Did they make that choice? They 
made the wrong choice. And to do nothing, as they did — to do 
nothing, as they did — is a choice, Mr. Speaker. Don’t ever . . . 
we must never let them get away with the feeling that it wasn’t 
a choice. They had a choice; they chose to do nothing. 
 
We have . . . Mr. Speaker, local special care homes are now 
being built and staffed to heavier care standards,  

another key point in our health care sector. We are 
systematically replacing older facilities designed for lighter care 
needs with new heavy care beds, and in the past five years we 
have added over 400 new positions to existing homes at a cost 
of more than $10 million — $10 million for new positions in 
special care homes, Mr. Speaker, a record that we are proud of. 
And we also acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that there is need for 
more. There is an acknowledgement of that, and there is an 
acknowledgement of that in this budget presented by the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
This is a record we’re proud of, one which every other province 
in this country would be hard-pressed to match, and one that we 
will continue to build on, as I’ve said. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, institutionalized care must be 
the last option. Our primary commitment to seniors remains to 
improve the quality of life for those individuals, and to keep 
them from institutionalized care as long as is possible with the 
kind of services that we can provide for them. 
 
And for this reason, Mr. Speaker, we have actively encouraged 
the development of a wide range of programs at the community 
level. Innovative support services like home care, adult day care 
and respite programs interlock with family support and senior 
enriched housing options. Even those with heavy care needs can 
stay close to family and friends under these kinds of programs. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and within this environment our seniors 
can enjoy life to its fullest. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made choices, and we believe we’ve 
made responsible choices in these areas. We’ve lifted that 
moratorium under the stewardship of my colleague, the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley, when he occupied this portfolio, 
and we are continuing that, Mr. Speaker. And we are continuing 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re proud of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made choices with regard to our children’s 
dental program, and with these changes our children’s dental 
program is still the best offered by any province in this country. 
Our program is the best offered by any province in this country 
right now. 
 
And as of now, Mr. Speaker, a bit of an update, close to 90 per 
cent of all eligible children are registered with a dentist; 97 per 
cent of our dentists throughout the province participate in the 
program; each of our dental health educators visits over 800 
children between five and 10 years old to provide firsthand 
instruction on good dental health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our changes to the dental program have prompted 
continued growth in the development of rural dental practices, 
practices out there on the main street which speak to the 
viability of those rural communities. Since the spring of 1987, 
numerous satellite and principal clinics have opened for 
business in our towns and villages. Many communities are 
negotiating with dentists to provide service in their areas. 
Establishment of these rural practices is speaking directly to the 
viability of our smaller communities. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

429 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not only something that’s done in isolation 
here in the Department of Health, that’s something that’s been a 
commitment of this government in whatever department we 
represent, to speak to the viability of rural communities in this 
province, and every time a new enterprise can open on the main 
street of one of those communities, it speaks directly to that 
viability. And these dental services, whether they be satellite 
services or principal dental clinics, speak to that viability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all Saskatchewan people now have an opportunity 
to see a dentist in an area close to their own community, and 
that’s not something that you could always say. We’re 
projecting an annual saving of 5.2 million as a result of changes 
to the dental program, Mr. Speaker. And as I said before, yes, 
we made choices and we continue to make choices as we must, 
and as everyone who occupies government benches must at any 
time. We made choices. We believe we have made responsible 
choices for the future of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve made choices with regard to the drug plan 
in this province as well. Saskatchewan has an excellent 
prescription drug plan, Mr. Speaker. It’s a comprehensive . . . it 
is very comprehensive and it provides substantial access to 
services for our people. 
 
We’ve built in a series of exemptions to recognize the special 
needs of our seniors in nursing homes, those with chronic 
illnesses and others. Cost savings in this program are projected 
at some 22 million for last year, because it was for one-half a 
year, and on an annualized basis, for a one-year basis, the 
changes in that drug plan, the choices that we’ve made — 
difficult ones, Mr. Speaker, difficult choices, but choices which 
had to be made and which were responsible — the annualized 
savings will be in the order of $50 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We continue to monitor the results of changes to the drug plan. 
We took a plan which had been successful, which all reports 
from Manitoba said, this is a successful plan, it works well for 
the citizens of Manitoba. Everyone said that. No one in 
Manitoba was complaining, whether they lived in Hamiota or in 
Waskada or in Brandon or in Winnipeg. Citizens of Manitoba 
believed that they had a good drug plan. When we went out to 
look at our drug plan, we said, there’s a plan that works, and we 
talked to the people there, and they said, this plan works. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously there have been some concerns, 
obviously there have been some concerns about it here. Our 
people have not accepted the drug plan to the same extent that 
they did in Manitoba. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to 
you today that more and more, and to a wider and wider and 
wider degree, there is a level of understanding of the cost of 
drugs, which is important, and there is a level of understanding 
of this system now that is there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes, we made choices, and we continue to monitor 
the results of changes to the drug plan in consultation with the 
key interest groups. But we made choices, we have people 
recognizing the cost, we had some resolve there, Mr. Speaker; 
we showed some courage there. Mr. Speaker, people expect that 
of their governments — no, Mr. Speaker, they demand that of  

their governments — and, Mr. Speaker, we have provided that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to protect the integrity of our delivery system to 
the people of the province, we successfully negotiated 
Saskatoon Agreement 11, eliminating extra billing and 
protecting access for our people to insured medical services — 
another accomplishment of this government since coming to 
power. 
 
I’d like to speak now for a moment on the area of rehabilitation. 
I spoke of this just briefly a few moments ago. Mr. Speaker, in 
1979 the former government commissioned a review of all 
aspects of rehabilitation services across the province. The report 
on rehabilitation published in December 1980 conceded that — 
and let me quote here, and I do quote: 
 

For some time the rehabilitation services in the province 
may in some areas be deficient because of a combination 
of inadequate facilities, insufficient manpower, a lack of 
community programs and an uncoordinated approach to 
service provision. 

 
Now I give them full credit. They did a review; the former 
government did a review of that system, recognizing that there 
must be some need there, and there certainly was some need 
there. The review admitted that “rehabilitation services were a 
long neglected area of evaluation, frequently ill-defined, 
ambiguous and controversial.” That was a direct quote. 
 
After completing the review, some 113 recommendations to 
improve our rehabilitation services were identified. But the key 
here now, Mr. Speaker: did they act on any of those 
recommendations — did they act on those recommendations? 
The answer to that is no, and I say, shame. They did not act on 
those recommendations. Mr. Speaker, did we act on those 
recommendations upon coming into the Government of 
Saskatchewan in 1982? The answer to that is yes. 
 
One of the first and most important tasks that fell to our 
government in ’82 was to begin the process of building and 
strengthening rehabilitation services across this province. And 
I’m proud to say that we’ve accomplished much in a very short 
period of time. We’ve laid the sound foundation for a solid 
network of reliable service for all people in all parts of the 
province. 
 
One of the major recommendations of the 1980 review called 
for two centres of rehabilitation, one in Regina and one in 
Saskatoon. In 1984 we appointed a new board of directors for 
the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre in Regina, and announced 
government funding of some $50 million to expand and 
improve the facility. We are now into the third year of a 
five-year phase construction program which will see the 
Wascana — just over here, very close to this building, as you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker — we are now in the third year of 
that program which will see the Wascana hospital become a 
regional rehabilitation centre for Regina and for southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1100) 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

430 
 

And in the case of workers’ compensation and people who have 
been injured on the job in this province, it will be the centre for 
injured workers for all of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is it an excellent rehabilitation centre for 
Regina and southern Saskatchewan, and in some aspects for all 
of Saskatchewan, but it is now recognized as it’s coming off the 
drawing boards, as they see the construction going up, and as 
people come from other jurisdictions, people are coming to us 
from other parts of Canada who are addressing their 
rehabilitation programs, and they’re saying, this is the program, 
this is the facility we are coming to study; this is the facility 
which is recognized in this country as being number one, the 
best in the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
something that everybody on this side of the House should be 
really proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say one more 
thing as it relates to that, because when I go to the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre today with a good deal of pride and watch 
that construction going, staff in that hospital and people who 
have been patients there for some period of time, whether they 
be on a long-term basis or whether they are patients there who 
visit from time to time . . . there was a time in this . . . not very 
long ago when those folks were in government, when those 
people in wheelchair, people in wheelchairs, handicapped 
people who were receiving services at the Wascana hospital, 
watched construction going on for some good length of time. 
They watched construction and the construction that they 
watched because of the choices made by those folks when they 
were in government, the choices that they made, the 
construction that those people who were in need of better 
facilities to serve them and their health needs; what they 
watched being built just across the lawn was the T.C. Douglas 
Building to house more public servants. 
 
The T.C. Douglas Building, Mr. Speaker, they made choices — 
we will build a building; we’ll build an edifice to Tommy 
Douglas, who . . . I don’t say that he doesn’t deserve having a 
building named after him, but I say, if you’re making choices, 
build that building at another time and build the hospital for the 
handicapped folks first, and build the T.C. Douglas Building at 
some other time. Make your choices. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they made their choices. They made 
their choice and they were rejected because of it, once in 1982, 
and they were rejected twice — they were rejected in 1986. And 
they will be again, because they are known for those kinds of 
choices. Mr. Speaker, we are becoming known and have been 
known for some time now for making those choices — for 
making those choices. 
 
While upgrading these rehab services in Regina. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’ve not been idle in Saskatoon. Our government 
committed $2.7 million toward a $3.9 million project to 
construct a new facility jointly housing the children’s rehab 
centre, the Alvin Buckwold Centre, and the Saskatchewan 
Institute On Prevention Of  

Handicaps. The new Kinsmen children’s centre has been 
operating as an integrated facility since 1984, and serves as a 
base for regional rehabilitation services across northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will improve access to rehabilitation services 
through the new $26 million Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon. 
The Parkridge Centre has a unique mandate in the rehabilitation 
field. Two new units have been created. The first, the 
rehabilitation unit, will extend clinical rehabilitation services 
currently offered by the University Hospital. The program 
represents a major increase in resources to the 21-bed unit and 
outreach programs at University Hospital. 
 
The second, a geriatric re-enablement unit, is an extension of 
clinical gerontological services offered by University Hospital. 
This unit will allow patients to recover beyond the two- to 
four-week maximum established by University Hospital, until 
they are able to regain their potential ability to function. 
 
We’ve made significant progress toward expanding 
community-based therapy programs as well, Mr. Speaker. Our 
provision of therapy services to rural Saskatchewan was 
expanded and reorganized in 1986. The existing hospital-based 
program was replaced by a new community therapy program. 
Our full-time therapist positions have increased from 10 to 20 
— from 10 to 20, Mr. Speaker — and an additional 10 positions 
will be added in the next two fiscal years; a commitment to the 
therapy programs in this province, Mr. Speaker, a significant 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several mainstream rehabilitation 
programs now offered through Saskatchewan Health. The 
chiropody program, which was introduced by this government 
for our seniors and others, but primarily for our seniors, was 
developed and implemented by us, as I’ve said. Chiropody 
services are now available throughout the province, offered 
locally through some 23 satellite clinics. 
 
We continue to explore other ways to extend the Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living program. In 1984-85 we expanded 
the program’s coverage to include many blind and 
visually-impaired persons through the aids to the blind program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are also committed to the provision of 
audiological assessment and hearing aid services through the 
Saskatchewan hearing aid plan. In 1985-86, two new audiology 
positions were permanently assigned to the Prince Albert and 
North Battleford health regions to keep pace with the demand 
for service in those areas for this program. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, we have met and exceeded many of the 
major recommendations of the 1980 review of rehabilitation. In 
one particular area, however, in one area of rehabilitation we 
have gone significantly beyond anything that they would ever 
have contemplated. On September 3, 1986, our Premier 
announced a landmark program in the field of rehabilitation. 
I’m speaking now, of course, of the Premier’s initiatives for 
prevention and treatment of alcohol and drug abuse. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

431 
 

There’s nothing new about the problems of alcohol and drug 
abuse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we know that. It’s found at all 
ages, in all walks of life. The health, social and economic costs 
are staggering. It’s a particular concern among our youth. An 
estimated one in 50 adolescents are daily users of alcohol or 
other drugs. Every year over 1,000 teenagers are convicted of 
impaired driving or of drug charges. 
 
To address this growing concern, we have committed 
significant resources to the Whitespruce Treatment Centre near 
Yorkton. That facility is Canada’s first specialized youth 
treatment centre based on a family-oriented program. 
 
I’m pleased to inform hon. members that last month, in the 
month of March, Whitespruce will be allocated $3.4 million, an 
increase of 125 per cent over last year. In Saskatoon we are 
relocating the Calder (Rehabilitation) Centre program, which is 
now in conjunction with St. Paul’s Hospital in an older facility; 
we’re relocating that Calder Centre program to the Frank 
Eliason Centre. 
 
Our efforts will result in a much improved environment for 
those recovering from alcohol and drug abuse. Opportunities for 
growth will exist where they did not exist before. The 
environment of the Eliason Centre will encourage program 
development and introduction of needed new programs, but 
more important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will demonstrate the 
value of making responsible choices for better health and for 
better life-styles. 
 
The Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission has 
extended its network of funded agencies to offer treatment and 
rehabilitation services throughout Saskatchewan — seven new 
out-patient centres now serving Buffalo Narrows, Creighton, 
Humboldt, Kipling, La Ronge, Meadow Lake, and Melville. 
Other new centres, offering a variety of service, operate at 
Indian Head, at North Battleford, and at Kipling. 
 
New or expanded facilities for established centres are under 
construction at Lloydminster and at Moose Jaw. SADAC, or the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, has added 
regional staff throughout the province to provide additional 
counselling services for youth and for their families. 
 
To emphasize the importance of the society’s war on alcohol 
and drug abuse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget will provide 
SADAC with over $15 million in operating funds, an increase 
of 16 per cent over the very substantial amount they had last 
year. 
 
In the past three years, Mr. Speaker — very key numbers here 
— in the past three years the funding designated to combat 
alcohol and drug abuse has doubled. This is a clear 
demonstration of our commitment to improve the health and the 
quality of life of our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, responsible government is about 
making choices. Mr. Speaker, we have made choices, and we 
chose to deal with this rehabilitation  

field in a major way and to commit the funds to it to have an 
impact, if it’s possible, and we believe it is, and to have an 
increasing impact on the rehabilitation of our people in this 
area. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, good mental health is just as important as 
good physical health. It is one of the essential factors in 
attaining a healthy life-style. We believe mental health is a 
service worthy of government support, and have made notable 
progress toward improving services in this area. 
 
Beginning in 1983, mental health services for children and 
youth were expanded under this government. Increases were 
made in the number of training positions for psychiatrists — 
residency positions have doubled from six to 12. 
 
New funding was provided for the development and expansion 
of crisis intervention services in Regina and in Saskatoon. Since 
1984, $700,000 a year has been channelled to new program 
initiatives such as expanded crisis management services, 
support to self-help groups, suicide prevention programming, 
expanded autism services, and innovative service projects. New 
resources have been provided for young offenders. New 
treatment programs have been developed for wife batterers. 
 
And on April 1, 1986 a new Mental Health Services Act was 
proclaimed to ensure that the human rights of patients are 
adequately protected. And I might say about that legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s seen across this country as landmark 
legislation; it’s recognized by every other jurisdiction in the 
country as the landmark legislation in the mental health services 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important facet of our health care system 
is our ambulance services. Our government has completed a 
review of ambulance services, and major recommendations 
resulting from that review have already been implemented. 
Funds for the ambulance program have increased by over 100 
per cent since 1982 and now total over $6.8 million. 
 
Ambulance services has been consolidated within the 
Department of Health to overcome the numerous problems in 
co-ordination which arose prior to 1982, and let me just hearken 
back to that for a moment. Can you imagine, if you allow logic 
to lead your thinking in any way, why ambulance services 
would have rested in the Department of Urban Affairs as it did 
under the former government, Mr. Speaker. Ambulance 
services properly belong in the Department of Health because 
they’re an integral part of the delivery of health services to this 
province. And they are in the Department of Health under this 
government because logic — logic, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
directs our thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a minister’s advisory committee has been 
established as it relates to ambulances, and in conjunction with 
the Department of Advanced Education and Manpower we’ve 
expanded emergency medical technician training for ambulance 
attendants in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
announce that after extensive consultation with key interest 
groups, the new Ambulance Act will be proclaimed this year. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

432 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there can be no doubt the provision of 
quality health care is our number one social priority. We have 
demonstrated, time and time again, our commitment to an 
affordable health care system relevant to the needs of all of our 
people. We will continue to do so. 
 
Our overall budget for health care has increased by some 68 per 
cent in the past six years. In six short years, a 68 per cent 
increase, Mr. Speaker. This year spending on health care will 
increase by $65 million, to over $1.2 billion. That’s over $3 
million a day, 365 days of the year. This represents the largest 
health budget in the long history of this province. In addition, 
capital funding of some $63 million will be provided for 26 
health care construction projects this year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard what the members opposite 
have said about the budget, in critical ways, but, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve also heard what the public of Saskatchewan have said 
about the budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I have heard, and others 
have heard, what the health care . . . people representing various 
sectors in the health enterprise have said about the budget. And 
all — all of the responses, from all of the sectors within health, 
have been positive to this budget, and I am pleased about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And they’re positive because they 
believe we’ve made the right choices. And as I’ve said earlier, 
there were choices to be made over a number of years, and 
some of those choices weren’t made and we’ve been facing 
some backlog situations, these needs, these things which we are 
now addressing, those needs were here for some time, and have 
been here for some time. 
 
And in Regina, Mr. Speaker, and $11.7 million addition will 
proceed at the General Hospital. This is phase 1 of package 4, 
as we continue with the regeneration of that very important 
hospital to the service of the people of Regina and of southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
A much needed $3.8 million pediatric unit will be added to the 
Pasqua Hospital. This unit will replace the existing 40-year-old 
structure and provide comfortable, efficient surroundings for 
children confined to hospital at the Pasqua. A fire safety 
upgrading project, estimated at $1.78 million, has been 
approved for the Plains Health Centre. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another area that’s important to us and to 
this province, in terms of the service they provide, the Red 
Cross across this province provides excellent service to the 
people of Saskatchewan in several areas, some areas that are not 
so obvious. Obviously the people in the province will recognize 
the Red Cross for their work in water safety, recognize the Red 
Cross for their work in the blood banks and in the collection of 
blood and some of those things. Mr. Speaker, the Red Cross 
does excellent services across this province in several areas. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that after consultation with the 
people at Red Cross, and with co-operation with those people 
and from those people, a major renovation will be done to 
modernize Red Cross headquarters here in Regina, Red Cross 
headquarters for all of Saskatchewan. The expansion and 
upgrading of this building will result in an improved facility 
where the organization can carry on its extremely important 
work across the province. 
 
Some renovations will also be done at the Saskatoon Red Cross 
building for a similar reason, because those services which the 
Red Cross provides have certainly outgrown the facilities that 
they’ve had. Those needs, as well, were there for some 
considerable length of time, Mr. Speaker. This government is 
responding to them because of a recognition of the work that 
the Red Cross does in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, design work will begin on a new 140-bed hospital 
in Estevan to replace St. Joseph’s, a proud hospital that’s been 
there for some period of time — in fact I believe it’s the 75th 
anniversary of St. Joseph’s this year in Estevan. So a new 
140-bed hospital designated for that rapidly expanding city. 
 
Major renovation projects will be carried out at St. Elizabeth’s 
Hospital in Humboldt, and at Milden Union Hospital. 
 
Other upgrading projects scheduled for this year include 
Hafford, Kelvington, Melfort, Pangman, Davidson, Kerrobert, 
North Battleford, Radville, Shaunavon, Wakaw and Wolseley. 
Mr. Speaker, that is an impressive list, considering the 
circumstance that the finances of the province are in. That list 
represents choices made by this government. That list 
represents the kind of responsible choices we’ve made. And the 
people in the health care sector across the province, and most 
particularly in those communities that will be receiving these 
projects, are very, very pleased about the choices we’ve made. 
 
Through our capital construction program we will continue to 
address the needs of our growing senior population as well. 
New nursing homes will be built in Elrose and in Wadena. The 
nursing home in Nipawin will be expanded by some 40 
additional beds. Integrated facilities will be funded in Cabri, in 
Loon Lake and in Montmartre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should say something about the integrated 
facility concept, just for a moment. Mr. Speaker, that concept 
was one that was introduced by the members of this 
government, by the former minister of Health, member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley. We have taken that concept to the rural 
areas. 
 
We speak directly, and the concept speaks directly, to the 
viability of some small rural hospitals, because what the health 
care needs, and the health care services in many of those rural 
communities must address, as we look out into the future, is the 
change in demographics, in other words the numbers of senior 
citizens that we have. 
 
And this integrated facility, by building special care beds  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

433 
 

onto the same structure which is now a very small acute care 
hospital, addresses that very need. And there are some 
economics of scale, there are some staffing overlap, there are 
many things that can be done in terms of boards and so on. 
 
And rural Saskatchewan people, rural Saskatchewan people in 
the health sector are very appreciative of this new and 
innovative idea. And we hear about that as well from other 
jurisdictions in this country who are coming to Saskatchewan as 
they’ve done for many years, as they’ve done for many years 
under successive governments — I admit that, and I know that, 
and that’s good, something our people are proud of. But they’re 
coming once again to Saskatchewan to say, here’s a concept 
that we are looking to adopt in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, discussions between the Moose Jaw planning 
council and the Department of Health are very much under way, 
and members from Moose Jaw . . . there are no members from 
Moose Jaw in here just now, but members from . . . and I don’t 
say that in a disparaging way, but I know they will be interested 
. . . oh, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I see one here. I’m sorry. I 
apologize . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — Order, order. Members aren’t allowed 
to make reference to people being in the House or being absent 
from the House. I would ask the minister to not make reference 
to members. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m sorry, and I do apologize to the 
member from Moose Jaw North who’s listening. I was 
surprised when he was so quiet. I normally will hear him from 
time to time when he’s in here, so I apologize to the member in 
any case. And I did need a break for a drink of water, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the discussions between the Moose Jaw planning council 
which will comprise folks who are involved with Moose Jaw 
Union Hospital, with St. Anthony’s, and with the Providence 
Hospital in Moose Jaw are under way. There is a good deal of 
good will there, let me say. There has been a challenge put out 
to them. They’ve accepted that challenge in a major way in that 
city. 
 
Let me say that, and it’s extremely important. They have 
several facilities, and they have taken the challenge to say, and 
they are now looking at Moose Jaw as the health centre that it 
needs to be and that it must be for a wide area, and for some 
things for southern Saskatchewan, frankly. 
 
And I’m pleased to say here today that St. Anthony’s Home, 
that many people in Moose Jaw have been concerned about in 
terms of its construction and so on, is very much in this budget. 
So St. Anthony’s Home will be there, but St. Anthony’s Home 
and the construction of that will begin when the planning 
council has completed its deliberations and has come forward 
with their recommendations about what they would like to see 
happening in Moose Jaw. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can report to you today, and I believe the 
member from Moose Jaw will concur with me in that, the 
Moose Jaw health sector, the people in Moose Jaw are very 
much involved in this area, are very excited, are very  

much excited about some of the things that are going on, and 
are very excited about the challenge that’s put forward to them. 
And I want to congratulate them in a public way for the way in 
which they’ve accepted the challenge, and the way in which 
they are conducting those very extensive deliberations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a total of $4.6 million will be directed toward 
other special care home renovations across the province. To 
operate these facilities we will spend in excess of one million to 
upgrade staffing levels in special care homes where need so 
dictates. And close to $24 million will be spent on home care 
this year — $24 million on home care. This represents an 
increase of some 85 per cent in that area along in the six years 
since we’ve been in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker — and I will say to you as I have said to the people 
in home care and others — there still is a need for more money 
in home care; I acknowledge that; we all acknowledge that. 
There is a need for an increasing amount of money in the home 
care area. We know that. But the home care people — and I was 
very appreciative of the representatives of the home care 
association, who said to me on budget day that they are very 
appreciative of what has been done, of the choices that have 
been made in order to provide for this increase in the difficult 
times that we’re in. 
 
An Hon. Member — You know, George, the only time I ever 
hear of this appreciation is during your speech on the budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Now, Mr. Speaker, and I would . . . The 
member from Regina Centre wants to dispute that. I would 
invite him to talk to the home care association and see what 
they will have to say. I will be pleased to provide him with 
some of those comments. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that those people who are 
directly involved in the home care sector — not those people 
over there — but the people, the real people out there in the 
province who are involved in the home care area are pleased 
with the choices we’ve made. And as I’ve said to them, I know 
there’s a need for increasing funding, and there will be, 
inevitably be, increases in funding as time goes on in this very 
important area. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me turn to another area of vital 
importance. Healthy people are those who take personal 
responsibility in pursuing healthy life-styles, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Health is like any other facet of life. To react 
positively, one must know and understand the implications of 
the right decisions and the wrong decisions. 
 
This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government and 
these members on this side of the House are committed to 
raising the levels of public awareness on life-style issues 
through targeted communications and education efforts. In fact 
this year our budget in this area has increased by some 200 per 
cent over last year. 
 
And I’ve heard some criticism from members opposite who will 
take the narrow view always, as is their habit, frankly. They 
will take the narrow view and say, this is  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

434 
 

public affairs, and all of that. This is not some kind of political 
advertising, Mr. Speaker, to hear these people. Well I 
understand that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — George, we introduced that when I was 
the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And the member from Saskatoon South 
says he introduced similar programs at some time or other. I 
acknowledge that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They were good programs. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I acknowledge some good programs in 
terms of the development of healthy life-style, encouragement 
of healthy life-style. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’m saying here today is there will be 
expansion, there will be significant expansion in that area under 
this budget because of the importance of the area of promoting 
healthy life-styles. This budget supports public campaigns 
designed to improve the quality of life and encourage 
responsible decisions for better health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our initiatives on AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome), on that issue and on that dreaded disease 
AIDS, are a good example of this principle. Mr. Speaker, some 
have said — as we have dealt with this issue and attempted to 
deal with it in a responsible way and an appropriate way for this 
jurisdiction — some have said, well there are only a few cases 
of clinical AIDS in the province, so on, 21 cases have reported 
up till now. But I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that our approach 
in that area has been a responsible one, and I report to the 
House that I think the widest population in this province will 
agree that it’s been a responsible approach to a very difficult 
issue, as it relates to a very difficult public health issue, and it is 
that. It’s a public health issue. 
 
Let me just go through what we have done in that area just so 
we can just see, in a chronological sort of way, to show the 
responsible way that this government has dealt with a very 
difficult issue. 
 
Over the past several years we’ve developed a multi-faceted 
approach to tackle this AIDS issue. In 1985 we were the first 
province in this country to establish a provincial advisory 
committee on AIDS, and since then we have published a series 
of booklets done up by that advisory committee for public 
information and education. 
 
We’ve expanded our provincial laboratory services to include 
full testing capability for HIV (human immunodeficiency 
virus), and we’ve arranged for pre-testing for HIV of all organ 
transplants in Saskatchewan. We added the drug AZT 
(azidothymidine), which is the primary drug for treating AIDS, 
to the prescription drug plan. 
 
Last May we sponsored a symposium to discuss AIDS 
prevention strategies. In September we provided grants to AIDS 
Regina and AIDS Saskatoon to assist in providing street-front 
prevention information. And in conjunction with the 
Department of Education we’ve developed a curriculum guide 
for school boards to use in providing  

AIDS education. 
 
We’ve expanded the list of reportable diseases in Saskatchewan 
to include HIV, the virus which causes AIDS. We’ve 
established community-based training to develop a network of 
volunteers who can speak to groups and organizations 
throughout the province and, Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal 
of interest among our people and a great deal of concern, and 
that’s been an appreciated initiative. 
 
We’ve just completed the first phase of a public advertising 
campaign on AIDS to raise public awareness, and, more 
recently, we have appointed an AIDS co-ordinator. Mr. 
Speaker, our response to this issue has been appropriate for 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan who hold 
widely varied views on some of these issues have said, people 
from widely varied views have said, our response is a very 
appropriate one for this province. 
 
I am just pleased that it has turned out that way because it has 
not been an easy issue to deal with, nor would it be for any 
government, certainly for any person charged with the 
responsibility for the public health of the citizens in their 
jurisdiction. We can only say that in these days, and when there 
is no cure for this dreaded disease on the horizon, the only hope 
we have is in education and is in information to as wide a group 
of our population as is possible. 
 
I would like to briefly touch on one of the other major public 
awareness initiatives in health which our government will 
pursue. Saskatchewan is bound by a strong sense of family and 
community. Through experience we have learned the meaning 
of interdependence, working together to achieve a common 
goal, and at times in our history our very survival has depended 
upon this ability. 
 
But we’ve also learned another important lesson, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — that of accepting responsibility in our person, in our 
personal decision making, and in our personal actions. In the 
field of health care there is room to apply these qualities in the 
practice of healthy life-styles. 
 
In the past few months it has become evident that there is broad 
public support for government involvement in this initiative. 
We’ve listened to the advice of our health care professionals, 
and we are prepared to respond to the needs of our people. We 
will seek to encourage a better quality of life for all through 
active promotion of good health care habits. 
 
(1130) 
 
In the coming months I will be announcing full details of a 
major public program designed to involve all our people in 
making the right choices for better health — in other words, to 
encourage the preventive aspects, to promote wellness rather 
than just . . . and be isolated to battling illness. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to address one of the most 
important announcements made by our government in  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

435 
 

both the Speech from the Throne and in the budget speech — 
the appointment of a task force on health care issues. Mr. 
Speaker, this province has always been a leader in the field of 
health care. Throughout our history we have gathered together 
as a people to meet the challenge of change. We have struggled 
to build a health care system which is sensitive and responsive 
to the needs of all. We have proven our tenacity in addressing 
common issues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have met with success as a people. Our 
collective efforts toward this goal have clearly demonstrated our 
ability to work together. Yet those who have gone before could 
not have foreseen the complexity of the many issues which 
challenge our health care system today. Those issues must be 
fully addressed by all people of our province. The shaping of 
our health care system to meet the needs of the 21st century is 
no small task, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it certainly is not an 
easy one. 
 
Health care in its many facets is a complicated issue that 
represents our major financial and service delivery challenge for 
the foreseeable future. And I’m confident that all hon. members 
in this House who have responsible positions — and we all 
have because we represent a lot of people — I know that all 
members will agree that change is necessary if we’re to 
continue delivering quality health care services which are both 
affordable and relevant to the needs of all our citizens. 
 
The principle of universally accessible and affordable health 
care has for many years been a top priority of the people across 
this province. Today health care is, and will continue to be, the 
top social priority of our people and of this government. We are 
committed to excellence in health care, and equally committed 
to responsible management of the system. 
 
Time and demographics have changed the use of our health care 
system. In Saskatchewan today the cost of providing health care 
services is in excess of $1,200 a year and growing for every 
man, woman, and child in our province. We must ensure access 
to medical services in rural communities, and a good supply of 
doctors trained across the full spectrum of medicine. We are 
facing some staff shortages in key medical specialties, elective 
surgical waiting lists in some urban hospitals, and other 
problems resulting from increasing demands for services. All of 
those are realities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The acquisition of new medical technology presents a major 
expense for government and health care institutions. Our high 
standards of equal universal access have created high public 
expectations in the delivery of health services. 
 
Meeting the health care needs of our seniors represents a very 
special challenge to us all. Seniors now account for a full 12 per 
cent of the population of our province and use 45 cents of every 
dollar spent on health care. Into the year 2000, the number of 
seniors in Saskatchewan is expected to grow by nearly 30 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote something that I read in a 
recent edition of the Economist, which is a staggering  

number, and bears repeating by all of us, and I quote now: 
 
Of all the people in the history of the world who have 
lived beyond the age of 65, two-thirds are alive today. 

 
I’ll repeat that: 
 

Of all the people in the world who have lived beyond the 
age of 65, two-thirds are alive today. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is a staggering statistic, and it’s one that just 
sort of focuses the attention that all of us charged with public 
responsibility, as we in this House all are, and those of us 
charged in a more particular way with the health and the 
well-being of our citizens as those across the country who 
occupy the chair that I do in various governments. Those 
numbers are staggering, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a very sobering 
thought, to say the very least. 
 
The stress that this reality alone will place on our health care 
system demands our immediate attention as citizens and as 
public figures. It’s within this environment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we as a people face a challenge of singular 
importance. No challenge we have faced in our history can 
compare with that we now face in providing the means to care 
for our people today and into the future. The magnitude and 
consequence of what we are about to undertake is 
unquestionable. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have always 
risen to the challenge, whatever that challenge may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will act and we will act now to ensure our 
people continue to receive health care services that are second 
to none on this continent. 
 
I’m pleased to inform hon. members that I will be announcing 
the particulars of the task force on health care within the next 
few weeks. 
 
And people will say . . . I know people will say, well why is it 
not today? And why wasn’t it last week? And I just want to 
clarify a point here, Mr. Speaker. We announced the task force 
in the throne speech as we announced the legislative program in 
the throne speech for what is coming in this year. 
 
We announced the task force in this throne speech because we 
want the people of this province, in all corners of the province, 
and all of the professionals in the health care sector to turn their 
minds in a very substantive way to the kinds of things they will 
say they will submit to this task force when the mandate is laid 
out and when the task force members are announced. And I just 
say that, Mr. Speaker, and encourage all members and all 
citizens of this province to become involved in the development 
of this blueprint. 
 
Through this task force we will confirm our partnership in 
health care with the people of this great province of 
Saskatchewan. Within this context our professionals in the 
health care community will play a major role in influencing the 
health care system of the future. As those who deliver medical 
services, never has their  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

436 
 

contribution been so essential. 
 
On the other side of the spectrum, the task force will actively 
solicit input from the people of our province. As direct users of 
the system, there are none as qualified to present ideas, 
opinions, and viable alternatives. I’m confident, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the outcome of the task force deliberations on 
health care will provide Saskatchewan’s blueprint for the future 
in this very important and vital area. 
 
Where health care is concerned, there are no sides to be chosen, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe that all of us, every one of our 
people, want quality, affordable health care. Just as we have 
overcome our differences in the past and stood together on this 
issue, today I challenge and invite all members of this House 
and all citizens of this province to participate in a meaningful 
way in the process that will follow. 
 
No one in our province today can deny their share of the 
responsibility for building the health care system of the future. 
It’s too large an issue representing too great a demand on our 
financial resources to be evaluated, designed, or delivered 
outside the broadest consensus of our citizens. 
 
Each of us will be called on to make a contribution, and each of 
us must be prepared to offer what we can in understanding, in 
information, in effort, in skill and in dedication. Let there be no 
mistake, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let there by no mistake; our 
commitment to responsible management of quality health care 
is absolute. We are pledged to the needs of our people. Together 
we will face this challenge. Together we will examine its many 
intricacies. Together we will decide how best to build a health 
care system for the future, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, together we 
will succeed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been a pleasure for me to rise in the 
Assembly today and outline for the people of our province our 
government’s continuing commitment to a quality health care 
system that is affordable, accessible and relevant to the needs of 
all of us. That commitment is characteristic of the dynamic and 
forward-looking policies of this government. 
 
When this debate concludes I’ll be proud, as I said before, on 
behalf of the people that I represent, the people of north-western 
Saskatchewan, a riding of some 6,000 square miles, a good long 
way from here, but those salt of the earth people that I represent 
and have the pride to represent here, I will be very proud on 
their behalf to support this budget, and I’m proud of my part in 
developing that budget. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I want to take this opportunity to participate in this budget 
debate, but before I do that I want to respond to some of the 
comments from the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Health has a lot to  

answer for in this province. He has just given us a one-hour 
speech on all of the things that his government is doing in the 
area of health care. Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Minister of Health did not address some of the fundamental 
issues facing our province when it comes to the provision of 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minister of Health says that this budget indicates a 
substantial indication of priority when it comes to the health 
care of our people. The Minister of Health should realize that, 
when you compare apples to apples, his health care budget only 
will receive a 3.5 per cent increase. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
inflation rate in the province of Saskatchewan is running at 6 
per cent; it’s the highest in the country, and I’m afraid, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this health care increase that we have 
experienced will not take into consideration some of the 
fundamental problems facing our province when it comes to 
inflation. 
 
What we have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in fact a health care 
cut. Inflation is 6 per cent; the Government of Saskatchewan 
has increased the health care budget by 3.5 per cent. We still 
have a major deficiency in light of all of the problems. 
 
The minister also says that this is an honest budget, that this 
budget reflects the economic stake of Saskatchewan people in 
our progress. I want to talk about the economic stake that has 
taken place in the last year or so. 
 
It is true we now have an economic stake when it comes to 
providing our own medication, and there are people in this 
province that are making decisions whether or not they will buy 
groceries or whether or not they will buy their prescription 
drugs. How is that good health care? It certainly isn’t economic 
stake. 
 
We have a situation where we used to have in this province 
children over the age of 13 included in the school-based 
children’s dental program. That no longer occurs. Parents have 
to provide that particular service themselves, and many parents 
in this province do not have the economic resources to do so. 
 
Now this minister also says that this budget recognizes good 
management. Well I would suggest to the members opposite 
that it does not recognize good management. Any time a 
government will build a power project in the Premier’s riding 
and in the Deputy Premier’s riding that will cost the people of 
this province $1.1 billion, when it isn’t economically feasible to 
do so, when it makes no environmental sense, that is not good 
management, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Any time a government will vacate office space in order to put 
government offices in private office space and it costs the 
people of this province $35,000 per day, that is not good 
management, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Any time members opposite will use their legislative duties as 
legislative secretaries to travel back to their home riding and 
bill the people of the province, when in fact they have a travel 
allowance, that is not good management, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

437 
 

Now the government . . . the Health minister said that the 
people in our province have a right to make choices, that this 
government makes choices. Well what are the choices that the 
people of this province are making today? They are choosing 
whether or not to buy groceries, or whether or not to buy 
prescription drugs. They are choosing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
whether or not to go to Calgary to get a cataract operation, if 
they have the money, or to sit in Saskatchewan and wait 
between 15 months and two years to have cataract surgery. 
Those are the kinds of choices that people are making as a 
result of the fiscal responsibility and the mismanagement of the 
members opposite. 
 
Now this government says that it has a clear commitment to 
improve, preserve and increase accessibility to health care. That 
is just utter nonsense. How have we seen improvements in this 
province when it comes to the delivery of health care? We no 
longer have the prescription drug plan that we once had. 
 
(1145) 
 
The prescription drug plan is gone. People used to be able to 
buy a prescription in this province for $3.95. That is no longer 
the case. They have a deductible, they have to pay the up-front 
charges after they’ve reached the deductible, and then they are 
reimbursed by the provincial government. Those 
reimbursements are taking over six weeks, and many families in 
this province can’t afford the up-front costs of prescription 
drugs. 
 
The government says it’s going to preserve the health care 
system, and they accuse us of being responsible for some of the 
problems that they’re now experiencing. There isn’t one citizen 
in this province that believes that our government was worse, 
when it comes to the delivery of health care, in 1982 than yours. 
You people have a fundamental political problem. People do 
not believe you; they believe the health care system is 
deteriorating. And the Minister of Health can give us an hour 
speech, but it does not address the fundamental perception of 
the people of this province that our health care system is falling 
apart. 
 
Now the members opposite say they want to increase 
accessibility. There are 15,000 people in the city of Saskatoon 
and Regina that are waiting to get into hospital. Hospital is not 
accessible to them. They are waiting, they are waiting, and they 
are waiting. The hospital system is not accessible because of the 
horrendous waiting lists and waiting times. 
 
I’d like to refer back to what I earlier said about people who 
have cataract operations. People . . . There are some people who 
have money in this province that can no longer wait. They are 
going to Calgary, to the Glenmore clinic, to receive their 
cataract operation. They are paying between 1,200 and $1,500. 
How is that accessibility? People that have money get health 
care treatment, and people that don’t, don’t. 
 
Now this government says that it has significantly increased the 
health care budget in this province since they came to 
government, and I just want the people of this province to know 
that this government has rolled into  

the Department of Health all kinds of budgetary items from 
other departments. 
 
For instance, they have rolled in over $8 million for grants and 
allowances for ambulance services; that used to be provided by 
Urban Affairs. They have rolled in allowances for home care 
and special care services; that used to be in the Department of 
Social Services. They have rolled in the property management 
corporation; once again, those were payments made by supply 
and services. They have rolled in northern health services; those 
services used to be provided by the department of northern 
Saskatchewan. And the list goes on and on. 
 
If you look at this budget document, 20 per cent of the items 
contained in this budget document were transferred in from 
other departments. In fact, this year, if you look at your budget 
document, you will see items that have been moved into the 
Department of Health from the Department of Education and 
Social Services and property management. These items 
represent $250 million of this budget that have been transferred 
in. 
 
So don’t mislead the people of this province and say that there 
has been all of this tremendous increase in health care spending. 
The increase has arrived because you transferred into the 
Department of Health items that used to be in other 
departments. 
 
Now the Minister of Health says that he has a lot of money 
available for capital projects, and I want to remind the members 
that for the last year, in the city of Saskatoon, we have had the 
Parkridge Centre. People moved into the Parkridge Centre last 
March. It’s a nursing home facility. There were 43 beds that had 
been left empty for a year because you people didn’t have the 
money to provide operating grants to that facility. It is not 
enough to build buildings; you must have the money there to 
staff and provide the resources for those people who are going 
to be using those facilities. There are people in this province 
that believe that we have some hospitals that are under 
construction, but those projects will not come on stream 
because the operating grants will not be available to them. 
 
We also have the cancer clinic in Saskatoon. That cancer clinic 
has been ready since last October, I believe. That cancer clinic 
is just now starting to come on stream. Now why is that, Mr. 
Speaker, members opposite? I believe that the reason that the 
cancer clinic has been sitting empty is because you have not 
been able to provide the operating grants. 
 
Now this government says that they are doing something about 
hospital waiting lists and hospital waiting times. If you compare 
where hospital waiting lists are at in the city of Saskatoon last 
year to where they are this year, you will find they are the same. 
The $1 million that you put into the system in Saskatoon did not 
do anything to resolve the problem. 
 
One of the reasons why those hospital waiting lists sky-rocketed 
last summer was because you people had, because of 
underfunding, forced hospitals into a situation where they had 
to close hospital beds — 308 hospital beds were closed last 
summer for practically a 12-week period in the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

438 
 

I would urge the members opposite to ensure that hospitals in 
Saskatoon and Regina and throughout the province have 
enough funding this summer so that we aren’t once again faced 
with the horrendous problem of hospital bed closures. When 
hospital beds close, when hospital beds close, they mean, 
ultimately, that hospital waiting lists will increase, and hospital 
waiting times will increase. 
 
Now I want to get on with my remarks in terms of this budget. 
My colleague, the member from Regina Lakeview, will be 
making more remarks when it comes to the Department of 
Health in her budget reply on Monday. 
 
This budget can best be summed up with this poem: 
 

Taxes are equal is a dogma which 
I’ll prove at once 
Proclaimed the Tory Boor. 
Why taxes hardly press upon the Rich 
And likewise press hardly on the Poor. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this budget is all about: tax cuts 
for the rich and tax increases for the not so rich. People in this 
province are fast believing that there are the haves and the have 
nots, one set of rules for the rich and another set of rules for 
those who are not so rich. 
 
With this budget, citizens are now deeper in the hole with tax 
increases. There are people that haven’t seen their wages 
increase in four years, yet the increase in the Tory flat tax has 
just taken another 150 to $200 a year out of their pockets. There 
is a 2 per cent cut for corporations when it comes to taxes, but 
there’s a 33 per cent flat tax increase for the working person. 
Some fairness. 
 
When the Conservatives came to power in 1982, they promised 
to reduce personal income taxes by 10 per cent. Instead those 
members opposite have just stuck their hand into each of our 
pockets and pickpocketed another 150 to $200 a year. And our 
disposable income has just gone down some more. 
 
And then the members opposite wonder why housing starts are 
down. Housing starts were down by 11.2 per cent last year. 
When you look at new housing starts in the rest of Canada, they 
have increased by 23.1 per cent. And the reason why housing 
starts are down is because the average citizen doesn’t have the 
kind of money that they used to have, and if they do, they’re 
hanging on to it for dear life because they’re afraid about their 
future and they’re worried that their jobs may be lost. 
 
Many working people haven’t had a wage increase for three or 
four years, yet personal income taxes have just gone up by 33 
per cent when you look at the flat tax. Inflation is up this year 
by 6 per cent. Power is up; light and water is up; SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates are up; and 
property taxes are up. Everything has gone up except their 
wages, and these people have just come along and taken some 
more. 
 
No wonder retail sales in Saskatchewan are the second worst in 
Canada. No wonder, Mr. Speaker, that businesses are closing 
their doors across this province  

There isn’t any money out there. And if people didn’t have any 
money before March 31 of 1987, the day you people brought 
down your tax budget, they sure won’t have it with this increase 
in the flat tax — this increase in the flat tax on net income, this 
increase of 33 per cent. 
 
I don’t know where you people have been. Maybe you’re all 
loaded. Maybe you’re all multimillionaires, or maybe you have 
money in the bank. You have a “no wage increase” policy. You 
have the zero, zero, zero policy, yet the consumer items that you 
people have control over have not had the zero, zero, zero, zero 
applied to them. 
 
SGI rates — you people have control over SGI rates. They’ve 
gone up 10 to 15 per cent; in some cases they’ve practically 
doubled. SaskPower has gone up 7 per cent. You people have 
control over that. Property taxes in my home town, my home 
city, went up an average of about 4 per cent last year, and it was 
because of your cuts to municipal grants and municipal revenue 
sharing. Personal income taxes — you people have some 
control over that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, the member from Weyburn 
acknowledges that. Well your flat tax has just gone up 33 per 
cent. You have control over that. 
 
We have the highest inflation rate in the country, at 6 per cent, 
and part of the reason we have that high inflation rate is because 
of your changes to the prescription drug plan. People are now 
asked to dig into their pocket and pay for the cost of those 
prescription drugs up front. That wasn’t the case a year ago. But 
you people have a no wage increase policy — you have a zero, 
zero, zero — but when it comes to the things that you control 
you don’t have the zero, zero, zero. 
 
SGI, you control it; SaskPower, you control it. You control 
property taxes when you don’t give municipalities their fair 
share in terms of revenue sharing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Boloney. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And the member from Regina South says 
that’s boloney. It is not boloney. When you have had no 
increase in grants to municipalities last year, Mr. Minister, the 
municipality and the city of Saskatoon increases property taxes 
in order to maintain services. With inflation, and you have no 
increase, it’s either cuts in services or it’s increased property 
taxes. Now they tried to hold the line. They did make cuts; they 
did the responsible business-like thing. But you people have not 
been doing this responsible business-like thing. I’d like to 
know, why isn’t there a guide-line of zero, zero, and zero when 
it comes to the things that you control? How is that fair, 
members opposite? 
 
Now the minister who delivered the budget, the Finance 
minister, is reported to have said that he made no apologies for 
his corporate tax changes. I call it cuts, but he calls it corporate 
tax changes. But it’s one cut this province did not need. This is 
one cut this province did not need. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

439 
 

The Minister of Finance says the cut will make Saskatchewan 
corporate tax structure more competitive with the rest of 
Canada. Well my impression of the government opposite’s 
ability to attract corporations to this province occurs in only one 
of two ways. You either give them a hand-out or you give away 
a resource that’s owned and controlled by the people of this 
province. 
 
Now I want to review who it is that these great leaders opposite, 
these great leaders of the Conservative Party, these members of 
the government, have attracted to the province. And I want to 
talk about Fleet Aerospace from Ontario. 
 
Here we have a situation, Fleet Aerospace from Ontario. We 
have about 12 per cent of the shares in SED Systems in the city 
of Saskatoon. And what do we do with our shares? We 
exchange SED shares for shares in Fleet Aerospace. And Fleet 
Aerospace is going to come into Saskatchewan and save SED 
Systems. 
 
The minister from Kindersley says that SED Systems is 
undercapitalized and that Fleet coming into Saskatchewan will 
guarantee jobs. Well here we have it — here we have it. One 
year later Fleet Aerospace, you know, the group that was going 
to come in and guarantee jobs and preserve jobs and capitalize 
this company — the government didn’t want to sink any more 
money into this company — lays off 70 people in the city of 
Saskatoon and says to the government, if you don’t buy the 
building at Innovation Place in the city of Saskatoon or the 
Sedco Centre, we are going to pull out of Saskatchewan; we’re 
going to pull out of Saskatchewan, take the technology 
developed and paid for by the people of this province back to 
Ontario. 
 
If the government opposite doesn’t bail them out, they’re going 
to move everything out of Saskatchewan. Now how can this be? 
Here is a government that wanted to get out of business, wanted 
to get out of a public asset. They wanted to capitalize this 
company. They wanted to guarantee jobs. They didn’t want to 
put any more of the taxpayers money into this company, and 
one year later, what happens? The government members 
opposite buy back a building, that apparently we sold to Fleet 
Aerospace, they buy that building back for $10 million. 
 
(1200) 
 
Do we have any guarantees that those jobs will be still there 
come this time next year? No. Do we have any guarantees that 
management will remain in Saskatoon? No. Do we have any 
guarantee that SED Systems will remain in Saskatoon? No. Are 
we assured that they aren’t going to pull the technology, 
developed and paid for by the people of this province, out of 
here and back to Ontario? No. What we could have, we could 
have a situation where these great business people over here 
will be left, stuck with the bricks and mortar. Fleet takes the 
technology, developed and paid for by the people of this 
province, out of Saskatchewan. Some business deal for the 
business people opposite. 
 
And then we have Weyerhaeuser, Weyerhaeuser from Tacoma, 
Washington. Here we have a $248 million deal. This is the little 
deal these members opposite cooked up.  

This deal had to come about because the people of this province 
are losing $91,000 a day. It’s a big lie. The people of this 
province were not losing $91,000 a day. That business, that 
asset, PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), did not begin to 
lose money until you people came to power. And have we 
gotten any money yet? Not that I’m aware of, not that I’m 
aware of. A $248 million deal, but we haven’t gotten a cent. But 
Weyerhaeuser’s up in P.A. running the business, but we don’t 
have any money. 
 
And what happened? Weyerhaeuser, last year, made $70 
million — $70 million that could have been paid into the 
treasury of the people of this province to pay for health and 
education. And where did that $70 million go? Did it stay in 
Saskatchewan? It went to headquarters in Tacoma, Washington. 
 
And then we have this other part of the deal with Weyerhaeuser. 
We agree that we’re going to construct 32 kilometres of road 
each year at a cost of $6 million every year, when the rest of the 
province’s highways are deteriorating. Some business deal. 
Some business deal. 
 
We have a situation where we have a $248 million asset that we 
haven’t had a cent for — we haven’t got paid a cent. We have a 
company that’s made $70 million that could have gone to pay 
for the prescription drug plan that you people dismantled last 
year. Some business deal, people. Some business deal. 
 
Senior citizens make decisions on whether or not they’re going 
to buy their prescription drug or whether or not they’re going to 
buy their groceries. 
 
And then we have Peter Pocklington. Well we attracted Peter 
Pocklington to Saskatchewan. You know, that great free 
enterpriser, that guy, that big guy from Alberta who says, get 
the government off the backs of business. That guy, you know 
that guy who’s a do-it-yourself kind of guy. He doesn’t want 
any kind of government interference. Great free enterpriser — 
$22 million of taxpayers’ money. How is that a good business 
deal, folks? The only way you can attract business to this 
province is to give them our money. 
 
And then we have Manalta Coal. Here we have Manalta Coal. 
You know that deal where Manalta Coal from Alberta got the 
Poplar River coal-mine that we used to own. So what happens? 
Forty-five million dollars. Oh, sounds good. Only problem is 
that the people of this province guaranteed that loan. We 
guaranteed that loan. Manalta, the PC government, and a 
sweetheart deal. As the button says: they got the coal mine, we 
got the shaft. 
 
Manalta makes profit and it takes its money to Alberta. Here’s a 
mine that we used to own, that supplied coal to SaskPower. We 
give this mine to Manalta, guarantee the $45 million loan and 
then we buy the coal back from Manalta. Some business deal, 
folks. Some business deal. 
 
And then we have Canapharm. You know Canapharm, that little 
business that’s headquartered in the constituency of the former 
minister of Health, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley; 
you know, that Saskatchewan business that was going to put  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

440 
 

Saskatchewan on the map when it comes to the manufacturing 
of pharmaceuticals — well it’s no longer owned by 
Saskatchewan business people. But guess who owns it? 
Magnetics International (Ltd.) from Quebec. 
 
This great free enterprise government, guess what else they’ve 
done? This great free enterprise government, this government 
out of business, this great free enterprise business has just 
bought $4 million worth of equity in Canapharm. I don’t 
understand that. Here we have a government that’s interested in 
privatizing the profitable assets of the people of this province, 
and here we are, here’s this government that’s just put $4 
million into Canapharm — the people of this province now 
have a little equity in Canapharm — all for the sake of what? 
Some way to attract business. 
 
I’m not sure, is this privatization or is this mismanagement? 
Here we have the minister of privatization himself, signing an 
order in council to convert a $4 million government loan to 
Canapharm into a $4 million ownership share. Now I ask the 
minister of privatization: how is this privatization; or is this 
mismanagement? 
 
And then we have the latest sell-off of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan Minerals, to Kam-Kotia from Ontario and 
Premier Cdn of Quebec. Here we had a small enterprise in 
Saskatchewan, Sask Minerals, that returned over $50 million to 
the people of this province, it paid out over $60 million in 
wages, and it gave grants in lieu to rural municipalities, in 
which those plants were located in, of some $2 million. But 
what happened? This government just gave away this asset for 
less than $16 million, when the 1986 book value placed the 
assets and inventory at 30 million. 
 
I’d come to Saskatchewan if I got a deal like that too. Does 
Kam-Kotia need tax breaks? Does Premier Cdn need tax 
breaks? Does the average family need a tax cut? You bet, Mr. 
Speaker, you bet. 
 
This government says it believes in the free market-place. This 
government believes in private initiative. This government 
believes that it should not be involved in the market-place. If 
that is what you people believe, why did Weyerhaeuser needs a 
loan guarantee of $248 million? Don’t their banks trust them? 
 
Why did Peter Pocklington need $22 million of the taxpayers 
money? Why did construction magnate Fred Mannix, or 
Manalta Coal, need a Government of Saskatchewan guarantee 
for its private sector issue of $45 million worth of securities to 
buy the coal plant at Poplar River? They borrowed the money, 
and we guaranteed the note. 
 
Now I also want to talk about this government’s consultation 
and tax reform which it referred to in its budget address. Mr. 
Speaker, like every previous budget of this government, this PC 
government, this budget now before us uses old Tory ideas, old 
Tory rhetoric, old Tory words. 
 
I just want to turn to a couple of them that these people like to 
use regularly. It seems to be their favourite words.  

They use the words, consultation and tax reform. The minister 
now talks piously — this is the Minister of Finance — about 
consultation with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me ask him this: where was your PC consultation before 
you attacked the prescription drug plan? Where was your 
consultation before you destroyed the school-based children’s 
dental plan? Was there any consultation with the public? Was 
there any consultation with the more than 10,000 people 
waiting for a hospital bed in Saskatoon? Did you consult them? 
 
Mr. Speaker, did this PC government consult with 
Saskatchewan people before it eliminated the property tax 
rebates or before it imposed its unfair flat tax? No, Mr. Speaker, 
it did not. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, the minister pretends to have seen the 
error of his ways; he pretends to want to consult with 
Saskatchewan people. But consultation about what? Does he 
propose to ask the families in rural Saskatchewan if they want 
the school-based children’s dental plan back? I doubt it. Does 
he plan to ask Saskatchewan people if they want the provincial 
government to provide property tax relief? I doubt it. 
 
Instead, Mr. Speaker, the minister talks once again about tax 
reform — tax reform PC style. When the people of 
Saskatchewan hear a PC Finance minister threaten tax reform, 
they are alarmed. We’ve heard those soothing words before, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard of tax reform before from the 
members opposite. 
 
Just three short years ago, Mr. Speaker, in the provincial 
budget, when the Minister of Finance promised tax reform but 
imposed tax increases after tax increase after tax increase — at 
the time, the PC government opposite set out their principles for 
tax reform on page 12 of their budget speech that year. And 
here were the principles: simplicity, fairness, revenues for 
necessary public services, maintain incentives in the economy. 
Those were their principles of tax reform then, Mr. Speaker, 
and we hear much more of the same today, the same words. 
 
But let’s look beyond the words. Let’s look at the performance. 
Have they made the tax system simpler? No. Have they made it 
more fair? No. Have they protected necessary public services? 
Have they maintained incentives in the economy? Three years 
ago this government, this PC government, talked about tax 
reform. They imposed tax increases and talked about tax 
reform. They set out their tax reform goals. They have failed to 
meet every one of those goals. 
 
Now I note, Mr. Speaker, that the minister does not cite his true 
inspiration for tax reform, PC style. The inspirations he’s 
received from the most recent Conservative budget in Great 
Britain a few weeks ago — you know, that right-wing Thatcher 
version of Conservative tax reform. And here’s her version: for 
the top 5 per cent of British income earners get a $4.5 billion 
tax cut, and all those at the bottom of the income ladder will 
actually pay more. That’s tax reform — tax reform, 
Conservative style. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

441 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, when this Minister of Finance 
says tax reform, he means tax increase. We see his so-called tax 
reform in this budget now before us — tax increases for 
ordinary families, tax cuts for big corporations like Peter 
Pocklington and Weyerhaeuser and Manalta Coal and whoever 
else you people have been able to attract to this province. That’s 
tax reform all right; that’s tax reform, Tory style. When this 
minister says tax reform, the people of Saskatchewan had better 
hold on to their pocket-books. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I close my remarks, I would 
like to introduce an amendment, an amendment to this budget, 
an amendment that does make a great deal of sense. And I 
would move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That all of the words after the word “that” be deleted, and 
the following substituted therefor: 
 
This Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to 
provide fair taxation, to provide adequate financial support 
for a comprehensive prescription drug plan, a 
comprehensive school-based children’s dental plan, and 
other health care services, and to provide adequate 
financial support for education services, and to take 
immediate and concrete action to address the farm debt 
crisis facing thousands of Saskatchewan farm families. 

 
I would move this amendment, seconded by my colleague, the 
member from Moose Jaw North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve waited some time to get into 
the budget debate, and I am pleased today to make a few 
comments on the budget. And let me say from the outset, Mr. 
Speaker, when the budget was handed down in the House last 
week, it certainly was a great disappointment to many people in 
this province, because we had a lot of fanfare from the Minister 
of Finance and the Premier and others on the treasury benches 
that this budget would address the real, current problems in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1215) 
 
We were told that it would address the agricultural crisis. But 
more so, Mr. Speaker, we were told by the members opposite 
that people in education and people in health — not to worry; 
this budget will take care of your problems; this budget will 
address your problems. Let me say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — There’s not enough money in the world. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And the Deputy Premier says again, there’s not 
enough money in the world to do that. I say to the Deputy 
Premier opposite, you’ve got lots of money. You’ve got lots of 
money, as you indicated this morning, for George Hill to 
renovate his lavish offices. You’ve got lots of money, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, to pay your legislative secretaries to get 
additional finances from this  

government — lots of money for those people. 
 
I say to the Deputy Premier, you’ve got lots of money for the 
Ramada Renaissance, of $12 million over a 10-year period for 
high rent space that you didn’t need. You’ve got lots of money, 
Mr. Deputy Premier, of $34,000 a day for rental space that you 
don’t even use — that you don’t even use. 
 
But the Minister of Social Services doesn’t have money for 
hungry children, for children that are homeless. No, he doesn’t 
have money for those. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, there is lots of money — lots 
of money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the government opposite, their 
fundamental flaw in their economic plan came about when they 
formed the government in 1982 and the then-minister of 
Energy, the former member from Morse who’s no longer with 
us, Mr. Speaker . . . well when they made the decision to give a 
break to the oil companies of $1.7 billion, when the oil prices 
were the highest they have ever been in the history of this 
province, and a barrel of oil at that time, Mr. Speaker, gave to 
this . . . or revenues from a barrel of oil were $28 — over $28 
— and we had . . . and the revenues, the revenues doubled to 
over 2 billion, and yet the revenues that accrued to the 
government were less than they were in 1982. They lost $1.7 
billion through a policy that they . . . which was really inane 
and wasn’t necessary. But, Mr. Speaker, that continued; that 
continued, and this budget is no exception. 
 
There is lots of money for those people who are friends of the 
government, who are friends of the government. And we see 
every day one minister, then another minister and another 
minister, announcing millions of dollars, millions of dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, to bail out, to bail out companies who don’t even 
have their headquarters in this province. But when it comes to 
the ordinary folk, when it comes to the teachers of this 
province, and when it comes to the university professors who 
they legislated back to work yesterday, there is no money. 
There is no money. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Urban Affairs, that small increase 
that you gave to the people of Saskatoon and other cities isn’t 
going to nearly be enough to meet the demands. And what you 
are doing, you are shifting the burden of expenditures and 
responsibilities on to the local government, and then you’re 
saying, well, we are being efficient. We are tightening our belts 
as a provincial government; now it’s time that you guys do. I 
will address that in a little more detail a little later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the government opposite, you’ve made 
your choices, and you’ve said to the ordinary people: you don’t 
rank very high in our priorities, but others do. We’ve heard the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana referring to Manalta Coal; 
we’d heard her referring to Pocklington; we heard her referring 
to Fleet Aerospace — all of those, millions of dollars, millions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you, even you and I, even you and I could 
build a Ramada Renaissance conference centre with a 
guarantee, with a guarantee that this government  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

442 
 

made, of $12 million over a 10-year period. It doesn’t take a 
genius, and it doesn’t take someone with a lot of money. With 
that guarantee even the back-benchers over there, any one of 
the, could have taken that guarantee to the banks and could have 
gotten the additional money to build that hotel, Mr. Speaker, 
that is what is so wrong with this budget; it does not address, it 
simply doesn’t address the problems that exist in Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
What does this budget do to the 6 or $7 billion agricultural 
crisis that we have in this province? We just heard yesterday in 
question period where thousands, hundreds of thousands of 
acres of land was lost by farmers again. And daily, daily, 
farmers are wondering how they’re going to be able to seed 
their crop this spring, because they haven’t got the finances to 
put in their crop. There is nothing in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
that addresses the transfer of land, absolutely nothing. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, you promised the people 
with a lot of fanfare before this budget that you would address 
those problems. Those problems simply weren’t addressed. 
 
I do want to say to the Minister of Health that I appreciate, for 
example, the budget taking care of a very serious problem, not 
only in Saskatchewan but across this country, and that is the 
alcohol problem. And the Calder Centre in Saskatoon which has 
a national and, I believe, had an international reputation — 
very, very successful. It needed new facilities. And I appreciate 
that, but I hope, Mr. Minister — I don’t say this with any 
criticism — hope that when you do renovate the Frank Eliason 
Centre and you transfer the people there and have a good 
program, that you then fund it adequately. I think you will, but I 
hope you will do that, because that is a problem we need to 
address. Difficult economic times drive people to do strange 
things and to seek hope in other than reality, and alcohol very 
often becomes that reality for them. 
 
But I do want to say to the member opposite . . . and I was 
somewhat disappointed, happy and disappointed, because one 
of the programs that I was very proud of when I was the 
minister of Health was the feeling good program. That feeling 
good program was a contract that we signed with the federal 
government at that time, and I believe, if my memory serves me 
correctly, it was in the neighbourhood of $780 million. It was a 
very successful program, very successful program. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was expensive, too. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, it was expensive, but it addressed the same 
kinds of problems that you people are addressing today — the 
same kinds of problems. And what happened was that in 1982, 
what happened was that in 1982 when you formed the 
government, the former minister of Health, the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley, de-emphasized the preventative aspect 
of that program. And I’m pleased now that the present minister 
has picked up on that and recognizes that prevention can do a 
lot in meeting some of the problems that people are having 
today. 
 
The member from Indian Head-Wolseley — and all we have to 
do is go back to the Hansard — criticized very  

severely the preventative health program that I brought in at 
that time. And it was no surprise to me that when he took over 
the portfolio that he would de-emphasize it. I simply want to 
congratulate the present minister for reinstating that program 
and giving it the emphasis that it deserves. 
 
But having said that, I also want to say to the present minister, 
however, that he did not, he did not address the very serious 
problem that we are having in Saskatoon. He did not address 
that problem. The problem I’m talking about is the waiting list, 
the waiting list of 10,500 people, and, Mr. Minister, I’ve had 
some very personal experiences with that, as you well know — 
10,500. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a different number than your 
colleague just used. Why don’t you get your numbers straight? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — But no, you can’t confuse the two, because 
there’s also 12,000 people on the ophthalmology list, people 
who need cataract operations. And I say to the Minister of 
Education, I’ve got a neighbour right across the street, she’s in 
her 80s. She’s been waiting now for months, waiting for months 
to get a cataract operation and she simply can’t get one. She is 
totally blind. And these people, those who have the money do 
go to Calgary to get those operations. But I say to the minister, 
that is not fair and you should address those problems. 
 
That 3.5 per cent increase in health expenditures simply wasn’t 
enough to address the problems that exist out there. And I think 
you should have another look at that and see if you can’t make 
some money available to address the problems. Not of 
construction — yes, you are doing a lot of construction, but you 
also, when you do that construction, have to make certain that 
the staff is available and that the hospitals have sufficient 
operating funds to carry out the necessary operations that 
should be done. It’s not sufficient just to have money for 
construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, there was a lot of fanfare that health and 
education would get a high priority in this budget. I want to say 
that on those two accounts the budget is very deceitful, very 
deceitful, and it’s dishonest. I think the present Minister of 
Health — and I want to ask him, I want to ask him in all 
honesty, how can you say, how can you people say that the 
Health budget went up 63 per cent when you have transferred, 
when you have transferred 250 million, 250 million you’ve 
transferred from other departments. Twenty per cent of your 
present budget, 20 per cent of your present budget that is 
contained in the Health budget have been transferred from other 
departments. Now that is being dishonest, and there is no other 
word for it. It’s deceitful and dishonest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one argues with the Minister of Health to say 
that he should put ambulance services in Health. No one argues 
with him that long-term care should be in Health. What I’m 
saying is that he cannot on the one hand say that we’re going to 
transfer those, and then say the Health budget has gone up 63 
per cent. That is being dishonest, and is it any wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that people out there have such a low, such a low 
regard for politicians. 
 
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

443 
 

Why can’t we at least be honest and say to the people, all right, 
we’ve transferred them, that’s where they should be, and our 
Health budget has gone up this much, and we’re proud of it. 
And I’d support you people on it. I think in some areas you’ve 
done a good job, but be honest with the people when you say, 
when you say that you are transferring these and don’t claim 
that it’s gone up 63 per cent when in fact it’s gone up 40-some 
per cent. 
 
I want to say to the Minister of Education that somehow he has 
lost out. Now I know this is, I believe, his third portfolio. I will 
venture to guess that soon he will be on his fourth. Yes, I’ll 
venture to guess soon he’ll be on his fourth. And I say that for 
several reasons. I say it for several reasons. One, there was great 
fanfare that there would be huge increases for the Department 
of Education; in effect, there was about a 2-point-some per cent 
increase . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, there was. And we 
can verify that. 
 
The local school boards, the local school boards got 2.1 per cent 
increase. And if you take into consideration, Mr. Speaker, that 
they got a minus 1 last year . . . In algebra, all of you people 
would have known, plus 2 and minus 1 leaves you a plus 1. 
Divide that by 2, that means that school boards got a half a per 
cent increase in each of the last two years. In each of the last 
two years, a half a per cent. 
 
Add up inflation, inflation last year was 4-point-some per cent 
in this province; now it’s around 6. Let’s, for round figures, say 
it’s 10 per cent. That means that school boards have lost over 9 
per cent due to inflation alone. And you people are saying, 
we’re tightening our belts. What you are simply doing is you’re 
shifting the burden to the local governments, local school 
boards, and you’re saying, now you tighten your belts. 
 
(1230) 
 
Another thing that the minister did, and that was not indicated 
in the budget address, was that he increased the computational 
mill rate by four mills. And if you people understand what that 
does to local school boards, it simply says, we recognize now 
that you can raise more money because we’ve increased your 
computational mill rate, which is absolute nonsense. What the 
government has done by sleight of the hand has shifted the 
responsibility, the financial responsibility, to the local school 
boards and taken off the responsibilities off their own backs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that again is being dishonest, and we will see 
that in a few weeks when local school boards have to either 
severely cut programs or they have to substantially increase 
property mill rate. And the flak is going to come, and you 
people will get the flak. I’ll tell the back-benchers right now, 
you wait a couple more weeks when the mill rates have to go up 
8 o r 9 or 10 per cent. And they’ll have to; there is no other way 
out. 
 
The minister did not take into consideration the increase in the 
settlement, the tentative settlement for teachers. That’s not in 
there. 
 

An Hon. Member: — That’s not true, Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — You didn’t say . . . you never announced it. The 
minister is telling me now that local school boards can expect 
that he is going to be paying for that tentative settlement, and I 
will go out and tell the school boards that they can expect 
additional funds from the minister so that that settlement will be 
paid. And they will be very pleased, they will be very pleased to 
hear that — very, very pleased to hear that. 
 
Let me say to the minister opposite, I have talked to school 
boards and I have talked to trustees, and they are very 
concerned. They are very concerned about the impact that that 
is going to have on their budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say to the minister that I think that he’s had 
very little influence, very little impact on his colleagues on the 
high priorities that education should have. Anyone that thinks 
that school boards can do with a half a per cent increase in the 
last two years, and that a 1.9 per cent increase in operating 
grants to the universities is going to solve the problems, and 
now education has received the high priority that we think it 
should have, he says, well he’s badly mistaken. He’s badly 
mistaken. 
 
We say yesterday, Mr. Speaker, back-to-work legislation for the 
university professors. Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, we can still 
settle that dispute without the legislation, although time is 
running out. 
 
But I say to the minister opposite, he must share a major 
responsibility for that conciliation process coming to a stop, 
because he directly interfered in that process when they were at 
the heart of bargaining by his announcement in this House 
which was unprovoked, unasked for, uncalled for. And that is 
the kind of minister that he has been in the Department of 
Agriculture, in the Department of Energy, and he continues 
with the same kind of thing in the Department of Education. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, you heard the first thing the 
other day at Easter council, exactly what educators think of that 
kind of a process. Never in the history of this province have the 
teachers and the educators booed a minister at Easter council. 
You were the first, you were the first. And I think if I were you, 
Mr. Minister, I would learn from that. I would learn from that. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are problems in education, there are 
problems in education that you should be addressing, and the 
problems of private schools. What is the government going to 
be doing with the Dirk’s report on private schools? People out 
there are waiting for a decision. 
 
What is the government going to do with the Wimmer decision 
on francophones? The public out there is waiting for a decision. 
I say to the minister opposite, the budget did not address those, 
did not address those problems, and I’m asking him to look at 
those and see what can be done. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s your position? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — The minister asked me what my position is.  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

444 
 

And I say to the minister, call an election and let me sit on that 
side and I’ll gladly tell you what my position is, I’ll gladly tell 
you it is my responsibility to make policy for the government. 
That’s why he’s on that side and getting his high salary, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the minister, there 
are a lot of problems in education that we need to address. The 
core curriculum, implementation of the core curriculum. We 
need to have a look, a very, very serious look if we intend to 
implement that in the fall. And from what I hear, that is the time 
table. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to say to you in all sincerity that that $1 
million, although much appreciated, is not enough for in-service 
training to implement the core curriculum. On that amount of 
money, it will not be done properly, simply will not be done. 
And I’ve talked to teachers about it, I’ve talked to school boards 
about it, and they welcome the $1 million, but they’re saying 
that all the work that needs to be done is simply not enough. 
And time is running out for you. Teachers should know right 
now, teachers should know now, and in the next few weeks, 
exactly where you stand and what the composition of the core 
curriculum will be. We can’t wait till September. I am told that 
they will not receive copies of the implementation program till 
September. They’re supposed to implement it in September — 
they need it now. 
 
And in part I know what your problem has been. Your problem 
stemmed from the firing of all the people in the department last 
year. You had really no one left to work on the core curriculum, 
and now the few people you have left are working day and 
night to try and get this thing in place. And I say to the minister, 
please deal with the problem before it gets so great in the fall 
that you have another catastrophe on your hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a few minutes to the economy. I 
want to turn for a few minutes to the economy. And the 
members opposite, and we heard the Minister of Labour this 
morning again saying that in all other aspects, other than 
agriculture, our economy is doing great. I have before me, Mr. 
Speaker, today, a copy of today’s Leader-Post. And I don’t 
know whether the Minister of Labour has all the knowledge at 
his side, but I say to the minister, the Conference Board of 
Canada doesn’t agree with you. It says, “Economic outlook 
gloomy for Saskatchewan.” They are predicting a 1.6 per cent 
increase. 
 
How, Mr. Minister, is that going to address the problem of the 
thousands of people that are unemployed in this province? How 
is that going to address the 15 per cent of our young people that 
don’t have jobs? How is that going to address the 12 per cent of 
the people in Saskatoon that don’t have jobs? And yes, I agree 
with you, Mr. Minister, that Saskatoon is a good city to live in. 
But I will say to you, please keep your ideas on what kind of 
life-styles and life we should have in Saskatoon. Keep them in 
Melville and in Regina. We don’t welcome that kind of thinking 
in Saskatoon. We don’t need it, we don’t want it, and neither do 
many of our churches. 
 

We don’t want the Stone Age thinking there. We’re more 
progressive and up to date. I say to the Minister of Labour, Mr. 
Minister, your government’s performance simply does not wash 
with the records and the statistics that are presently available. 
Your job performance has been dreadful. There was . . . the 
budget did not address it. There was no money except for 
Opportunities ’88, which is a rehash of last year. There is no 
additional money to address the problem. And I say, in that 
regards the budget has failed. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the Minister of 
Finance — and I listened very carefully to his address — he 
said in glowing terms, and praised himself and his government, 
that they had done some belt tightening, that they had a more 
efficient government, and that is why his budget came in at 
$568 million rather than $577 million. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, was deceitful and dishonest because the real 
reason why the minister came in at $568 million was because of 
the equalization payments received from the federal 
government. He almost got twice as much from the federal 
government than what he had anticipated, otherwise his deficit 
would not have been $568 million but would have been $750 
million. And he says to local governments: look, I can’t afford 
to give you an increase because we’ve done our belt tightening; 
now I’m asking you to tighten your belts. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Finance that that is unfair, because 
the local government and local school boards don’t have an 
equalization fund that they can draw from. The province 
doesn’t provide them with equalization. If the economy is bad 
for the provincial government, the economy is equally bad for 
the local governments. You didn’t stimulate the economy. 
 
And as my leader said the other day in the debate, in this 
province, the history of this province has been built on the three 
engines that we have used, and that is the engine of the 
co-operatives, the private sector, and the public sector. And 
there must be a healthy mesh of those three. And if you ignore 
any one, we in Saskatchewan, because we are a land-locked 
province far removed from the international markets, if you 
spent all your time on only one of those sectors, one of those 
engines, ignore the other two, we have problems. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because the government opposite has 
basically ignored two of those engines, they’ve got problems, in 
spades. The public and the co-operative sector, you people have 
basically ignored — basically ignored. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that in this province, if you 
study the history of this province, we’ve had success only when 
we have built our economy, our mixed economy, by using all 
those three sectors. And if you stop doing that, you’ve got 
problems. You can’t expect that international corporations will 
use Saskatchewan to set up their headquarters and to diversify 
our economy unless you do as you presently are doing, use 
large public subsidies for those corporations. And when those 
corporations no longer can benefit as much here as they can 
somewhere else, they will simply pull out or  
  



 
April 8, 1988 

 

445 
 

blackmail you people, like Fleet Aerospace did just recently. 
 
We warned you a year ago that exactly what is happening today 
would happen. And I remember the minister saying, oh no, oh 
no, you guys are all doom and gloom. And a year later, exactly 
the same thing happened, exactly the same thing happened as 
we predicted. 
 
And I say to you people, it’s time that you start using the 
resources that are available here. Use the ingenuity of our own 
people. Use our raw resources to develop our province. Set up 
those manufacturing firms here with public help and 
co-operative help and private. And if you stop doing that, there 
is no way out of the present problems that you’re having. 
 
The debt that we’re having right now of $11.7 billion, I believe 
it is, and the deficit of 3.7 billion, mainly due to the fact that 
you’ve given that money away — that money simply went out 
of this province and nothing in return. Oh, you got a few jobs; 
oh, you got a few jobs all right. But I’ll tell you, Pocklington, 
the big free enterpriser, the big free enterpriser when he ran for 
the Conservative leadership, Mr. Speaker, said, it’s time that 
free enterprisers and capitalists get their hands out of the trough, 
the public trough. 
 
Who was the first one, Mr. Speaker, who was the first one to 
get his hands in the trough? Peter Puck. The first one. And he’s 
doing the same thing in Alberta. He’s continuing to do the same 
thing in Alberta, getting hundreds of millions of dollars from 
the Albertans, and that is not enough for him so he’s got to get 
millions more from the province of Saskatchewan. And we are 
suckered enough to do it. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, if you continue to do this, 
you will continue to put this province further and further into 
debt. You will ask, as you have done over the years, the 
ordinary private citizens to pay more in taxes. Your income tax 
and total taxes have gone up over 100 per cent since you 
formed the government. 
 
I ask some of you people, work out your income tax as I just 
recently did, and my income has gone down by over $10,000 in 
this past year. 
 
(1245) 
 
An Hon. Member: — And you’re still overpaid, Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And the member from Regina South says, and 
I’m still overpaid. Well that’s fine, that’s fine. I don’t mind that. 
I’ll do my job. I don’t need to pile up the money in the bank, 
because I’ll tell you, I don’t care whether you’re worth 10 
million or whether you’re worth 10 billion or whether you have 
2 cents in your pocket, all of us will get the same in the end. 
And you can’t take it with you. You’re not going to be judged 
on how much you have when you go; you’re going to be judged 
on what you did with what you had, material and otherwise. 
That is what you’re going to be based on. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, it doesn’t bother me. The 
point that I wanted to make was that even though my  

income had gone down dramatically, I did not see the same 
thing happen to the taxes that I had to pay to the federal and the 
provincial government. And that is the sad thing. You put the 
burden on the ordinary people, and you let the corporations get 
away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does not address the problems as I see 
it. It does not address the agriculture problem; it does not 
address the health problems; it does not address the education 
problems; it doesn’t address the economic problems. It does not 
address the problems of the ordinary people. In conscience, I 
cannot accept it. 
 
I will not vote for the budget. I will vote for the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to have an opportunity to enter into this debate, but it is 
my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that the Lieutenant Governor is 
here and is waiting to enter the Chamber, so I will beg leave to 
adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 12:49 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of Students at The 
University of Saskatchewan / Projet de loi N° 3 — Loi portant 
reprise de l’enseignement et des activités connexes à 
l’Université de la Saskatchewan 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:51 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:52 p.m. 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Travel Expenses for MLAs
	Child Hunger Problems in Saskatoon
	Contingency Plans for Drought Conditions
	Renovations to Sask Power Headquarters
	STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Taxes are equal is a dogma which

	ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS

