


















































May 9, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 9, 1988 
 

1159 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, 
Mr. Speaker, introduce to you, and to all members of the 
Assembly here today, the 22 grade 8 students sitting on the left 
side of your gallery. They’re from St. Francis School in the 
constituency of Regina Rosemont, and they’re accompanied by 
their teacher today, Ms. Oksanna Zwarych. And I would like to 
ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them in the usual 
manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reorganization of Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
 

Mr. Lyons:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. My question today is 
to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am sure you will agree with myself, and all 
members of the Assembly, and all the people in Saskatchewan, 
that Saskatchewan Power Corporation was delivering a good 
quality product to all the people in the province at a reasonable 
cost. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister: that being the case, is it true that 
you’re planning to split Saskatchewan Power Corporation in 
two, into a natural gas utility and into an electrical utility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very happy  
I’m very, very happy that members opposite have finally 
admitted that indeed SaskPower does deliver a quality product 
with a high degree of efficiency at low cost. And I’m glad that 
member has finally put that on the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, that I will be making an announcement 
soon relative to the relative to the reorganization in SaskPower, 
relative that is taking place in SaskPower, a reorganization, Mr. 
Speaker, that has been made necessary as the result of 
deregulation, as a result of a recommendation by PURC (public 
utilities review commission) that said we ought to have two 
separate utilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that reorganization has been going on now for some time, 
Mr. Speaker, and when it is finalized, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very 
happy to come into this House and make the appropriate 
announcement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I take 
that long-winded answer is an admission that, yes, indeed you 
are going to split SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) into 
an electrical utility and into a 

natural gas utility. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you’ve already sold 
off, given away, the natural gas reserves of SPC, may one . . . 
may the people of the province take it that the next step in your 
plan for this foolhardy privatization is to sell off gas utility 
which you plan to create? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, he talks about giving 
away the reserves of . . . the natural gas reserves of SaskPower. 
The fact of the matter is, SaskPower got . . . or when the deal is 
closed, will have the equivalent of $325 million for those 
reserves, Mr. Speaker. that will have the net effect, Mr. 
Speaker, if applied to the debt, that will have the net effect of 
$30 million of profit  $30 million of profit to a utility, Mr. 
Speaker. That is spending 40 cents of every revenue dollar 
towards servicing the debt at SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that member to say that giving those reserves 
away for $325 million for the financial health of that 
corporation, he simply isn’t tough with reality, Mr. Speaker. 
There is a . . . There will be a reorganization that splits the 
utilities, Mr. Speaker  electrical and gas. That has been 
recommended by PURC. It has become more and more 
administratively necessary because of deregulation, Mr. 
Speaker, and I will be making the appropriate announcement, 
Mr. Speaker, when all of it has been finalized. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Speaker, in light of the minister’s answer, I 
have another new question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have here the financial data, or a copy of the 
financial data, for SPC from 1978 to 1987, and notice that on 
electrical side, the electrical side incurred a loss, net operating 
loss, for the last seven of the 10 years. 
 
We turn over to the next page, and what do you see? We see 
that the natural gas utility had a profit from 1978 to 1987, every 
year. Would you, sir, please tell the House what kind of 
management is that would sell off a profitable utility to some 
private investors and some private friends of the government 
opposite. And would you please table today, in this House, the 
deal and the nature of the kind of reorganization, as you put it, 
of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, the reserves are not a 
utility. The reserves, Mr. Speaker, are reserves in the ground, 
undeveloped reserves. The development of this reserves, Mr. 
Speaker, will require that about a hundred million dollars be 
spent over the next five years to drill somewhere between 6 and 
800 wells and all of the spin-off that goes with that, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s over and above the impact, the net effect, of 
$30 million added to the bottom line of SaskPower. 
 
Now he asks, what kind of management would there be at 
SaskPower that would have these losses in the electrical utility 
over the last seven . . . or seven out of the last 10 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1160 
 

years. it’s the kind of management, Mr. Speaker. that brings on 
additional generating capacity to meet additional demands on 
the utility. And I talk of Coronach, I talk of Nipawin, I talk of 
Shand, and all of those things  some of them committed prior 
to this government taking over, Mr. Speaker, but all of them 
coming onto the balance sheet during the term of this 
government. And Mr. Speaker, those things coat money. 
 
Now on the other side of the coin there’s only one way to pay 
for those additional capacity, and that is to increase the rates. 
Out of respect for the electrical consumer, Mr. Speaker, you do 
not consciously and deliberately go into an abrupt rate shock. 
You step it up over time, as we did with our 7.5 per cent, 
three-year rate increase, Mr. Speaker. And that was appreciated, 
Mr. Speaker, by the consumers of that electricity, and 
consequently it took us some time to get that debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Nice speech, Mr. 
Minister. The question is this: why would anybody in their right 
mind consider or put together a deal which would sell off the 
profitable side of SPC? What kind of management, or 
mismanagement, are you guys engaged in in this operation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, let me just say that as it 
relates to the management of the corporation, we went through 
capital expenditures and capital programs in SaskPower such as 
have never been seen before in this province, or in this utility. 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, this year we had $46 million turn 
around. we posted a $35 million-plus profit at SaskPower. 
 
Now that member tends to equate reorganization with sale. 
That’s simply not the case. there is a reorganization to split the 
utility so that administratively it can be better managed, Mr. 
Speaker, better managed  that’s what we’re after  better 
management for both the gas utility and the electrical utility. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
straight and direct question to the minister, answers to which he 
not given yet today. 
 
Mr. Minister, we heard your speech about reorganization. I ask 
you now: will you confirm or deny that the natural gas portion 
of the power corporation is up for sale, or give-away, in the 
next short period of time? Confirm or deny. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, to that rather lengthy 
straightforward question, the answer is no. 
 

Hospital Waiting List  Special Case 
 

Ms. Simard:  My question is to the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, on April 29 in this House I raised the 
problem of Mrs. Klotz of Unity who desperately needs a hip 
replacement operation but can’t get a bed. At 

that time you said you were looking into it and that you would 
be contacting Mrs. Klotz. Can you tell me why then, Mr. 
Minister, neither you nor your officials have contacted Mrs. 
Klotz to date, almost a week after  or more than a week after 
I raised the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  A couple of things that need to be 
clarified, Mr. Speaker, and I welcome the question from the 
member. In fact I’ve been waiting for it for some time. 
 
The initial inquiry came to our member from Wilkie, and I 
believe as well to the member from Lakeview, from a Mrs. 
Barb Risling of Unity who is the daughter of Mrs. Klotz. That 
initial communication that came to us from Mrs. Risling related 
to the issue of her mother, and so on, but did not give the 
information as it relates to even her mother’s name, who the 
doctor was  some of those things. 
 
Mrs. Risling was then contacted by people in my office, and 
Mrs. Risling did talk to people, and since that . . . So when I 
gave the answer to the hon. member before about not having 
contacted Mrs. Klotz, and that the contact would go back . . . 
the contact has been to Mrs. Risling who is the daughter of Mrs. 
Klotz. 
 
And subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, another daughter of the 
same lady in question, Mrs. Helen Sauverwald from Oyen, 
Alberta, has contacted us on the same matter and has been, as 
well, contacted by the department. And that’s an ongoing 
process, trying to see where Mrs. Klotz will come into the 
situation as it relates to the urgency of her surgery. And 
understand that there is a waiting time here and that work is 
going on with her particular doctor. 
 
So I’m pleased to report to the House, Mr. Speaker, that those 
things are going on and that communication has been going on. 
So the member has to some extent misled us by saying that Mrs. 
Klotz hadn’t been contacted. The fact is Mrs. Klotz did not 
contact either us or the hon. member; their daughter, Barb 
Risling, did. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, we contacted you on behalf of 
Mrs. Klotz, and we told you she was from Unity, and all you 
had to do was take a phone book and you could get her phone 
number through information  a very simple procedure even 
for you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  As far as I’m aware, your department has not 
spoken to Mrs. Risling, Mr. Minister. I think you should check 
that out once again. As far as I’m aware, there’s been no direct 
communication with . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. I think we’re getting into 
debate, and I’m sure the hon. member would like to ask another 
question. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask another 
question. We have a copy of a letter, Mr. Minister, from Mrs. 
Klotz’s daughter  a letter to Mrs. Klotz’s daughter, rather, 
from the doctor. And in that letter 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1161 
 

the doctor states that there most certainly is going to be a 
summer closure again for four weeks  he’s talking about a 
summer closure of beds  the last two weeks of July and the 
first two weeks of August, again for lack of funds. “I 
unfortunately, have no control over this, and it’s going to take 
the patients themselves to loosen the government’s 
purse-string.” 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, you know the problem here is a question of 
lack of beds. Is that what it’s going m take, Mr. Minister, sick 
people marching on the legislature or marching to the ballot 
box? Is that what it’s going to take to make you realize that 
these long waiting lists are crucial and that people need beds 
desperately, immediately  now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, what it’s going to take is 
responsible positions taken by people that are elected to 
responsible positions, such as the hon. Health critic of the NDP 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just go through the details of this issue, and 
I’ll just go through these notes so I can be sure. 
 
On April 18,’88 the MLA for Wilkie received a letter from 
Barb Risling of Unity, dated March 28, 1988 with respect to the 
waiting time for her mother’s hip replacement. The member 
brought the letter to the attention of the Minister of Health’s 
office immediately. since the letter did not contain information 
on the mother’s name, address, doctor, or the hospital in which 
the surgery is booked, an assistant to the Minister of Health  
an assistant from my office, Mr. Speaker  contacted Mrs. 
Risling by phone that afternoon, April 18. After obtaining the 
appropriate information, Mrs. Risling was told that the case 
would be investigated, that the minister would respond by letter 
as soon as possible. 
 
On April 19 my office received by mail a copy of the same 
letter from Barb Risling. On April 26, 1988 a letter was 
received from another daughter  the lady I referred to earlier, 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Helen Sauverwald from Oyen, Alberta, on 
the same matter. The opposition Health critic brought up the 
case in question period on April 27, after those communications 
had been going on for some time, initiated by the member from 
Wilkie. 
 
Again in question period on April 29, the Health critic claims 
no one had contacted the family, which was absolutely untrue, 
Mr. Speaker  and I just lay it out here now that it is absolutely 
not the case. And, Mr. Speaker, now given the information that 
she says about beds being closed and the lady not being 
available in the summer, Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Klotz is scheduled 
for surgery this summer. 
 
Ms. Simard:  A supplementary, Mr. Minister. Mrs. Klotz has 
been waiting for surgery, Mr. Minister, for almost a year  
since I believe last July of 1987, or June, perhaps. The question 
is, Mr. Minister, what are you going to do for her? July and 
August . . . When we were contacted by the family we were told 
that July and August was too long a wait. We raised it so that 
you could take some action. Now what are you going to do for 
her, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago this 
hon. member over here  she’s taken an irresponsible position 
 said that the hospital will be closed because somebody in 
that family told them that the hospital would be closed over the 
summer. I said to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the House, and 
I say to the hon. member, Mrs. Klotz is scheduled for surgery 
this summer. She is scheduled and she has a scheduled date as 
far as I know, but she is scheduled for surgery. There is no 
question about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact that Mrs. Klotz has had to wait for surgery is not 
something that anyone feels good abut, that’s true. But it does 
not help her, nor does it help other citizens in the province, for 
these folks to get up and use the kind of rhetoric that they do. 
 
Example, what she said here earlier today. What did she say? 
“What is it going to take? Do these sick people have to march 
on the legislature?” The rhetoric of the NDP. They think the 
solution to everything is, grab a picket sign, write anything on 
it, and march and walk around. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way responsible people act. 
That’s the way they act and that’s part of their rhetoric. Mr. 
Speaker, Mrs. Klotz will have her surgery this summer, albeit 
later than any of us would like it to be. But certainly it will be 
the case, Mr. Speaker, and the case rests there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privatization of Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the minister of privatization. Mr. Minister, in this 
House on April 29 my colleague, the member from Athabasca, 
asked the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture if there 
would be any job losses as a result of the privatization of the 
Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. The Minister said, and I quote, 
“No.” 
 
Today, sir, we hear that nine of 11 employees have been laid 
off. Unlike your colleague, Mr. Minister, can you explain to this 
House whether or not that’s considered a job loss? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, I can explain from the information I 
have that the member opposite as usual is wrong again. There 
are not nine people without work. There are two of the people, 
correct, have been picked up by a new developer who is 
bringing in a new amusement park and recreational vehicle park 
and so on, added attractions, from Moose Jaw. 
 
Some of the people that were previously employed have found 
other employment, and other will be employed in other aspects 
within the Department of Parks. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Minister, will you tell this House how 
many of these people were offered and accepted ultimate 
employment within the public service, what was the nature of 
that alternative employment, and if others 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1162 
 

were displaced from the civil service because of this alternate 
employment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, obviously I’ll take that 
under advisement. But I just want to indicate again to the 
member opposite that certainly some of the people that were 
previously with the wild animal park will find employment in 
other aspects of the Department of Parks, and other ones have 
found employment in other aspects. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Supplementary. Mr. Minister, can you table 
before this House today the lease that was entered into by your 
government and the lessees of the wild animal park in Moose 
Jaw? And can you tell us today how much money the taxpayers 
of this province will get yearly for the sell-off o the Moose Jaw 
Wild Animal Park, a publicly owned facility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members 
of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan the same 
thing as the minister indicated earlier, that the province of 
Saskatchewan will not be losing close to a quarter of a million 
dollars a year with the operation of the Moose Jaw Wild Animal 
Park. 
 
We’ve entered into an agreement that will bring other types of 
recreational entertainments, not only to Moose Jaw but to other 
areas of this province. And I think that is building and 
diversification and adding to the interests that we have in our 
parks. And I want to reassure the member opposite we will not 
be losing between 200 and $250,000 a year on the operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  New question. Every time your government 
privatizes something, you assure us that there will be no job 
losses. And there have been, Mr. Minister. You tell us that fees 
won’t increase and that services won’t decrease. But they have, 
Mr. Minister. Your entire privatization initiative has been 
discredited by these wrong kinds of statements. 
 
Mr. Minister, do the honourable thing, table the lease agreement 
in this legislature today so all of us can see what’s in that lease 
agreement to make sure that the public is getting a fair return 
for our public investment. And, Mr. Minister, will you also 
assure us, Mr. Minister, that all of those workers will in fact get 
jobs within the public service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I should just 
reaffirm to the member that some of the members have taken 
employment somewhere else, so how can I reassure them 
employment within the public service? Certainly some of them 
will have employment within the public service. 
 
But I listened to the member opposite and again she tries to 
mislead, saying that all of these things have turned out bad. I’ll 
remind her of Blackstrap, which ran quite successfully in the 
last year. I’ll remind her of the added 

functions and facilities that are present in most of the parks in 
this province now  Cypress Hills, Moose Mountain, and 
Duck Lake, that were not there before, before there was a move 
to allow public participation in the parks. And we will the see 
the same type of development in Moose Jaw. And I want here 
to stand on record as opposed to that type of development. I 
support that type of development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Statistics on Net Migration and Employment 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Human 
Resources and Labour. Mr. Minister, I’m sure that you have 
seen the latest statistics on in-migration and out-migration for 
Saskatchewan. They show that in April, 1,867 persons left 
Saskatchewan looking for new opportunities, almost twice the 
number of people who moved in. 
 
In the first four months of this year Saskatchewan has lost 
almost 5,000 persons, many of them young. Mr. Minister, we 
are heading for another record year. Will you confirm these 
disgraceful numbers in the House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite is new here so he probably doesn’t know that his party 
is against diversification of Saskatchewan, that they’re against 
the Weyerhaeuser paper project, that they’re against the bacon 
plant, that they’re against an upgrader in Regina. He probably 
doesn’t know all these things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are building and they are against everything. And now they 
find a statistic that they think is in their negative favour. I say 
that the population of Saskatchewan is over 1 million and it 
never was when they were government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, I may be new here, but I have a 
fresh mandate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Minister, in 1982 your party said, bring the 
young people home. In 1988 you say, let them go; they’re no 
concern of ours. This attitude is not good enough. Would the 
minister confirm also that by his government’s own figures, the 
actual number of people without jobs in this province is 1,000 
more in April of 1988 than it was in April of 1987? Would you 
confirm this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this province has the 
second lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  We are only surpassed by . . . 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1163 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order, Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Speaker, we are only surpassed by 
Ontario, which is getting rich making free trade cars. And 
they’re opposed to free trade as well. I remind the members 
opposite that they may have a fresh mandate, but their ideas are 
50 years old. Their ideas are so old they’re starting to look new, 
or they’re trying to sell them as new ideas. But they are in a 
1932 time warp, and that’s where they will always remain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Correction, Mr. 
Minister, we’re third, not second. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatoon Eastview have sent me 
here with a message  a message for you. That message is that 
your government has failed miserably in the field of 
employment and job creation. Will you say today whether or 
not your government is prepared, at long last, Mr. Minister, to 
develop an employment strategy which actually works? Will 
you assure the people of Saskatchewan you take the problem 
seriously, because out there they don’t believe you do, and 
intend to do something about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Speaker, when you look at the new 
member there, you would expect some new ideas. He doesn’t 
even know that the NDP has a full employment policy and they 
are opposed to welfare reform. I offer people jobs instead of 
welfare, and they’re opposed to it. They are totally inconsistent. 
They have a policy, and when I implement it, they are opposed 
to it. 
 
I am implementing full employment, starting through all of my 
departments, including the department of welfare and welfare 
reform, offering people jobs instead of welfare. They are 
opposed to that as well. From a new member we should have 
some new ideas, but we don’t, Mr. Speaker. It’s disappointing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Drought Assistance Program 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Would the members . . . would 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana and would the member 
from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden please respect the Minister of 
Environment who’s trying to give a ministerial statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to 
announce, as minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, the first phase of the Saskatchewan government 
drought assistance program. The first phase consists of the 
water corporation providing an additional 

$8.5 million to enrich six key water supply programs. 
 
Drought is not a new reality in Saskatchewan; our last 
widespread drought experience in this province occurred in 
1984, and at that time Saskatchewan Water Corporation revised 
the existing policies and developed new programs to deal with 
short-term and long-term water supply problems. Since 
persistent drought conditions have existed in some area so f 
southern Saskatchewan for the past five years, these programs 
have continued to be offered by Sask Water. 
 
What this means is that Sask Water has taken a proactive role in 
combating drought through a variety of programs including 
well development, dug-out pumping, municipal water 
assistance, water supply lines, dug-outs and small storage 
reservoirs, and irrigation development. While these programs 
have been extremely successful, worsening drought conditions 
and a farm economy under stress mean that we must deliver 
even more. The water supply enhancement I am announcing 
today does exactly that. 
 
For well drilling, Saskatchewan Water Corporation will 
increase funding available to meet increased demand under the 
test drilling assistance program. They will increase financial 
assistance program. They will increase financial assistance for 
deep wells to 50 per cent for the full depth of the well, and add 
to the community well development program to include 
dug-outs and infiltration wells and water supply pipelines for 
farm groups of five members or more. 
 
The corporation will reduce rental rates by 50 per cent for 
dug-out pumping equipment and provide a grant of 50 per cent 
for the rental of pumping equipment from other suppliers. Sask 
Water will also purchase additional equipment for use over the 
summer and to meet expected demands in the fall. 
 
The dug-out and small storage reservoir program will be revised 
to pay 50 per cent of construction costs after taking into account 
the assistance available from PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) 
 
The municipal water assistance program will be enriched to 
provide a grant of 50 per cent to help cover the cost of 
hydrogeotechnical engineering and exploratory drilling. It will 
also include 50 per cent of the cost for urban pumping or 
hauling water to replenish reservoirs. 
 
In addition, Sask Water has in place water management plans 
and operating plans and operating plans to ensure that major 
reservoirs and other major water supply sources are managed to 
best conserve water and meet minimum demands. 
 
Water is our most valuable natural resource. In times like these 
we realize just how valuable it is and how multi-use water 
supply developments prove their value on the prairies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
see that the government has finally aroused themselves that 
there’s a problem of drought in the rural part of Saskatchewan. 
Unfortunately, it’s like most other 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1164 
 

things, it’s coming almost after the fact in many cases, and I see 
it’s the first phase of whatever is yet to come. And I say to the 
minister, it would be very nice for the farmers and ranchers of 
southern Saskatchewan to exactly know what they have to look 
forward to. 
 
I mean, we still . . . what we see here are sort of a 
reannouncement and shuffling of old programs. We’ve seen 
Alberta react more than two weeks ago to the problem. Now we 
have phase 1 of what  what, I’m not sure of. There’s no 
mention of participating in a federal plan. We’re not sure where 
that’s going. There’s a number o problems that come into this, 
and that’s underlined by timing. We see test drilling deep wells 
which . . . less PFRA assistance; we see community wells 
where farmers can go together, but how long is that going to 
take? I mean, if this is the type of program that you’re looking 
at, why weren’t you looking at it a month ago when we knew 
the problem was there? 
 
I say we can go into the dug-outs and pumping. And I ask you, 
Mr. Minister: where are you going to pump from? If you are 
going to dig new, small storage areas and dug-outs . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. We’re having a 
little difficulty hearing the member responding, and I’d like the 
co-operation of all members to allow this. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well I see, Mr. Speaker, that the members are 
a little testy, opposite, when it comes to the truth because . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall:  . . . we have no long-term, thought-out plan 
here. We have another short-term response that we’ve seen that 
has already been in place. We see no mention of what’s going 
to happen to farmers who have cattle and who have to water and 
feed those cattle right now. There’s . . . is there any mention of 
transportation assistance, or feed assistance, or the availability 
of pastures, or are we going to have park land or Crown lands 
freed up from pastures? The government seems to be unable to, 
or unwilling to make any decision on this matter. 
 
I think what we need here, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, what 
we need here is a long-term plan that you could have had in 
place long before this, that farmers would know exactly what 
they were looking at if there was a problem. And now we’re 
pulling out of the air these programs that really aren’t 
addressing the problem  phase 1. We don’t know what’s 
happening. 
 
So I would ask the minister, please, for all those farmers and 
ranchers who don’t really know what’s going out there, please 
immediately put all the rest of your cards on the table with 
some assistance for grazing and dry feed and pastures so that 
we know what we’re looking at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order. 
 

MOTIONS 

Change in Committee Membership 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve given notice to the 
government House Leader of this. I would like to move a 
motion changing membership of committee, with leave. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by my 
colleague, the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Mr. Thompson be substituted for that of 
Mr. Lyons on the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDER OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 15 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, before I begin the questions I’d 
like to thank you for the invitation that you extended to me last 
week to attend the regional conference on science and 
technology. I found it very interesting, and I met some 
informative people. I also took the opportunity this weekend to 
attend the science fair in Saskatoon, and again I had an 
opportunity to meet with people there. 
 
I still have a number of questions that I would like to ask you 
before we wind up these estimates, and I want to begin by 
asking you a question regarding the new deputy minister, 
Harley Olsen. He’s not with you today, I gather, so he’s not 
beginning his work yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  That is correct, Mr. Chairman. The 
new deputy minister will be starting on June 1. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, was this position advertised 
nationally? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, it was. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Would you be prepared to table a copy of the 
advertisement here in the House, and also would you be 
prepared to table a copy of the job description that Mr. Olsen is 
working under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I don’t see any reason why not. It 
was a public competition; it was carried in The Globe and Mail 
across the country, and it was also carried in the main dailies in 
Saskatchewan  the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Does that include also the job description, Mr. 
Minister  that you would table that? 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1165 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Would you also tell us how many applicants 
applied for that job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I can give you that, yes. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll expect those fairly 
shortly, since they will be easily accessible to you. 
 
I’d like to just talk briefly, though, about the qualifications of 
Mr. Olsen for the job because there is some concern about that. 
Can you describe the experience that he’s had in industry, 
especially in the area of research and development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Olsen has been in the service of 
the government for some 14 years, going back into the time the 
previous administration was in power. He has had several 
positions, certainly, with regard to senior supervision and 
administration. He has also been involved with research in 
some of those specific positions, and he has a master’s in 
agricultural economics. 
 
I think that when one considers the importance that agriculture 
plays in the province at this particular time and the thrust that 
we are putting into agricultural biotechnology, that Mr. Olsen is 
very well qualified for this particular job. 
 
I would also point out that in the past, when deputy minister 
have been employed in the various departments, that there are 
situations when they do not necessarily have, in this particular 
case, a very long background in research. The previous deputy 
minister, I would point out  his background was in education. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, I understand you saying that Mr. 
Olsen has experience in administration, and also you’ve 
emphasized agricultural research. There are a number of 
agricultural research components in the provincial government 
that are not under the jurisdiction of Science and Technology, 
and it is the interest in your department to be a broader 
department, looking at industry generally and experience in 
research within the university community in a broader sense. 
 
And that’s the comments that I’ve been getting from people in 
the high-tech community. They are concerned about the need 
for a deputy minister in Science and Technology that has had 
experience outside of agriculture, but with the other dimensions 
of research, especially as your government is promoting the 
high-tech industry generally and wanting to see economic 
diversification. How can you justify a deputy minister with 
experience in agricultural research, and as I understand it, very 
little experience in industry or research in other fields? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I find the 
questioning quite interesting. As I said, the previous deputy 
minister in the department’s background was totally in 
education. He had no experience whatsoever as far as industry 
was concerned. I think that Mr. Olsen’s experience certainly has 
carried over into the agricultural 

sector, and as I indicated, a lot of the work that we’re involved 
with, certainly as far as biotechnology and machinery research 
and so on, is very important to today’s need. 
 
I would also point out the fact that the process for choosing a 
deputy minister is simply advertising the position, and then a 
series of interviews are held with those who have been 
short-listed. A committee does that, and then the 
recommendation is made as to who should be given the offer. 
 
(1445) 
 
In so far as other areas of expertise, no one individual is going 
to have expertise in all of the areas that we would deal with in 
Science and Technology; that’s an impossibility. That’s why we 
have people in the department such as some of those who are 
here with me today. They have expertise in those other areas. 
We have people with engineering background, we have people 
with marketing background, administrative background, and so 
on. 
 
And it’s our hope that over the period of time, as positions 
become available or the department has been developed, that we 
do fill positions with people who have a variety of experience 
and qualifications. So one individual  this is an administrative 
position. Certainly he has expertise in so farm as administration 
and in so far as a part of the sector. 
 
To get the ideal person, if you will, I think is very difficult to 
find. And it’s my understanding from talking to committee 
members that this was the top candidate, in their estimation. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, what was the nature of the 
committee that sat in judgement on the applications and made 
recommendations. Is that a committee within your department 
or a committee of government? Can you describe that 
committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well this is a competition that is 
held through the Public Service Commission, so I assume that 
they’re the ones that are responsible for setting up the 
committee. I wasn’t involved with it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Are you telling us, then, that a committee of the 
Public Service Commission is the committee that recommends 
deputy ministers and makes a decision as to who should be 
recommended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I believe that the members on this 
committee that made this particular selection  there was a 
representative from the Public Service Commission, a 
representative from Executive Council, and Mr. Jim Hutch, who 
is the president of the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well, Mr. Minister, you must be aware that 
there is concern in the high-tech community about the 
appointment of the deputy minister, a concern that you haven’t 
addressed the issues of the experience  not that you can ever 
find an ideal person, but that you need to build in this 
dimension of expertise in industry and in research beyond 
agriculture, particularly because your 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1166 
 

own background is not in these areas and that you need that 
kind of advice. And a person who’s been the assistant to the 
Deputy Premier and then later an assistant to the Premier is not 
seen, in the high-tech community, as a person with the 
background, with the job qualifications needed to be the deputy 
minister of Science and Technology. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have some questions related to a council of 
ministers that you mentioned in the estimates in 1987, because 
of concern from the high-tech community and from myself as a 
critic for Science and Technology, about who was advising you 
in the terms of the development of policy. On September 15 in 
Hansard, you refer to the council of ministers that has been set 
up within the last few months to participate in a social impact 
study regarding the effect of advanced technology on society as 
a whole. You said you expected this study to be completed 
around the middle part of February 1988. My question 
obviously is: has the study been completed, and when will it be 
made public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I would just point out 
one further comment with regard to the new deputy minister. 
You like to make the point that he was in the Deputy Premier’s 
office. I would point out to the member opposite that Mr. 
Olsen’s background with this government and this province 
goes back to 1974 when the NDP were in power. So he served 
certainly in a senior capacity with the NDP government for 
seven years prior to his being employed with the present 
government. 
 
With regard to the council of ministers that was referred to, Mr. 
Chairman, that is the council of ministers from all of the 
provinces and the territories and the federal minister from 
across the country. This was something that was set up last 
year, and it was discussed briefly when the council of ministers 
met in Edmonton in March, but as I understand it, the 
information that I have, it’s going to be discussed further at the 
next meeting of minister, and following that, the report will be 
made available, but not available, but it’s not available at this 
time. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, I don’t want to get into a lot of 
detail discussing this deputy minister any more, but it is my 
understanding that it was not a senior position under the New 
Democrats. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That he what? 
 
Ms. Smart:  That it was not a senior position under the New 
Democrats  that’s my understanding. 
 
An Hon. Member:  He was deputy chairman at the land 
bank. Prior to that he was the head . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Ms. Smart:  I’m not asking the questions to the Deputy 
Premier, I’m talking to the Minister of Science and Technology. 
 
Mr. Minister, you mentioned in the Estimates last year, you 
mentioned an advisory board  and I’m just looking to find the 
quote here  you mentioned an advisory broad that was giving 
you information, and you said it was a very active advisory 
board. I assume that that advisory broad is different than the 
council of ministers 

that you mentioned before, and that this advisory board is a 
provincial broad. I wish you to tell me who is on that board? 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s on the top of page 2569 of Hansard, 
September 15  you say: 
 

We also have a very active advisory board for the 
Department of Science and Technology, and this group 
will be meeting within the next 10 days, and we will be 
taking a look at the services that are being delivered and 
seeing where there are loopholes and where we have to 
make some changes. 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
advisory broad that’s referred is to do with the 
Canada/Saskatchewan Subsidiary Agreement on Advanced 
Technology, and within the next month it’s our intention to 
move towards setting up an advisory committee towards, or for, 
the Department of Science and Technology not just specifically 
to do with this agreement. 
 
This particular group, of course, will have many of the 
members that will be on the new advisory board. But that one 
that was referred to and I can certainly . . . I can read the names, 
or I can send a copy of them over to you. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Sending a copy of the names over will be fine. 
How often did the board meet during 1987 to now? How many 
times has that board met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The board meets at its own 
discretion; that’s at the call of the chair. And it’s not something 
that I always have information on as to when they are meeting, 
because I don’t attend those meetings unless I’m invited. 
 
Ms. Smart:  But this was described to us in the last estimates 
as an advisory broad for the Department of Science and 
Technology, in a way that was to convey the impression that 
this board was an active board involved in giving you advice 
about the department, and that you were going to look at what 
loopholes had been identified and what changes might be 
proposed. 
 
And of course, my question to you now is: what loopholes 
would such a group identify; what changes were proposed? And 
if it sits at its own discretion and doesn’t have any connection to 
the department, in terms of you being part of that board or being 
involved in the meetings or knowing when they’re happening 
and that kind of thing then how can you describe its as a very 
active board for your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I would point out. Mr. Chairman, 
that advisory council again is basically set up, or was basically 
set up to deal with the subsidiary agreement on advanced 
technology. Certainly we meet on a regular basis with 
representatives from the various companies, and many of them, 
of course are on this list that I’m going to present to you 
 
We have, over the course of the last year, identified 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1167 
 

different areas, certainly, where we feel there would be 
loopholes, where we need to take a look at developing some 
new programs, possibly some new policies. and one of the main 
problems that was identified was in the area of marketing, so 
we’re looking into that in more detail right now. 
 
Another area of concern that has been raised is in the area of 
financing for high-tech firms, because that seems to be an 
ongoing problem. they have difficulty borrowing money from 
the banks, and the venture capital corporation certainly has not 
always proved to be an answer as far as the high-tech 
companies are concerned. So I’d say those are two of the main 
problems  the marketing, and providing, in many cases, 
short-term funding for them. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well I can certainly see financing as being one 
of the concerns and loopholes, and I can certainly agree that the 
venture capital programs is full of problems for people trying to 
access capital for developments that are ongoing. 
 
I thing it’s interesting that a government that bases its policies 
on saying things like, taxpayers’ money should not go into high 
risk ventures, is saying also that science and technology is such 
high risk that private enterprise won’t put money into it. And so 
of course government funds end up going there. 
 
I recognize that concern. I just want you at some point to 
identify that contradiction, because to me it’s very blatantly a 
contradiction for your government to continue to say that you 
won’t found public projects that have a risk in them, and that at 
the same time you want to get into funding the high risk of 
science and technology. 
 
But that’s part of the policy discussions that have to go on with 
your department and with the topic that you’re trying to 
struggle with in the development of advanced technology in this 
province. 
 
You’ve mentioned that this advisory board was connected with 
the Canada/Saskatchewan Subsidiary Agreement on Advanced 
Technology, so I would like to just direct a couple of question 
to that. 
 
I want to know if I’m right in assuming that this is the portion 
of the Economic and Regional Development Agreement 
(ERDA) that applies to science and technology. Is the 
Canada/Saskatchewan Subsidiary Agreement on Advanced 
Technology a subsection ERDA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  There are a couple of things, Mr. 
Chairman, with regard to the concern of the advisory council. 
We do have a detailed report now. We’ll be meeting again the 
first part of June when we’ll be discussing it and taking a look 
at some of those concerns that been raised. 
 
As far as the department is concerned, and many of our 
programs, I’m sure that you’re well aware that they are 
designed to share the risk. And we’re sharing the risk there 
with, in most cases, the federal government and the industry 
itself. So we’re committed to doing that and 

helping out in whatever way that we can. 
 
And finally, the subsidiary agreement, or what we’re talking 
about here in the agreement, subsidiary agreement on advanced 
technology, is a subsidiary of ERDA. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Is it administered by the Department of Science 
and Technology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, it’s administered by Science 
and Technology, but it’s in conjunction with the Department of 
Industry, Science and Technology at the federal level. That’s 
the old DRIE (department of regional industrial expansion), as 
such. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I have a brochure that I suppose was published 
by the federal government, but it says that this agreement runs 
until March 31, 1989, and claims for projects approved by 
March 31, 1989 will be accepted until September of 1994. 
 
The total budget for the Canada/Saskatchewan subsidiary 
agreement was to be $33.2 million shared equally by Canada 
and Saskatchewan, but only $3 million of this has been spent 
according to the Estimates; it’s on page 104 of the Estimates. It 
seems to me that this agreement never amounted to much, and 
now it’s gone completely. 
 
The Saskatchewan Advanced Technology Management 
Association has published a newsletter in which they say that 
they would like to . . . they’ll be participating in meetings, held 
in Saskatoon on April 27 and 28, with the federal government. 
They are very concerned about this agreement. They were 
meeting with you and with the federal government to see about 
the revitalization of the agreement and enhancing its impact. 
 
I would like to know what happened at those meetings on April 
27 and 28 in terms of this agreement, and why there’s no money 
in the budget now for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, it’s incorrect for the 
member to say that there’s no money in the budget for it; that’s 
part of the $3.5 million that has been allocated for programs. 
 
Certainly it is a concern. There have been a lot of discussions 
with regard to that particular agreement and the amount that has 
been spent. We’re going to be discussion that further at our 
meeting in the first part of June. 
 
I would point out that other provinces have raised the same 
concern, and in some cases there have been extensions granted. 
So we’re looking at different options now, whether we’re going 
to be asking for a extension on it or whatever the case might be. 
But it’s certainly incorrect to say that there isn’t money in the 
budget. 
 
(1500) 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well I’m looking at page 104 of the Estimates 
for 1988-89  grants pursuant to the Canada/Saskatchewan 
Subsidiary Agreement on Advanced Technology. 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1168 
 

Under estimated for ’88-89 there is nothing, for ’87 to ’88 there 
was $228,000. The actual amount spent in ’86 to ’87 was 
$978,000, and in ’85 to ’86, $604,000. Where is the money 
then? I don’t see it in the Estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, that amount of 
money is now included in the economic diversification and 
investment fund. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Why? Why, when you said . . . when there was 
an agreement that $33.2 million would be available for five 
years for this Canada/Saskatchewan subsidiary agreement  
$33.2 million, half of which I don’t see anywhere in the budgets 
over the last five years. Where did that money go? Why was it 
put under economic diversification instead of staying here in the 
Estimates under the title for the agreement that it refers to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well the main reason, Mr. 
Chairman, that the change was made . . . it was originally taken 
out of the Heritage Fund, gut in the last year . . . we started this 
process last year in simplifying where these funds were being 
put, and it has been moved in with the other money. 
 
But there’s certainly, if you’ll take a look at the amount that’s in 
there now  last year we had $3 million; this year we have 
three and a half million dollars. So the amount actually has been 
increased as far as the money for programs is concerned. But 
it’s for simplification, that’s why it’s moved in there. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I put it to you that it’s part of the smoke and 
mirrors strategy of your government in order to . . . helping us 
to understand the Estimates and to know where to hold you to 
account. 
 
Half of $33.2 million is nowhere in the budget. It’s not under 
the economic and investment fund; it’s not under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan subsidiary agreement. And yet you have 
a promise in this newsletter that projects will be accepted until 
September of 1994, and approved, and there’s only this 300 and 
. . . $3,000,500 under the economic diversification fund, which 
includes a lot of other things besides this agreement. 
 
I really am quite confused as to how your government is trying 
to organize this money. I wish you would explain to me again, 
clearly, and for the high-tech community, what is happening to 
the Canada/Saskatchewan subsidiary agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well I’ve already indicated to you 
that it is under discussion right now with representatives from 
the high-tech community, and it will be discussed further at a 
meeting in the first part of June and then a recommendation 
made as to the approach that we’re going to take with it, 
whether we’re going to be looking for an extension from the 
federal government as some other provinces has, or just what. 
 
I would remind you that applications for this fund, project 
funding, will be received, as it stands now, up until March 31 in 
1989, but the projects could be carried on and payments would 
still be made up until 1993. As you’re 

well aware, many of these projects are not just completed 
within the space of a few months, or even in the space of a 
couple of years. So a project may well be started prior to March 
31 but not completed for three or four years after that, so the 
funding would still be made available for that. 
 
I would also point out that there hasn’t been a year, certainly in 
my involvement here and I don’t think prior to that, when all of 
the funds have been called on. So I mean for you to try and say 
that the government is holding back money, and it’s not putting 
money into the budget  the money is there, but if the 
companies are not making application for it in their specific 
projects, we’re not going to go out and solicit or force them to 
take the money. They have to make application for it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well it’s very clear from the way your 
department has been operating that you are not taking the 
initiative in developing policies to fund the high-tech industry 
in any sort of organized and planned way. So I accept your 
statement that people just have to wander in off the streets and 
ask you for money, and maybe you will give it to them and 
maybe you won’t. 
 
But our concern is that your government announced $50 million 
in the last election campaign for high-tech money, and it 
announced half of $33.2 million for the Canada/Saskatchewan 
Subsidiary Agreement on Advanced Technology. And what we 
see in the Estimates is a very small amount of money estimated 
for those projects. Now that where I say it’s smoke and mirrors. 
 
When you say to the public that you’re putting all this money 
into high tech, and then when you look at what you actually do, 
it’s not there. It’s absolutely not there for the high-tech 
community. And it’s a concern in terms of the kind of support 
that they’re going to get from your government and what you’re 
talking about when you talk about money being available and 
then when it isn’t in the budget. How do you justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I would point out to 
the member opposite that we have a very active department as 
far as Science and Technology, and our people are out there 
working very hard, working with the clients that are already in 
operation and certainly working with many new clients. We 
have new businesses, of course, that are coming on stream 
pretty well on a monthly basis. 
 
The reason that the moneys have not all been spent each year 
certainly is not because of inactivity on the part of the 
department. There have been very few requests that have been 
denied over the last year, and any of those that were denied 
were simply because they didn’t meet the criteria for a specific 
grant. It was nothing to do with the amount of money being 
available. 
 
So I think if you want to check back on that, we are in very 
close contact with the high-tech community, with the 
organization that they have, SATMA (Saskatchewan Advanced 
Technology Management Association), and also with the 
representatives from the various companies, and representative 
from the department are involved on an ongoing basis with any 
given number of companies. This is going on all of the time. 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1169 
 

So I think that the information is being passed on to them 
certainly. There is all kinds of consultation going on, and it isn’t 
just a matter of them wandering in off the street, as you might 
say. But the moneys are there, and if the projects meet the 
criteria then they are able to receive this grant money. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well my point is still that the grant money that 
you say you’re going to spend is not in the budget to be spent. 
And I would like to ask you if . . . what pockets of money 
Science and Technology controls? There’s a certain amount of 
money in the Consolidated Fund, I understand. The Heritage 
Fund is gone from these estimates. The Canada-Saskatchewan 
agreement has gone. There’s a . . . and estimates for your 
department and then there’s money under the economic 
diversification and Tourism department. Is there any other 
pockets of money that your department has any access to in 
these estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite again is saying that there’s no money there and ERDA 
is gone, and this simply is not the case. The amount of money 
that’s budgeted for program this year is up by $500,000 from 
what it was last year. 
 
As far as pools of money that are in existence, the only two 
pools of money that Science and Technology have at their 
disposal are in vote 15, which is clearly identified there, which 
is for administration, and the other one is vote 66, which is the 
economic development and investment fund, and that’s where 
the three and a half million dollars is found. There’s nothing 
hidden there whatsoever. 
 
And the two programs that are funded from the economic 
development and investment fund are the ERDA programs and 
also the research and development programs that the department 
assists on. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I understand that there’s $1.983 million in the 
Consolidated Fund. Is that something that you administer . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Pardon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Who administers that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, that figure that the 
member has quoted, that is for administration; that’s the vote 
15, and we do control that. I don’t know what you’re saying 
about the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I’ll look it up later and get back to you on that. 
 
So your total amount of money then that you are administering 
is the amount of money that’s in your department plus the three 
and one-half million dollars that’s in the economic 
diversification fund. 
 
Then where does money come from to meet the expenses of the 
order in council for Develcon, which got three and a half 
million dollars just this last April, spread over a number of 
years? But can you break that down and tell me where that 
money is? That’s for the research on the commercial 
development of their maxi-network system. 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Just a question, again with regard to 
the Consolidated Fund. All of the moneys that are listed there, 
that’s again, the administrative amount of it here, the $1.983 
million. 
 
In so far as the total money that we have then, it’s $5.483 
million. And in so far as Develcon is concerned, that would be 
money that would flow over a four-year . . . four fiscal periods, 
and that will be out of the vote 66 from the economic 
development and investment fund. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well it seems to me, when I look at the amount 
of money that you have, that it really isn’t very much for the 
kind of development that’s required in this province. 
 
I’m really quite surprised to find that that is the way it is 
because, for example, we had the announcement in the throne 
speech in 1986 that there was going to be a biotech institute 
built in Saskatoon, or in the province somewhere, and that 
institute has been mentioned many times. 
 
It was mentioned in the estimates in September 15 of ’87, 
where you say we are very actively involved right now in 
discussion the biotech institute. And you also acknowledged 
that that was one of the main projects that your department is 
involved in right now. Where is the money for that in this 
budget of $5 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The Agricultural Biotechnology 
Research Institute has moved along fairly well, and we would 
certainly hope that before too long we will be able to advertise 
for an executive director for that particular institute. 
 
As far as the moneys are concerned for that, we will certainly 
put in what we can from Science and Technology. But there are 
also other areas within government that it should be . . . 
possibly we may be able to tap. I think since it is very 
agriculture related, I would hope that we may be able to get a 
few dollars from the agricultural development fund. but to this 
point we are looking at the sources of those funds. 
 
Of course this is . . . we’re not going to be funding all of it. It is 
going to, of course, be a joint federal funding type of program 
as well. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well that response creates two big questions for 
me. One is: what is the biotech research institute going to be 
doing, if it’s funded federally? What is it going to be doing 
that’s anything different than the National Research Council 
biotech institute that’s now in Saskatoon? Can you outline for 
us the difference between the two and what you see as their 
priorities? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The idea with the institute, when we 
get it going, would simply be that it’s going to play a very 
important role in so far as co-ordinating some of the research 
funds that are now coming in. There are some 13 to 15 different 
departments in and around the campus now that are involved in 
that particular area. 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1170 
 

And it is also going to be designed to top up some of that 
research money that’s coming in, whether from the federal 
government. We would expect, as is the case now, a lot of 
money certainly is coming in from private sources. 
 
But right now we need some type of a co-ordinating agency that 
can tie all of this together, because it is zeroing in on one 
specific area, and that’s agricultural biotechnology. Right now 
the funds are being disbursed quite widely and there’s really not 
that much co-ordination. So it will affect, I suppose, to some 
extent what’s happening with the planned biotechnology 
institute, because you’re looking at the whole family of the 
private industry, the research councils that are now in operation 
there and many of the departments within the university that are 
doing research in that area. 
 
Ms. Smart:  So it’s not going to be actually doing any 
research itself. It’s going to be an institute, basically a 
co-ordination office, for biotech research in the province. 
 
Well it seems to me really a very strange way for government to 
organize themselves, to announce something in a throne speech 
in 1986 and then to stand in ’88 and tell me that maybe a little 
bit of money will come from the Science and Technology 
department, maybe there’ll be a few dollars from somewhere 
over here. 
 
That’s what I’m talking about when I say about  the way in 
which you develop your policy seems to be very loose and 
strange to me in terms of knowing what you’re doing and 
knowing where the department is going and knowing what it is 
that you’re talking about when you tell us in this estimates that 
one of your main areas of concern is the biotech institute and 
biotech research. 
 
Then you have these answers that are so very vague, and the 
money doesn’t seem to be there, the organization doesn’t seem 
to be there. The promises are there. There’s all this hype about 
the need for it and how wonderful it’s going to be for 
Saskatchewan, and we’ve heard that many, many times. And 
yet when you actually question about what it is and what it’s 
going to be doing . . . and very concerned that it not duplicate 
the work of the National Research Council, which is already a 
federally funded organization doing biotech research. And 
you’re wanting to set up something else, but you’re not too sure 
what it is, and you’re not too sure where the money’s going to 
come from, but you talk about it as if it’s already in the works 
and well planned out. 
 
It’s that kind of smoke and mirrors that the people of 
Saskatchewan are really getting concerned about. We have a 
right to know what it is you’re planning to do and how it is 
you’re planning to spend the money and how it is you’re 
planning to co-ordinate this. And certainly the high-tech 
community deserves to know what your plans are. 
 
And I don’t think it’s enough to stand up and say, tap a few 
dollars here and tap a few dollars there and bring a few people 
together. There may well be the need for co-ordination, but it 
seems to me that that could be the role of the Department of 
Science and Technology, as much as anything else, to make 
sure that these research 

projects are well co-ordinated. 
 
One of the roles that your department played over the last few 
years, again around this issue of co-ordination, was setting up 
the two offices of research at the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan. And they were described very 
glowingly in the annual report from your department in ’86-’87 
as being very effective: 
 

(They) co-ordinated over $32 million in grant and contract 
research support for private enterprise, crown 
corporations, international agencies, the university, and 
government. 

 
This fiscal year, the Regina office of Research 
co-ordinated over 203 successful and on-going research 
projects for a total value of $3.6 million in grant and 
contract research support for industry, government, crown 
corporations, and university and international agencies. 

 
(And) working with other provincial departments, 
Saskatchewan Science and Technology co-ordinated and 
analyzed the $85.4 million spent annually on provincial 
research activities in order to increase the efficient 
allocation and priorization of research activities in support 
of government policy and program initiatives. 

 
That’s what those offices were doing, and that’s what you 
boasted that you were doing in your annual report. 
 
So I have two questions. You’ve been able to do that work of 
co-ordination, according to your reports, and yet you’ve also set 
up those two offices that were doing that co-ordination and now 
this year, those offices are terminated. So why did you 
terminate them if they were doing such a good job, and what’s 
happened to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite has mentioned several things in trying to make out that 
this is a complicated process. For most people I don’t think it is 
all that complicated. I would point out that we have been 
involved with the discussions on this Agricultural 
Biotechnology Research Institute since last September, and I 
have been co-chairing that committee with the president of the 
university. 
 
Now you’re wondering about the advanced technology or the 
high-tech firms  should they have the right to know what’s 
going on? Well I’d point out that there have been 
representatives from all of those different companies involved 
in developing the report and setting the guide-lines as to how 
this research institute is going to operate. So I can assure you 
that they are very well in the know as to what’s happening with 
it because they’ve been involved in developing it. 
 
We had, I’m sure as you’re aware, a meeting with the prime 
Minister about a month ago when he visited the Plant 
Biotechnology Institute. 
 
We discussed such things as the institute, the research institute, 
and also the larger centre of agricultural science for the centre 
of excellence, as such. So this is all part of it, and I know that it 
takes a long time to get all of these things 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1171 
 

together, but we are talking about a tremendous amount of 
money that is invested in research in this particular area. 
 
I certainly would have hoped that we could have had this thing 
going some two months ago. But until . . . I just received a copy 
of the final report, as a matter of fact, a little over a week ago 
from the working committee, so we couldn’t really do much 
more until that was received and then make representation to 
the federal government as far as their share was concerned. 
 
In so far as your last question and talking about the offices of 
university research, we do a lot of co-ordinating of research, 
certainly, within the department, but that’s research and 
development to do with other government departments. The 
offices of university research in Saskatoon and here in Regina 
 that was a three-year agreement that was set up back in 
1984, and the understanding was that at the end of that time that 
the university offices would be self-supporting because it has 
triggered a tremendous amount of research money coming in 
just as a result of having that office. It seemed to me that the 
office in Saskatoon went from in the neighbourhood of one and 
a half million dollars to over $30 millions in research coming 
in. 
 
The University of Regina has had a very, very good record in so 
far as attracting research dollars because of the existence of that 
office. And as I said, that was a three-year agreement, but we 
decided this year to extend it for one more year. But we cut the 
funds in half, the main reason being that the universities were 
not quite ready. They wanted a little bit of time for the 
transition to take place, and I had the honour of being over at 
the University of Regina today for a news conference where I 
announced that they would be getting $50,000 for this yea, and 
that’s simply to help them . . . that’s an extension to help them 
through the transition period. But they firmly believe that at the 
end of this current year that they will be self-supporting. 
 
I would point out to the member opposite that a similar type of 
announcement will be made in Saskatoon in the very near 
future with regard to the extension that is being done up there. 
So they’re very pleased with it. We’ve had ongoing 
consultation with them as to how things are going. I think it’s 
been a great program, and they have really benefitted from it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well the money for those offices must be 
coming out of that three and a half million then from the 
economic diversification, vote 66. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, that’s considered program 
funding, and that comes out of the vote 66. 
 
Ms. Smart:  So for three years the Department of Science 
and Technology funded those two research offices at the 
university. Now the agreement was terminated and you were 
wanting to pull out of it altogether, but you’ve agreed to 
continue with the university for another year. 
 
The university, although it has gotten a lot of money for 
research through those offices and they have been 

successful, presumably that money that they collected would be 
for the research projects and not for funding those offices per 
se. Now is it part of the agreement form the university that 
those offices would be funded by that research money that’s 
collected from private enterprise, or is this another burden on 
the universities, another operating cost for the universities 
which they have to pay for out of the money that’s given them 
from the Department of Education? What is your understanding 
about the funding of those offices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The university offices of research 
have been looking at the possibility of charging some of the 
overhead costs back, and also looking at other ways within the 
universities. Certainly they have appreciated the support that 
they have had, and they have been putting forth the suggestions 
as to how they are going to carry that on. They recognize the 
fact that the program was going to run out, but we felt because 
of the importance of this to the university that we should give 
assistance in those areas. 
 
So the University of Saskatchewan received $600,000 over the 
last three years and the University of Regina, 300,000. And it’s 
their feeling that they will find ways, because of efficiency and 
possibly charging back some of the overhead to the grants, that 
they will in fact be able to carry those offices on at the end of 
this year without any other assistance. And they’ve got their 
long-term strategy in place, and of course by our assisting them 
a little bit this year they hope to be able to meet that 
commitment. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well it seems to me from the kind of response 
that you’ve been giving me, your priority is co-ordination of 
research projects. That’s what the biotech institute is to do in 
that area. There’s a need for the other agricultural research 
development that’s at the university, a need for your department 
to be co-ordinating the research. 
 
Here was a project where you were putting money into two 
co-ordinating offices, and yet you only did it for three years, 
and now that funding isn’t available in the future, and it means 
another burden on the universities to pick that up. Now if they 
can work it out that they get it from their money from their 
research grants, perhaps that’s what they should be doing. But 
the universities are suffering very much in the area of research 
and development funds, very much needing more money all 
around. And for you to start up a co-ordination project, which 
you then drop on the basis that perhaps the university would be 
able to pick it up, or someone else will fund it, it seems to me 
another part of the sort of haphazardness of this department in 
terms of how it’s developing. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve got a number of other specific questions that 
I want to ask you, and since we’re talking about the money 
that’s available to Science and Technology, I want to ask you a 
bit about your trip to China which you came back from, I 
gather, about three weeks ago. You went on a two-week trip as 
part of the twinning agreement with Jilin province in China, as I 
am understanding it, and there were about 18 people on the trip, 
some people from your department and others from other 
departments. Would you please tell the House and tell me 
where the money 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1172 
 

was in the Estimates for that trip to China, and what was the 
benefit to us in the market-place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, a couple of points 
with regard to your concern about co-ordination and the 
university research. Certainly the universities have indicated 
they are very happy with the arrangement that they have had 
with Science and Technology. And you’re talking about 
shortage of funding that they have. I think the fact that because 
of our initiative that they have been able to increase the amount 
of research money coming in, from something in the 
neighbourhood of one and a half million to about 30 millions, 
has been pretty significant. But I would point out there are other 
programs that are in place as well. 
 
And the Prime Minister announced not that long ago about, I 
think, $1.3 billion that is going to be going towards universities 
and the university, of research. And also something that we’re 
promoting quite strongly, and the universities are quite 
involved, is the university-industry collaboration where we’re 
trying to get the industries to put more money into the area of 
research. So there are other programs that are carrying on as 
well. 
 
With regard to the trip to China, you’ve indicated a number of 
18 people that were there, but I would point out that we had I 
think something like eight in the Science and Technology 
delegation. And the balance of the people were members of the 
negotiating team which were there to negotiate the third plan of 
action with Jilin province. The expenditures of course there 
would have come from the various government departments 
that they were representing. 
 
(1530) 
 
As far as our own expenditures for the Science and Technology 
delegation, they would come out of vote 15, the general 
operating budget. But since some of these things were paid 
before the end of March, we’re taking some of that out of the 
two years. And it’s not that it was a large amount of money. 
Some of it was taken from last year then, and some coming out 
this year. 
 
As far as the benefits are concerned, you know that the history 
with Jilin province goes back several years. In fact, I think that 
the original initiation was taken on behalf of the previous 
premier, Allan Blakeney, starting this. And then the agreements 
were signed and started, I think, about three years ago, and the 
new agreement that we have just negotiated and signed is now 
in existence for the next two years. 
 
And I think that it represents a lot of opportunity between 
Saskatchewan . . . or for Saskatchewan businesses. We just had 
a meeting this morning, as a matter of fact, to discuss the 
various types of benefits that the industry feel that they gained 
from going. And they’ve already got negotiations going on with 
firms and companies in China. And they feel that it has been a 
very, very worthwhile trip. 
 
I think that we have lots to do as well in ensuring that we do tap 
those opportunities that exist in China. They’ve got a large 
number of consumers there, and if we don’t move 

into some of those markets, certainly others will. And I think 
that you have to understand that it takes a fair amount of time to 
build up the trusting relationship that is necessary before the 
Chinese people are going to deal with any companies, whatever 
country or province they might be from. And I think that we 
have established that excellent relationship. We’re now ready to 
move on into specific areas where we can take advantage of 
opportunities that exist. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Who were the eight people connected with 
Science and Technology that went? What was their capacity, 
and what sort of detailed negotiations went on? What are you 
talking about when you say there was negotiations between 
businesses  what kind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well I’m certainly not going to be 
able to give you information as to negotiations that went on 
between companies and the Chinese companies. If the company 
representatives want to give you that information, you’ll have to 
get it from them; I don’t have that. 
 
But the representatives that were there on behalf of Science and 
Technology, besides myself: my chief of staff, Mr. Jim Hutch, 
the president of the Saskatchewan Research Council  and I 
can send this list over to you as well; Mr. Keith Head, who is s 
consulting agrologist with Newfield Seeds in Nipawin; Mr. Bob 
Hawkins, general manager of Del-Air Systems Limited from 
Humboldt; Mr. Laverne Volding, the general manager and 
co-owner of V&V Livestock, and is a swine consultant; Mr. 
David Cole, general manager of Sterling Microelectronics; Mr. 
Brian Duck, who is a consultant, does a lot of work with 
Agdevco (agricultural development corporation); and Mr. 
Wayne McElree, who is the intergovernmental co-ordinator in 
Science and Technology. 
 
Ms. Smart:  And the cost of this trip for them was paid for 
out of the economic diversification fund. is that correct  vote 
66? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, out of vote 15, as I’d indicated. 
 
Ms. Smart:  It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that that 
$3,500,000 is being divided up into all sorts of little pockets for 
trips to China and for co-ordinating meetings and this kind of 
things. It’s not much of a budget, to start with, for the 
development of Science and Technology in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was an article in the paper just recently 
about a group in Regina that wants to develop a high-tech 
centre near the airport, “to give Regina the ammunition it needs 
to battle Saskatoon for the high-tech buck. They want to begin 
building a $15 million high-tech centre called “omni park” by 
the end of this year. 
 
What relationship does Science and Technology have to a 
project like this, and would you be looking at helping this kind 
of competition set up in Regina against Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, just one 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1173 
 

final comment with regard to the China trip. None of that 
money comes out of the $3.5 million, which is vote 66; that’s 
for programming, research and development. I’d indicated to 
the member opposite that any expenses for this particular trip 
were from the vote 15, which is to do with administration. 
 
In so far as the latter question and the possible or potential 
development of a centre near the airport in Regina, there may be 
several groups that are interested in developing such a centre 
near the airport in Regina, but we certainly are not going to be n 
a position to give any information out as to any discussions that 
have been held. There’s only been one meeting that I have been 
involved in, and that was simply to get information as to what 
the group were planning. 
 
So there’s no request made for any type of funding. so whether 
they’re going ahead or not, I have no idea, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Is your department working at all with the 
Saskatchewan Science Centre, and is there any proposal to put 
provincial funding into the Saskatchewan Science Centre in 
Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, we have a 
representative on the board for the science centre. We certainly 
support the initiative that they have there, but to this point in 
time we have not been involved in any funding, nor do we see 
our being involved in the near future. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, I want to just turn quickly to the 
Estimates, specifically for your department, and question you 
about the amount of money for the administration branch. 
 
You’ve doubled the administration branch  almost doubled it 
 in size from 6.3 person-years of employment in ’84-85 to 
11.3 person-years, and the budget amount has almost tripled. 
This is a relatively small department, so I want to know why 
over one-half of the people are working in the administration 
branch and why it costs over three-quarters of a million dollars 
to run the department’s internal workings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the amount of money 
and the staffing remains the same as what it was last year. The 
amount of money is actually a lesser amount than it was before. 
 
Certainly there are 11.3 positions in there, but that takes care of 
our accounts for the deputy minister’s office and all the support 
services that go along with the department. So I mean, we’d 
consider that in. It’s understandable why you would need that 
number of people; it’s because of the support services that are 
required and are being provided out of that particular section in 
the budget. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Can you describe support services, what you 
mean by that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The section under administration 
takes in a good, wide area here. As I mentioned, that’s all of the 
administration, performance 

of administrative support, responsibilities to the deputy 
minister’s office; there’s also the minister’s office, the computer 
services, personnel, finance, and the general administration of 
the department. so it takes in, as I say, a wide area. I can 
certainly give you a copy of all of the different sections that are 
covered under that particular department if you wish. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well a large part of the department is 
administrative costs. I’m not convinced that the people who are 
working there are . . . is necessary to have such a top-heavy 
department in terms of administration. 
 
I’m concerned about the fact that I think only at the most two 
people in your department  and you can correct me if I’m 
wrong  have a background in industry or come from . . . or 
serve the industrial dimension of the interest in the Department 
of Science and Technology, and that you have changed the 
research co-ordinator into a communications department which 
has just about doubled its budget since the first set of estimates 
concerning Science and Technology were printed. 
 
I want to know why the steep increase in the department of 
communications, and what you managed to spend the money on 
last year, and what you’re planning for this year in 
communications. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, with regard to 
communication, there are several areas in which the money is 
expended in that particular department. One in information 
promotional materials, development and production. We have 
processing, special events organization. 
 
One of the main expenditures, I suppose, is the development 
and printing of the tech transfer catalogue which includes the 
majority of the high-tech companies that are in existence in the 
province, and that is distributed very, very widely and has been 
very, very beneficial in getting information out about the 
companies and the type of products or processes that they’re 
involved in, and I think has generally meant a fair bit of 
business as far as those companies are concerned. But that’s one 
of the areas that’s certainly included in there. 
 
We publish a newsletter, which you’re familiar with, the 
Frontiers. We’ve had resource centre that’s carried on as well. 
And special events, there are always events that are taking 
place. You know what’s happening, of course, this week, and 
that has led to some additional expenses. 
 
But communication is a very important part of the department 
and a lot of good information that’s going out to the high-tech 
industry itself, and on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well, Mr. Minister, I wouldn’t see 
communication like that being the same as research 
co-ordination. I would think that research co-ordination would 
be something quite different. I think that the public in 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan has had quite enough of the kind 
of hype that’s been coming out from the department. 
 
The technology transfer catalogue includes all sorts of agencies 
and groups and people who are . . . some are 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1174 
 

now are out of business, some are not necessarily connected 
with the research community, and it’s my understanding that if 
you were to do a transfer technology catalogue that really 
included the high-tech firms in Saskatoon, it might list as many 
as 66, but not certainly the 170 that are in that catalogue; that 
it’s a glossy publication that has not been proven to be as useful 
as it could be if the communications arm of your government 
was truly trying to let people know what was really happening 
in Saskatchewan, instead of puffing up the Science and 
Technology department and the activities in the province to the 
point where you’ve lost touch with what’s really around and 
what the real concerns of the people are in the high-tech 
industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Ms. Smart:  I think I have some other colleagues who would 
like to question you. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, what have you 
done to facilitate employment for university students having a 
technological background for this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, with regard to the 
number of companies that are in existence in the province, 
certainly we do have computer print-outs. We can list, I think 
quite effectively, how many companies we’ve got in existence 
in the province. And I think the tech transfer catalogue has 
played a very important role as far as getting information out, 
and it has benefitted the companies more than anything else. 
 
In so far as the employment for students in the summer, because 
of the fact that the high-tech industry is growing, there are more 
companies certainly coming on stream, but some of the others 
are hiring more people. We would expect that there are students 
from engineering and from computer science that are being 
taken up by that, and also the encouragement that we are 
providing through the university industry collaboration 
program. But other than that, as far going out  and we’re not 
certainly providing any assistance, financial assistance, as far as 
students going out and getting jobs in the high-tech field. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, why aren’t you assisting 
students to further their education by virtue of summer jobs in 
the high-tech field? And why aren’t you, even more 
importantly, assisting Saskatchewan high-tech firms by 
providing a student employment program to enable nascent 
high-technology companies, particularly, to benefit from some 
of the expertise of students at the universities in Regina and 
Saskatoon? Why aren’t you taking a leadership role in this 
regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point 
out to the member opposite that we have had discussions for the 
last few months with the Shad Valley project people, and we 
had hoped to have that in operation this summer. However, 
when we submitted the number of people to them  and this is 
something that’s operated out of Ontario  they then asked that 
we would double the number of people that we had, and we 
weren’t in a position to do that at that particular time. We were 

putting forward, I think, 20 individuals, and that’s what they 
had suggested at first. So we’re still working on that. I would 
hope that we can do that in conjunction with the Shad people 
next year, along with the University of Saskatchewan. So we 
have been attempting to get that going, and quite frankly, I was 
very disappointed when they backed out on us and wouldn’t 
provide it this summer. 
 
I would also point out, though, that there are several other 
programs  student employment programs  that are offered 
by other departments within the government, and a certain 
amount of assistance is being made available there. So that 
would apply to students that are in the high-tech field just the 
same a students that are taking any of the other courses at the 
university. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Precisely my point, Mr. Minister, that you 
have a responsibility to create a niche for students with a 
scientific background. You have a responsibility and an 
opportunity to provide particular employment possibilities 
unique to them and for them. And they should not necessarily 
have to compete among all sorts of other university students for 
summer jobs, particularly so because high-tech firms, and 
especially nascent high-tech firms here in Saskatchewan, would 
benefit in large measure by the opportunity to hire some of 
these students. And it’s a reciprocal kind of arrangement 
whereby students could benefit from having field experience on 
the job over the course of the summer. 
 
Now you talk about sending students to Shad Valley in Ontario. 
We don’t need to do that necessarily, and you aren’t doing it, as 
you say. I want to know why you can’t put Saskatchewan 
students to work in Saskatchewan high-tech firms over the 
course of this summer  why you don’t have plans to effect 
this kind of thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly 
didn’t suggest to the member opposite that we’re going to be 
sending students to Ontario. I indicated that we were hoping to 
be co-operating with the Shad Valley project, which is operated 
out of Ontario, to have students working with the companies 
here in Saskatchewan and going to the University of 
Saskatchewan. So I said nothing about them going out of the 
province. 
 
As I also indicated, we were not successful in getting them to 
come into Saskatchewan this year to provide that program. But 
we’re not going to give up on it. That is an opportunity, I think, 
that we can capitalize on, and if we can get 20 or 30 students 
involved in that and out in the community working with 
high-tech firms, I think that’s great, and that’s a good start. 
 
At the same time, there are other programs that are provided in 
the province as far as student employment is concerned. But 
certainly at this point, although the idea might be sound, we in 
the Department of Science and Technology are not going to be 
providing assistance to companies to hire students from those 
particular colleges in the summer-time. I mean, there are lots of 
opportunities out there right now, as I’ve indicated, and I think 
a lot of the high-tech firms are employing some of these 
university students in the summer-time. 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1175 
 

Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, can you supply details on the 
Shad Valley project for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you very much. 
 
The reason I’m concerned about this, Mr. Minister, is because 
in last year’s estimates I questioned you about the possibility of 
student employment programs. This was on September 15. And 
you indicated, or you seemed to indicate at that time, that this in 
fact made a lot of sense. You said in conclusion of our 
exchange at that point, quote: 
 

So I think you raised a good point, and it is something that 
we’re aware of and are putting plans in place so that we 
can get something operating next summer. 

 
This in respect to student employment prospects. And I took 
your words at face value. I believed you when you said that you 
would be able to put something into place for students, and now 
we come to this summer and there’s nothing that’s been done. 
 
I had suggested to you last September that you venture on to the 
University of Saskatchewan campus, and you talk to students 
there and you maybe talk to some of the faculty there, and you 
come up with some kind of program that might meet the real 
needs of student and of the high-tech firms that you’re 
responsible for. And you haven’t done it. you put all your eggs, 
it seems, in this Shad Valley basket, and nothing’s come of it 
 
Mr. Minister, you can talk about other government departments 
having an opportunity for summer employment of students, and 
that high-tech firms can choose from those kinds of students, 
but what we see from your government is a reduction in the 
opportunities program for students, and I think it’s positively 
damning that you have the nerve, in your latest issue of 
Frontiers for May, to talk about student employment 
possibilities: “Employing Summer Students Brings Mutual 
Benefits.” You have a full two columns in this little newsletter 
put out by your department on the benefits of student 
employment, and you do nothing to facilitate that. In fact, your 
government has cut student employment funds from 10.5 
million to $4 million, and there’s been no increase over last 
year’s figures in that regard. They’re frozen at $4 million. 
 
I don’t see how you can possibly talk about the benefits, mutual 
benefits, which is precisely my point about students 
employment projects  that it benefits the student and it 
benefits industry. I don’t see how you can talk about that and 
not provide funds and leadership in that regard unless you’re 
talking out of both sides of your mouth. Now I would like to 
hear from you and explanation of how Saskatchewan high-tech 
firms are benefitting from student employment prospects under 
your ministership. What can you tell us in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite never was too good with figures. I mean, he’s carrying 
on here like he really knows what 

he’s talking about. 
 
I indicated back in the fall that we were negotiating at that time 
with the Shad Valley people as far as the programs were 
concerned that we could offer here in Saskatchewan. And those 
discussions went on for several months throughout the course of 
the winter. 
 
But it was only recently that we received the word from them 
that they were not going to be providing a program in 
Saskatchewan this year. And they do have them at several of 
the other universities across the country. So I mean, for you to 
say that we’re not trying to do anything about it, or doing 
anything about it, we did not know until just a short time ago 
that they would not be coming in and providing a program in 
which we were willing to co-operate on and also to put money 
into it. 
 
So I think that there are still many opportunities out there as far 
as high tech is concerned. Certainly the copy of Frontiers that 
discussed the benefits, there are many benefits. I think we have 
to encourage the industry to hire as many of these young people 
as they can for the summer. And I’m sure that many of them are 
doing that, because it is a benefit, not only as far as the student 
is concerned but also as far as the company is concerned. 
 
We do have some co-operative programs that are in existence. 
And I really commend the University of Regina for being 
involved in one of those, because it does give some of the 
students an opportunity to get out and get the real life 
experience, working with some of these companies. 
 
But right now these students have the same opportunity, as far 
as getting jobs in the summer, that students from all of the other 
departments have. And I certainly believe that in the future 
there will be many, many opportunities for young people going 
into the high-tech industry, because the demand is going to be 
there. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, my point is that the help isn’t 
there. The help isn’t there from your department. The help isn’t 
there from your government with the Opportunities program, $4 
million frozen from last year  cut last year, incidentally, from 
10.5 million. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you must have been in Toronto at the 
high-tech conference on January 13 when the Prime Minister of 
this country announced, and I quote: 
 

I want very much to stress the critical importance we 
attach to education as the foundation on which durable 
science and technology policies much be built. 

 
Education as the foundation on which science and technology 
policies are built, and you are doing nothing to facilitate that 
kind of development. It’s also been said that students are to the 
spread of high technology and science as mosquitos are to 
malaria. They have a vial role to play in building the high-tech 
sector of this province, and it’s a role that you are choosing to 
ignore and, I would submit, you’re choosing to ignore because 
you don’t have any money. 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1176 
 

And this brings me to question you about the $50 million 
promise made by the Premier of this province for $50 million 
worth of help  seed money he called it  for nascent 
high-tech firms. Can you tell me what the status of that promise 
is, and when we are going to see $10 million for high-tech firms 
for each of the next five years? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s one thing 
for the member opposite to stand up and say we’re not doing 
this and we’re not doing that, but at least it was this government 
that had the courage to go ahead and develop a Department of 
Science and Technology, which is something that the previous 
government didn’t recognize. And the money that’s been going 
into the research and development and to high-tech companies 
over the last six years has increased dramatically. 
 
I think that you made mention then of the conference that was 
held in January in Toronto, and certainly you didn’t carry on . . . 
indicate that the Prime Minister had also announced  you 
talking about the importance of education  and the fact that 
he announced at that time that there would be no fewer than 
2,500 scholarships made available across the country for 
students that are going into engineering and into the natural 
sciences. 
 
So this certainly is going to be a big plus, and I would hope that 
we should have at least 100 students in Saskatchewan that are 
going to be able to cash in on those scholarships for this current 
year. So that’s a step in the right direction. 
 
As far as the offices of university research are concerned  and 
you know of the amount of money that we put in there, and the 
questioning your colleague just had  that’s had a tremendous 
impact on increasing the amount of research money coming into 
the university. 
 
And I don’t have any doubt at all but there are many more 
students that have jobs as a result of that money that’s coming 
into the university because you know, with your association 
with the university, that there are a lot of students that are 
employed on campus in the summer, working in the offices 
where this research is being carried on. 
 
So I don’t think that you can say that we’re not doing anything 
in so far as helping students get jobs in the summer. If they 
didn’t have the research dollars coming in and through the 
programs that we provided, there would be a lot more students 
that wouldn’t have jobs. So I think that has been very, very 
positive. 
 
I would also indicate that we’ve been doing a lot in so far as 
raising the awareness of students as to what opportunities do 
exist in this area because we’re not just planning for today, 
we’re looking at the future a few years down the road because 
we’re going to need many, many more people in the area of 
research and engineering. 
 
You’re talking now as well  your last question was to do with 
the election promise with regard to moneys being allotted for 
technology transfer  we’re in the process right now, 
discussions are going on with other 

departments and the research council as to the best way of 
utilizing dollars to bring about technology transfer. 
 
There is a fair degree of that going on. We are providing a 
certain amount of money in that area, but there’s also money 
being provided by other government departments which is 
going into research, and some o that of course is also spinning 
off into tech transfer in companies being able to do things a 
little bit better and a little bit smarter. So those plans are under 
way right now, and as soon as we can give you more 
information on it as to how this is going to be brought about, we 
will be doing that. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, the high-tech firms of this 
province have been waiting for a year and a half to learn the 
details of the Premier’s $10 million a year for five years seed 
money promise for high technology, and I don’t think they 
should have to wait a year and a half to find out the details. 
Now you’re telling us that plans are being made, and in the 
future we may hear some of the details; people have been 
waiting for those details for a year and a half. 
 
On October 19 I asked the Premier about this very question and 
he indicated that, quote: 
 

I promised in the next five years that we would have a 
program in this province that encourages high-tech 
development, that we would rank among the best in the 
country, and that we would spend up to 10 million a year 
over a five-year program. I promised that, Mr. Speaker. 
All I can say to the hon. member: you watch, you watch us 
deliver on a five-year program for high technology. 

 
Those were the words of the Premier of this province on 
October 19, 1987, a full year after his election campaign 
promise on October 10, 1986. You watch, he says. I’m 
watching, and the high-tech firms in this province are watching. 
We want to see that $10 million in seed money for new 
high-tech firms. And I want to know when we can expect to see 
it from you, the minister for high technology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I would point out that 
during the course of the last year and the plans for this coming 
year, there is more money flowing from Science and 
Technology into the various companies, high-tech companies, 
and also where we are looking at transfer of technology into 
some of the other lower-tech companies. We’ve also got to look 
at the institute that we’re talking about, moneys that are going 
to be going into that. Some of that is certainly going to be to get 
ideas from the bench out into the commercialization, and that 
involves technology transfer. 
 
I think that you can look at some of the companies, and I’ll just 
point out three of them where there have been direct benefits 
because of the moneys that we have been assisting them with. 
Capa Software is one example; SCI-TEC is another one; 
International Road Dynamics  these are all companies that we 
have been involved in, and there have been many others. So we 
are working with the high-tech companies and we’re helping 
them to become more effective. They’re expanding their 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1177 
 

work-force, and we’re also looking at the employment of more 
technology with some of the other industries. 
 
I would also point out that there are new industries coming in 
all the time that we are involved in. We are giving them support 
in one way or another, depending on what type of project that 
they’re making application for. 
 
So There are things happening. You certainly are aware of the 
fact that the revenues have been down the last few years, and 
certainly it’s not always possible to do all the things that one 
might do if you have all kinds of money, like you people had 
back in the ’70s and didn’t do any of these things. 
 
So you’ve got to keep that in mind. but we are committed to 
getting more high technology going and the industry is 
growing. Certainly there’s lots of evidence of that in Saskatoon, 
and I think if you look around here in Regina you can see it as 
well. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Glowing words, Mr. Minister, but no money. 
You refuse to talk about the $10 million over five years that 
your Premier promised a year and a half ago, and then 
re-promised on October 19 of last year. He said, you just watch 
us go; you watch us deliver on a five-year program in high 
technology. And I’m taking him at his word. 
 
And I think it’s . . . I must say, I commend you for not putting 
your foot in your mouth, because you’re skating on very thin 
ice. Because you aren’t talking about the $10 million  very 
wisely so. Because I say this was a political manoeuvre by the 
Premier of this province and nothing but that  a political 
manoeuvre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  This $10 million over five year, $50 million 
is imaginary money  imaginary money  and every single 
Saskatchewan high-tech firm in the province knows that. They 
have your number, Mr. Minister. That number is $50 million 
over five years, and you can’t deliver on it. You won’t deliver 
on it. 
 
You talk about the New Democratic government not having a 
high-technology policy or department. I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Minister, the New Democratic government, when it governed 
this province, did not go out and promise $50 million over five 
years for high technology and not give it. 
 
Your Premier promised it. He promised it a year and a half ago; 
he promised it a year ago, and he hasn’t delivered on it, and you 
are unwilling to deliver on it. Will you finally admit that that 
was just a political promise and imaginary money, pure hype 
from the Premier? Will you admit that, Mr. Minister? For once 
be honest with the high-tech firms in this province and say there 
ain’t going to be a $50 million fund for high-tech firms, seed 
money for high-tech firms. will you finally admit that we’ll 
never see that money from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I would point out to 
the member opposite that this government is committed to 
science and technology, and probably in 

the neighbourhood of 120 or $130 million are being spent on 
research and development within this province. And some of 
that, certainly, is going towards technology transfer. And I’ve 
already indicated to him that certainly, if there’s more money, 
you can do many more things. but the five years is not up at this 
point. 
 
We are committed to spending in the neighbourhood . . . we’re 
probably going to be spending about . . . we spent $3 million 
last year; we’ve got three and a half million dollars in there this 
year. And certainly there’s going to have to be more money 
found as far as the Ag-Bio Institute is concerned, and there are 
other programs that are going to be coming in that we’re going 
to have to look at getting additional funding. 
 
So we’re doing what we can with the funds that we have, but I 
think we have to take a look at the economic responsibility. 
And there are other priorities, certainly, as well. But we’re 
doing the best that we can, and we’ll keep moving in that 
direction of helping the high-tech companies and other 
companies as we can. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Fifty million dollars over five years, from the 
Premier of the province. No details, no game plan, no time 
frame, no money, no commitment  that’s the bottom line. No 
$50 million seed money for high-tech firms, Mr. Minister, and 
that is a broken PC election promise. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know 
what the hon. member feels we’ve been doing with all the 
money that we’ve been spending over the last year. He’s talking 
about $50 million and no money spent. I’ve already indicated 
the amount that is being spent by the various department and 
certainly what’s been spent out of our department. And there 
has been a lot of money allocated to this particular area, and we 
certainly want to continue making sure that the dollars count 
where they’re most needed. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, the Department of Science and 
Technology has become just about a joke. There’s no funding in 
support for science education; there’s little support for science 
students getting employment. There is all sorts of scams with 
the tax credit and the venture capital system that’s been set up, 
and money going out for manufacturing that doesn’t exist  
and that’s one of the criteria for getting venture capital grants, is 
to be able to produce manufacturing in Saskatchewan. There’s 
money that’s been promised in the Canada/Saskatchewan 
subsidiary agreement that doesn’t exist; there’s the $50 million 
over five years that doesn’t exist. 
 
And it just proves, again and again, my point that this 
department is hot air and hype; it’s boosterism; it’s promises 
that don’t exist in substance. And that is a betrayal to the people 
of Saskatchewan who very much want to see some substantive 
and careful planning in the area of high tech. And you 
particularly would be well advised to surround yourself with 
some people that know what they’re doing instead of continuing 
to bumble around in this area without the support system that 
you need to be credible. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have some very specific questions that 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1178 
 

have been asked to other departments, and I want to wind up 
these estimates by asking you these questions. I would like to 
get the name, the title, and the salary of each one of your 
personal staff. I would like to know if any of them have had a 
pay change in the last 12 months, and if so, what it was, and 
including any remuneration for moving to Saskatoon. May I 
have that? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting 
the comments that the member makes opposite, and it’s just 
typical, I think, of all the rhetoric that we’ve heard. You’re 
talking about the Department of Science and Technology and 
the fact that nothing is happening. I take great pride in pointing 
out to you that the Department of Science and Technology and 
the activity that’s going on in this province is looked upon as 
one of the leaders as far as the country is concerned. 
 
So I mean for you to make some of the statements that you’re 
making, they’re just totally out of line if you’d really take a 
look at what’s happening across the country. The programs that 
we provide, and the policies that we’re following, of course, 
there is close consultation with industry as well as with the 
universities and the research councils. So we are trying to meet 
the needs that are being indicated to us. And that consultation is 
certainly going to be continuing. 
 
As I indicated to you earlier in the estimates, we plan on setting 
up an advisory council to the Department of Science and 
Technology within the near future, and that is going to provide 
us ongoing information and support as well. So I mean, these 
are things that are happening at the present time. 
 
Now with regard to salaries, we can certainly provide that 
information for you. I can either read them out to you or I can 
send it over. I’m not sure what you’re referring to in so far as 
moves to Saskatoon. There hasn’t been any expenditure for 
moves to Saskatoon since the department moves up there, 
which was a year ago last summer. So there’s been no money 
allocated in that area at all. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I was referring to any extra remuneration that 
was being provided to staff because they had to move. Was 
there any extra money given to staff beyond their salaries for 
the move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  No, any of the moves in so far as the 
department was concerned, all of that was taken care of prior to 
September 1, 1986. So there is nothing in the current year at all 
in so far as personal staff or department staff. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Do any of the people in your department have a 
government car or a car allowance? You can send me these 
answers in writing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  We can certainly send that to you in 
writing. I’m the only one that has a car. The deputy minister 
does receive a car allowance, but we can send you all of that 
information. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I’d also like to know about the 

out-of-province travel in 1987-88 by the minister, the staff  
the date, the destination, the number of persons on the trips, the 
purpose and the total cost. If I can have that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I can have that in writing? Okay, and the total 
in-province ministerial air travel in 1987-88 with the same 
details as I just asked you for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, that’ll be made available. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I also would like to know what costs in 1987-88 
your department incurred for polling, advertising, aircraft 
charter or lease, and in each case the date, the purpose, the firm 
and the cost. Can I have that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. That’s provided 
in the . . . been provided in the past, and we certainly will do 
that again. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I’m specifically interested in whether the 
department did any business in 1987-88 or to date in ’88-89 
with Band City Aviation, and if so, the date, the purpose and the 
cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  We haven’t done any business with 
that firm this year that I’m aware of. We can certainly check our 
records. The majority of the air travel is with exec air. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I’d also like to know the total amount paid by 
the department to the property management corporation in 
’87-88 and anticipated to be paid in ’88-89. For each year, for 
what purposes were these moneys paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  That is set out in the Estimates, and 
we dealt with it a couple of weeks ago in so far as some of the 
specifics for the rental and renovations and things like that that 
had been done. If you still require more information on that, we 
can get it together for you. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Okay, I’ll have that in writing. And then I’d also 
like to get an itemized list of the facilities  the offices, the 
compounds, the parking lots  provided to your department by 
the property management corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I’ve already indicated in the 
Estimates where we are leasing or renting space in the T.C. 
Douglas Building here in Regina and in the Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon. We did deal with that, but we can certainly give you 
the addresses of those facilities. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Have you also given me the number of square 
feet, or in the case of the parking lots, the number of stalls in 
each of the facilities that you’ve outlined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  We can give you the facilities in 
square metres; that’s what we have it in. 
 
Ms. Smart:  And parking stalls, please, if you have that. 
 
So am I correct in assuming that you’re leasing all the facilities 
that you operate in this department? 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1179 
 

Specifically, are there any instances where the facility is not 
leased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I didn’t hear your last question. 
 
Ms. Smart:  My question was: are all the facilities that you 
occupy leased or are there any instances where the facility is not 
leased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, all of the 
facilities that we use are leased. And with regard to the parking, 
I believe we have two spaces here in Regina and 10 in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I also would like to get an itemized list of the 
services being provided by the property management 
corporation and the amount being charged to the department for 
those services today  that’s beyond the space, the services  
and how much was paid in fiscal ’87-88, the mail service, the 
government automobiles’ cost, the furnishings, etc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, we provided 
that in the past and we dealt with it a couple of weeks ago in 
estimates as to the specifics, and we can provide that to you. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well I’m really amazed that you say you dealt 
with them in estimates, because you haven’t been asked those 
questions yet. I’m asking them now. 
 
Thank you for giving me those answers, Mr. Minister, and 
thank your officials for being here to talk with us. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a 
couple of straight administrative-type questions. On item 1, Mr. 
Minister, I don’t believe this has been asked, but you have 
under personal services, 11.3 person-years. You have that last 
year and this year, but the amount of money that you have 
allocated is $100,000 less. I’m sure you’ll have an explanation 
for why or how you will have the same number of person-years 
but $100,000 less in money to pay for those person-years. What 
is the explanation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Did you say for administration? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well the difference there is, I think, 
some $23,000, and so there’s not a great amount of money 
there. I suppose that some of it was possibly to do with the fact 
that we did have people on the year before that had much more 
seniority. I suppose their salaries were probably higher than 
some of the people that are coming in now. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  I’m sorry, I was more specific. I was 
asking under personal services, and the difference there is in 
fact $81,000, Mr. Minister. Have you had that much movement 
in staff and personnel, that the people you now have are getting 
paid  well it’s only 11 people, 11 person-years  are getting 
paid $81,000 less? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You will 
notice that there’s a significant difference in the cost 

for other expenses; the overall figure  that’s what I was 
looking at  is about $23,000 less. I think what we found, that 
breaking it down like w have here maybe more accurately 
represents what the actual expenditures are for. 
 
I think we would . . . as I indicated through, some of the salaries 
are probably going to be a little bit lower there, but that 
certainly is not that large an amount. I suppose, too, that we can 
look at the fact here that in some cases we find that we may 
have to do some contracting of services because of a particular 
type of project or a particular type of expertise that we may 
require with some of the high-tech companies. So that’s going 
to be filtering down into other expenses. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Minister, I’ve been there before. In 
fact, I’ve been the chairman of the treasury board. I know that 
under personal services, you don’t include contracting . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . But I’m not asking you abut other 
expenses; I’m asking you, under personal services, how you can 
have the same number of person-years from one year to the next 
and have a reduction in the amount of money allocated, 
appropriated, of $81,000 unless your Minister of Finance is 
trying to cook the books. 
 
Now will you explain to this House: how you can have 11.3 
person-years with an $81,000 reduction in appropriation? I was 
not meaning to be argumentative. I simply asked you a straight 
administrative question; I wanted an answer. Give us the 
answer and I’ll go on to my next question. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the additional 
expenditure, of course, in 1987-88 was due to the fact that in 
fact there were two additional people in those positions up until 
the end of May. So there was an additional expenditure at that 
part of the year. We did drop down at that point then to the 
11.3, so the expenditure was higher than for the previous year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  So are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that 
if I look at the Supplementary Estimates, I ought to be able to 
find in the Supplementary Estimates, under Science and 
Technology, an additional expenditure for these extra two 
people? 
 
Now I’ve got the Supplementary Estimates in my hand and I’m 
trying to locate that, Mr. Minister, and I can’t. If you spent 
more money on two additional people that you do not have 
appropriated for in your 1987-88 budget, it ought to show in 
here. So I don’t know that your argument holds any water. Now 
will you try again, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the information that I 
have, that there was down-sizing that occurred at that particular 
time, at the end of May — but I think that if you consider the 
fact that the $607,000 that’s indicated here is only an estimate; 
the actual expenditure for that year was 474,000, so there isn’t 
really a very large difference indicated there. So the 
down-sizing had some effect on it, but that is only an estimate. 
The actual was 474,000. 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1180 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you. That explains the question. 
I’m sorry it took so long to get it out of you, but I’m glad we 
finally got it straight. So just for clarification, you actually 
underspent the appropriation for ’87-88 by some  whatever 
amount  so that you spent actually $470-some thousand. I 
accept that. 
 
We’ll see in the Public Accounts, if we ever get them. They 
have now been several months late, as you know  as a matter 
of fact, over a year now in which we have not received those 
Public Accounts. I guess that’s clearly . . . 
 
We now have evidence of why the government refuses to 
provide those Public Accounts, Mr. Chairman, because in the 
opposition we try to find out what is being proposed to be spent 
this year compared to what was spent last year. We’re unable to 
do that, because for on, we can’t get answers from the minister, 
who are confused because they don’t know those answers or are 
not forthcoming with them. And two, because the government 
refuses to table those Public Accounts so we can make the 
appropriate comparisons. 
 
Now there is the nub of what is wrong with the lack of 
accountability on the part of the government. But I thank you 
for finally coming up with the answer, Mr. Minister. I point out 
to you that there still is a shortage of . . . less money, even less 
than what you spent last year, although you have the same 
number of person-years that you’re asking for, not only in this 
subvote, but in subvote 2 as well. 
 
So I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that throughout these 
estimates, and I’ve gone through them all for all the 
departments, there is a cooking of the books by the Minister of 
Finance so that the public does not exactly know what is being 
requested. And you don’t, and your government don’t really 
car, because you just spend willy-nilly whenever you want, 
without ever accounting for it in a timely way. But thank you 
for finally giving me the answer. I’ve got some other questions 
on some other subvotes. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 5  Statutory. 
 
Vote 15 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Science and Technology 
Vote 66 

 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Research and Development Division 

Science and Technology 
Ordinary Expenditure 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
in ’87-88 there was $829,000 appropriated. I 

don’t know whether it was spent, of course, because there’s no 
way we know unless you were prepared to tell us. But in 
1988-89 there is nothing. There’s obviously a good reason. It 
must have been shifted somewhere or it’s cancelled. Can you 
explain to us what it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. As I had 
indicated to the hon. member’s colleague earlier, this money is 
now in the economic diversification and investment fund. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I too would like to 
thank my officials. I think they’re doing a tremendous job and 
have done a very good job in getting ready for these estimates. 
And I would also like to thank the hon. members for their 
questions. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I’d like to take this opportunity to thank your 
officials, Mr. Minister, for being here and answering our 
questions. Thank you very much for the time. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 35 
 

Mr. Chairman:  Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, on my left is Mr. Jim 
Hutch, who is the president of The Saskatchewan Research 
Council, and behind him is Mr. Ron McGrath, controller. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too want to 
welcome your officials, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have just a few brief questions on The Saskatchewan Research 
Council. The reason I want to ask my questions is because on 
March 23 the Premier did announce that the research council 
was to assume the responsibility for PAMI, the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute. And I just to want to clarify 
what is happening here, or hope that you might clarify it. 
 
First of all, the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, said that 
SRC will assume responsibility for management of PAMI under 
the contract to the PAMI board, and I’m wondering . . . and 
there was some talk about the new management structure would 
be worked out. Can you report to the House, Mr. Minister, what 
that new management structure is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, with regard to 
PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute), I know that 
the member opposite is aware of the change, as far of the 
operation of it, in that Alberta has backed out. The funding, as 
far as PAMI is concerned, is now being provided by 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba. We are committed to $957,100 
for the current year, and that’s being funded out of agriculture. 
 
The Saskatchewan Research Council will be assuming, or 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1181 
 

is assuming the management of that. I’m informed that they’re 
still in the process of developing the strategies and how the 
thing is going to be operating, and we’ll certainly be very happy 
to pass that on to you just as soon as they’ve completed them. 
But discussions are going well, and it should be done in the 
very near future. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  So I guess you’re telling us, Mr. 
Minister, that that has not yet been finalized, and I want to point 
out that that’s one other example of, I think, a very 
inappropriate way for government to function: simply making 
announcements, take a blind leap of faith, and then say, well, 
we’re going to work it out at some other time. 
 
And I’m not suggesting for a moment that it’s a problem with 
the Saskatchewan Research Council. I’m saying, Mr. Minister, 
it’s a problem of you, as a minister; of the Premier, as the 
Minister of Agriculture; and of the whole approach of this 
government which is an approach that has no  absolutely no 
inkling of what good management and good planning is all 
about. As a result, we have a $3.7 billion dollar deficit because 
of that kind of mismanagement. 
 
So I’m not happy, but I have to accept your explanation that no 
. . . there was no idea about how it was going to work. You had 
to have something to announce in the throne speech, and the 
Premier had to have something to say, so he announced that this 
would take place. And then somehow down the road, who 
knows when, there would be a restructuring. 
 
But having said that, surely, since the decision was made and 
the Minister of Finance knew about the decision, you at least 
would know how much money has been provided in the 
Saskatchewan Research Council for the new function of 
managing the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute. 
 
Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, how much money has been 
appropriated to the research council to carry out it’s new 
management role? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the research council 
has been managing PAMI since April 1, and certainly it was 
necessary to make an announcement prior to the end of March. I 
think, as the member opposite can well understand, that there 
were concerns with PAMI as to how it was going to be 
operating, if and where the funding was going to be coming 
from after April 1. So SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) is 
managing it. 
 
But when I indicate that some of the strategies are still being 
developed, it’s simply to the point that the first board meeting 
has not been held yet. But SRC is in fact managing PAMI and 
has been since April 1, and, I’m sure, managing it very well. 
 
The other thing, with regard to the moneys that you’re 
wondering about, any moneys for managing will, of course, be 
coming our of the $957,000 that I indicated to you earlier. I 
would just point out, too, that the funding for Manitoba is 
425,390, so any management cost will be coming out of that 
total budget. 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  So you have not provided any 
appropriation in the Saskatchewan Research Council, as I see 
here in the Estimates, for its management function? Am I 
correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The funding, of course, that I have 
indicated here, Mr. Chairman, is simply government grants. 
There will be other moneys coming in from contracts, as I’m 
sure you understand. 
 
The management process that is taking place right now is the 
fact that SRC is operating it. There is an acting director in 
place. There’s one less position, I suppose, than there was 
before, and that of course is going to be part of the overall 
strategy, I would think, in the development of the management 
of it. That’s the information that I have. 
 
So as soon as that takes place  right now, Mr. George 
McKave is in Humboldt two days a week to assist in the 
management of PAMI, and the balance of the time the acting 
director is in charge of it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  You say, Mr. Minister, that there has 
been a reduction of one position at PAMI as a result of all this? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The position of director has been 
vacant for quite some time; in fact, I would think going back at 
least a year, and that was a person by the name of Lorne Smith, 
who is now with Science and Technology. So the position has 
been vacant for several months. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  So the net result, Mr. Minister, as part of 
your decentralization strategy, is that this position which has 
been vacant for over a year now is not going to get filled, so 
that the senior management which was part of the community 
of Humboldt, and who was really quite an important element in 
the decentralization strategy, is now no longer there. You’re 
going to abolish it, and the management is going to be taking 
place out of the city of Saskatoon. Now would you like to 
explain, Mr. Minister, how that becomes a decentralization 
approach to benefit rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
opposite has to understand that with new management taking 
over in the form of the research council that we have to have a 
bit of a transition period. And I’m sure that during that 
transition period part of the plan is going to be assess the types 
of services that are being provided by PAMI and taking a look 
at the staffing needs that they require. And in fact if they find in 
the future that they need that additional person there, they will 
be hiring someone. But until they’ve had a chance to assess it 
further and to see where they go from there, that’s the way it is 
right now. But give them some time for the transition to take 
place. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  I don’t think we have any choice other 
than to do that, Mr. Minister, because a decision has been made. 
 
I’ll ask one final question, and this is an important 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1182 
 

question. Can you provide some assurance to this House, and 
the community of Humboldt, and the people who work at 
PAMI, and the whole institution  which is a valuable one  
that this process will not result in a reduction of staff at PAMI 
because much of the functions will gradually move to what is 
happening at the research council somewhere else? Can you 
make that commitment in this House, Mr. Minister, because I 
think you do have an obligation to do that if you really believe 
your Premier’s often-stated concept of decentralization? Will 
you give that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Speaker, if one considers the 
history of the SRC, the research council have gone from 81 
people in 1983  181, sorry  in 1983 to 230 today. We can 
see that their main efforts are designed towards future growth, 
and they have had tremendous success. The same plan is going 
to be in effect as far as PAMI is concerned. They are looking at 
a growth strategy there. I think that they want to ensure that 
PAMI is getting as many contracts as possible and continuing to 
operate in a business-like manner. So as time goes on and as 
they grow, I would certainly hope that they will be employing 
more people out there, but that may well take some time. 
 
But SRC has a good record, I think, in so far as that, and under 
their management I would hope that that will continue. But 
there are no guarantees that they are going to remain at the same 
stage they are right now. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Minister, this is not a question, it’s a 
comment. It is a very telling commentary on your part to say 
there are no guarantees because that signals, that signals that 
there may very well be some plans in your government’s back 
pocket, not associated with the SRC, to further undermine the 
whole concept of PAMI. 
 
That was a very telling comment that you just made in this 
House, and all I can say to you is that I’ll be back in here next 
year, in the next session, to ask you or whoever you are 
replaced with, by  if you are replaced, it’s not my decision  
to ask the questions on some of the assurances you gave here 
today and see what happens. 
 
And my fear is that PAMI is going to have a price to pay with 
the move that you have made, and that PAMI, as we know it, is 
not going to be the PAMI that has functioned so effectively 
since its institution some time ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, my only comment to 
that would be that I think it’s unfortunate that the member 
opposite would try to cast a little bit of fear among the people 
that are employed out at PAMI at the present time or living in 
the Humboldt area, because there is certainly is no indication 
that there is going to be any job losses out there. 
 
And if you look at the history of SRC, they are going to be 
operating that plant in as efficient a way as possible and looking 
at the growth and the opportunities that exist. I would think that 
we can well look to having a bright future as far a PAMI is 
concerned. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, I’m looking at page 24 of the 
annual report for the Saskatchewan Research Council, and I 
notice under liabilities and province’s equity that 

the bank indebtedness in 1986 was $88,677 and in ’87 was 
$2,092,839, and I would just like an explanation as to why the 
bank indebtedness went up so high into the millions in 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I’m informed that 
there are two reasons for the large difference  I don’t think 
the member is even interested over there  two reasons for the 
difference: higher accounts receivable, and decrease in deferred 
income. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Yes. Is the Canadian centre for advanced 
technology still at the Saskatchewan Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Yes, it’s still there at the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  You seem to qualify that, Mr. Minister  at 
the present time. Are there any plans to move it or to close it 
down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I’m informed that they’re in the 
process of selling some of the technology, but this would result 
in the transfer of some of the employees to a manufacturing 
centre within Saskatoon. But the deal has not been totally 
finalized yet; it’s in progress. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is that 
you’re basically privatizing, or looking at privatizing the 
Canadian centre for advanced technology. Is that in fact the 
case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  No, on the contrary, Mr. Chairman, 
it’s the Canadian Centre for Advanced Instrumentation that the 
member opposite is referring to, I believe. This will always 
remain with the research council. It’s part of the technology 
which is simply being taken out of there and is going from the 
idea into the manufacturing stage. That will be taking some of 
the employees with it, and I think that’s great. But as far as the 
centre, that will remain there. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Why is some of the technology being sold off 
then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  This is a technology that is better 
handled by the private sector, and I think that it’s good 
whenever we can get the ideas from the research labs and the 
centres out into the private sector where the manufacturing is 
going to take place. The research council certainly isn’t into the 
manufacturing business. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Just so that I understand then: will the centre 
continue to operate with the same funding available for it at the 
Saskatchewan Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  The CCAI (Canadian Centre for 
Advance Instrumentation), as such, has always been on its own. 
It doesn’t receive funding from the research council. It receives 
its money from doing contracts with private business. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, do you  let’s put it this way 
 do you envision any change in the mandate or the work, the 
role of the centre in the next year? 
  



 
May 9, 188 

1183 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well it’s pretty hard to say there’s 
not going to be any change, because they’re always working on 
different project there, and I’m sure that they will continue to 
do so. Hopefully there’ll be other projects that they can get 
involved in that will spin off as well, such as the one that we’re 
talking about now. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Have the employees involved been given 
guarantees of jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I point out that the 
SRC is not a government department, and there are no 
guarantees as far as the jobs are concerned. But certainly the 
information that I have, that the employees will by going along 
with the technology into the manufacturing. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  And when can we expect to hear details of 
this move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  As I indicated, talks are going on 
now. The thing is not finalized. And we certainly are not in a 
position to say today exactly when this is going to happen. It 
really hasn’t that much to do with the overall operation of the 
research council. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

The Saskatchewan Research Council 
Vote 66 

 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Vote 66 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

The Saskatchewan Research Council 
Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 35 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I too would 
like to thank the officials for being here and providing the 
information. I would hope, and I’m sure, that they will carry on 
with the good work that they’re doing at the research council. 
 
I would also commend the critic and the former critic for the 
interest that they have taken, not only in the research council 
but in the high-tech industry. And I would certainly encourage 
them to in the future pay a visit to the research council because 
there’s no better way to learn what’s going on there than to 
visit. And I’d also encourage you to visit some of our high-tech 
companies in Saskatoon and in Regina because we have a lot of 

exciting things going on, and we’re very proud of that. 
 
So thank you very much. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, I’d like to thank the officials for 
being here, for answering our questions. Those of us who 
represent Saskatoon constituencies are very interested in the 
research council work, and are familiar with the research 
council and will be visiting it in the future, as we have in the 
past. We welcome your invitation to do so, and emphasize 
again our concern that this also be a project that develops in a 
diversified and decentralized way around the province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 


