


















































May 31, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 31, 1988 
 

1719 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Just 
before the legislature adjourned at 5 o’clock, I was asking the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
to supply me with the costs of advertising during certain years. I 
wonder if the minister would be prepared, now that he’s had 
two hours to peruse the figures for the . . . provide me with the 
1987 and 1986 figures for the total advertising paid out by his 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m glad to see that 
he’s modified his request a little bit. My officials went back and 
put in a lot of time trying to struggle with your question. We’ve 
discovered, Mr. Chairman, that 1982-1983 is filed away in dead 
storage some place. We don’t even know; it would probably 
mean going through microfiche files and all the like to get that 
done. 
 
And as I said at the outset, I’m prepared to supply him with the 
information that he requires, but whether we could do it in 7 
days or 10 days or 14 days, I can’t say after my officials looked 
at it for a couple of hours tonight. It’s going to be a horrendous 
task, and I would ask the member to be a little bit more 
considerate. 
 
And if you could outline to me, under the circumstances — 
because I don’t know what ’82 and ’83 is really going to do for 
you, and we’ve gone through this year after year after year — 
but if you could just outline exactly for me what you would 
really like and break it down, my officials will pay close 
attention. And if we feel that we can supply you that within 
seven days or within 10 days, if that’s the period that they will 
require, then I’ll respond to you after I hear if you’re just 
prepared to relax a little bit. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just asked for the years, 
now, ’86 and ’87. I certainly can appreciate there’s technical 
difficulties for the previous years, but do you have available 
now the total advertising paid out by Sask Housing Corporation 
in 1986 and in 1987? Do you have those figures available? The 
total advertising of . . . Certainly those are the only two years 
that I would expect you to have on hand right now, and if 
you’re able to provide me with that information, that would be 
fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I specified earlier that we’ve got the 
media advertising and that’s the only breakdown that we’ve got 
at this time. The rest is going to require some research and 
breakdown. It’s all bulked into “other,” practically. 
 
So if you would be prepared to just list for me what you want, 
how you want it broken down and the items that you want us to 
break down, fine. We’ll supply that to you. But I’m not in a 
position, nor are my officials, and even  

after two hours now, to be able to very easily determine what 
you want. 
 
You know, you say, well is this advertising, or is this stationary, 
or what is this? And I think that if you’re reasonable, we’re 
prepared . . . We have nothing to fear and nothing to hide, and 
I’m prepared to supply you with the information. Give me an 
exact list of what you want and we will provide that to you. 
And I don’t have any hesitation in doing that. 
 
But my officials tonight, all we’ve got with us is few little 
briefing books and everything. The filing cabinets and 
everything is back at the shop so that’s where we’re going to 
have to go to draw on this. Everybody understands that — even 
you do. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps the reason you’re 
stonewalling on the question is because that the portion you 
paid out in 1986 in advertising for the media, in media 
advertising alone, totalled over $200,000 by your own figures, 
but you haven’t included the other advertising that you’ve done 
— for example, the money that you paid to Dave Tkachuk and 
D-Mail, if you paid any, in order to publicize the home 
program. 
 
What I’m asking you for is a total list of the advertising, 
including mail-outs by the department, of brochures and of 
information in regards to the home program as well as the 
advertising that you paid to print media and, thirdly, to be 
specific, a list with the amount of how much advertising you 
paid to the advertising agencies in the province. 
 
Now that doesn’t seem to be a very hard list for the years ’86 
and ’87. I suspect that you probably have that information 
available and you could make that information available within 
a very short period of time. But I also suspect that you’re 
stonewalling that issue. What I want you to give me is your 
assurance that you will provide that to the Legislative Assembly 
within seven days because that doesn’t take very much time. 
 
You have . . . You know, and your officials know, how much 
you paid out to send out the advertising on the home program, 
an you can’t tell me any different. You know how much you put 
out in media because you’ve already given me the figures. I 
want you to just to give me the total and also the breakdown as 
well. 
 
I don’t know what’s the big hassle because we could get over 
these estimates really quickly if you say you’re going to give 
me the total amount that you paid out in that kind of 
advertising. Because to advertise the home program is 
advertising through the brochures, the printing costs, and also 
the distribution costs of that. If you will include that with your 
print media cost for ’86 and ’87, then you’ll have the total 
figure that I want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I want it clearly understood, if after all of 
your discussion, and I haven’t been able to pick out exactly 
what you want, and I’m sorry — and I’m not stonewalling — 
but, you know, you’ve rambled on about quite a few things. But 
if we can clarify something, if all you want me to supply is the 
cost of the brochures and the  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1720 
 

printing and the distribution costs of the home program in 1986, 
I’m prepared to supply you with that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I want that for 1986, that plus the media costs 
which you have already read out, the media advertising, and 
also the costs incurred in 1987. Because the annual report is 
out; that financial year is over; you should have those costs 
compiles; and you should be able to provide that. If you will 
provide me with that, that’s all — including the distribution 
costs — that’s all the we’re asking for here tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I will undertake to supply 
for the year 1986 the brochure, the printing, and the distribution 
of the home program costs and the 1987 advertising cost. Is that 
clear? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Yes. Provided that the years are separate, I think 
that we’re on the same wavelength on that; ’86 year advertising, 
including media and the things you related; ’87 with the same 
thing. Okay, if you will provide me that breakdown, that will be 
fine. 
 
Mr. Minister, before we get into . . . And I’d like you to tell us 
when you’ll supply that information for us. If you can supply 
that tonight, then just indicate yes or no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already supplied in 
1986 and ’87 media cost. There won’t be any change in that 
figure; I’ve already supplied that. So you’ve got that, but if you 
want me to include those figures again, I will. 
 
And then the second thing I will supply you with, but I can’t 
supply it tonight, is in 1986 the brochure, the printing and the 
distribution of the home program, and that will be supplied 
within seven to 10 days. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Minister. I have your undertaking: 
seven to 10 days. I’ll remind you if that’s not able. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, prior to proceeding with the votes on this 
estimate, I want to make it very clear to you the meaning and 
content of the statements that I made earlier on this afternoon in 
regards to the question of Jenny Wakelam and her hiring. I 
referred specifically to Mr. Boys in that. 
 
Mr. Boys was one of the officials that I contacted in finding out 
what happened and why Jenny Wakelam was not hired by your 
department. I did not mean it imply — and I want Mr. Boys to 
be assured of this and the Assembly assured of that — that Mr. 
Boys was the one who told me, who did not tell me the truth 
because I contacted other officials in your department who I 
won’t name here tonight. 
 
And I understand Mr. Boys obviously was acting under the 
directions of yourself and of Mr. Little, in regards to Mr. Little 
being the head of Sask Housing Corporation, and I don’t want 
to in any way leave the impression that it was Mr. Boys who 
did not tell me the truth. 
 
There were stories, there were explanations given to me by 
officials in your department which varied one with  

each other, which varied one with each other, and I want to 
make it clear that I stand by my statement that when I talked to 
officials of your department, I was not given the truth in regards 
to the Jenny Wakelam story. 
 
I did not, however, mean to imply that it was Mr. Boys, and if 
Mr. Boys feels aggrieved, I certainly want to take this 
opportunity to express my regrets and my personal apologies. I 
did not, sir, mean to imply that you did not tell me the truth. 
 
What I said and what I still, and I think that it was a breach on 
Mr. Little’s conduct, is when I requested from Mr. Boys — and 
obviously he passed the request along to Mr. Little and, 
hopefully, to yourself — the resume of the person who was 
hired in that, I felt that it was a breach of etiquette not to supply 
that particular document. I want to clear . . . So it’s understood, 
I stand by my earlier statements that I did not receive the story 
as related to the real facts in the matter when I contacted the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. I also want to make it clear 
that I did not . . . I do not mean to imply that Mr. Boys was the 
one who did not give me the truth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m willing to accept 
his explanation on behalf of Mr. Boys. Mr. Boys is a long-time 
civil servant. He began his career with the Government of 
Saskatchewan in 1978; began his career with Sask Housing in 
1981 under the NDP administration and has worked his way 
diligently up through the ranks to the position that he now 
holds. But I still am not satisfied with the member from 
Rosemont and his explanation of officials. It does not go, Mr. 
Boys, Mr. Little, to the minister. It goes the other way, from 
Mr. Boys down to the director of personnel and through the 
management system of Sask Housing. 
 
(1915) 
 
And I would like to point out that the member from Rosemont 
still, all in all, is slamming long-time professional civil servants 
inside this legislature. He shouldn’t do that; he shouldn’t pick 
on people in here. If he’s got a complaint, let him name the 
people outside of this legislature so that they can indeed offer 
some explanation and not to be accused of telling a falsehood in 
this Assembly, but rather be accused of lying — if that’s the 
right word to use, of not telling the truth. Let him say that 
outside the Assembly and put a name on it, but don’t come in 
here and say that the chain of command works up this way to 
the minister. 
 
I don’t get involved in the daily hiring practices of the 
corporation, and neither should I. And I don’t even know this 
lady. I’m not aware of anything that occurred in this whole 
instance, and for him to stand here and take the hierarchy apart 
for one of his constituency is not fair — is not fair to her, is not 
fair to other people that applied, is not fair to the hiring 
practices of the corporation, is not fair to the union that exists at 
the corporation and, indeed, is not fair to the management of the 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, all I can say in reply to that, 
I stand by my statements. My beef — my beef, and I’ll say it 
here — is with you and your management of the Sask Housing 
Corporation. We say we have been backed  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1721 
 

by the facts. History will prove us right in that, is that you and 
your administration has made a mess of the Sask Housing 
Corporation. You have not carried out its mandate; you have 
exceeded its mandate. And I will stand by the statements that I 
made earlier in regards to not getting the full story in relation to 
the Sask Housing Corporation. 
 
That, however, will get us nowhere arguing that. I think that’s 
all the questions I have regarding item no. 1. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think what is required is that we need to 
leave to revert to Committee of the Whole. If we do, I will ask 
for leave to revert to Committee of the Whole. The House can 
do anything with leave, I think, if the Clerk can advise you. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The Chair has to report progress to the 
Speaker; the Speaker will have to ask for leave to revert to 
Committee of the Whole; and then we have to . . . 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask for 
leave to move to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to declare a Day of Mourning for 
Workers Killed or Injured in the Course of their 

Employment 
 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Schimidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
First of all, I’d like to say that, on behalf of the government, we 
think this is a fine Bill, that it’s unfortunate that we have to pass 
a Bill of this nature, because we would like to eliminate death 
and injury. But from a practical point of view, we know that it 
may be possible to eliminate work-related deaths but probably 
not possible to ever eliminate all injuries in the work place. 
 
Although we do work hard to try to eliminate these injuries, if 
my recollection is correct, the number of deaths in the work 
place has gone down from about 26 last year to about 13 this 
year. I know that the number was cut in half over the average. 
So last year was an  

exceptionally good year for the reduction of death in the work 
place. 
 
In addition, we implemented, through my department, we hired 
two employees to work in the area of agricultural safety, a 
particularly dangerous business in Saskatchewan when you 
consider agriculture is one of our major industries, and yet, it is 
one of the most dangerous industries in Saskatchewan. We’ve 
had these people on the road at agricultural fairs, at Agribition 
and things of that nature, and it seems that in the last year the 
number of injuries, and in particular the number of agricultural 
deaths, has decreased by nearly 50 per cent. 
 
In addition Saskatchewan has a proud tradition, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, of having a Workers’ Compensation Board that is 
renowned for its efficiency throughout North America — 
throughout the world. We had people, a delegation from New 
Zealand, visiting here studying our workers’ compensation 
system. I was pleased to host them last year. We’ve had 
delegations from Wyoming and Colorado and various states in 
the United States. 
 
Our Workers’ Compensation Board . . . and I would say that 
money cannot compensate for the pain and suffering that 
workers endure when they’re injured on the job. But as much as 
possible we have a progressive Worker’s Compensation Board 
— progressive to the extent that it concentrates on 
rehabilitation. It has the most generous benefits in North 
America, and we do as much as money can accomplish to assist 
injured workers as a result of the injuries in their work place. 
 
We have also had over the years I might say, under a Liberal 
government, an NDP government and a Conservative 
government, a well-managed board. There we over those years 
allegations of patronage in the appointment of people to the 
board, but all of those people — whether they were Liberal, 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), NDP, 
Conservative — have served well, and therefore the board has a 
high return on its investments. It has adequate reserves, and I 
know that the workers of Saskatchewan and the employers 
appreciate what I will here say and congratulate and boast on 
behalf of all former governments of Saskatchewan in the type 
of board they have set up and the way it has operated. 
 
We on this side of the government have tried and, I might say, 
have been successful in continuing with that successful board. 
We will be introducing legislation to make that board work 
even better. And so all in all there is a great recognition of the 
need for compensation and safety instruction on the prevention 
of injury in the work place. In addition we are introducing now 
before this Assembly the work-place hazardous materials 
system to protect workers from hazardous goods, chemicals in 
the work place. 
 
And so all in all I would say that, while unfortunately this day is 
necessary because we can not solve the problem entirely, that 
all members of the Assembly here agree that we should 
continue with every effort to prevent death and injury in the 
work place, and that this particular Bill is proper to give 
recognition to those people who have been injured, those people 
who have died in the work place. 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1722 
 

And it is also proper to pass a Bill of this nature and have this 
type of day of recognition so that there’s a greater awareness for 
others to be safe in the work place. And so you have the 
commitment of this government and I’m sure of all members of 
the Assembly to try to stop these type of injuries and to go 
along with the recognition of this particular day. And I would 
say that I have no difficulty in supporting this Bill. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
support both my colleague and the member from Moose Jaw 
North, but I wanted to make a few personal comments. 
 
I had had some brief discussion with the hon. member from 
Moose Jaw and had wanted to put forth a personal point of view 
and perhaps a point of view for consideration in the future, Mr. 
Chairman, particularly as it relates to injured workers. 
 
This Bill before us is one that declares a day of mourning for 
workers killed or injured in the course of their employment. 
While none of us in this House disagree with this Bill, I had 
brought to the attention of both my colleague and the hon. 
member from Moose Jaw that perhaps in the future we would 
look at the situation of injured workers in different manner. 
 
The reason I say that, Mr. Chairman, several points, and I go 
from a personal point of view, as I said earlier on it. I know 
from personal experience what families go through with injured 
workers. I know that it’s not easy, particularly if the injuries are 
serious, and I know that after the trauma and the shock is over, 
that, in fact, the last thing that they want is sympathy, 
mourning, or pity. 
 
It becomes very much a task of learning how to live again, 
learning how to take your disabilities and put them into 
abilities. And I think we would all agree that we could probably 
name at least one person each of us have met that have taken 
these disabilities and in fact probably have ended up with more 
abilities than a lot of us in this room. 
 
So the day of mourning was one that bothered me, as it related 
to injured workers. If there was anything that an injured worker 
and their family requires after such an event happens, it is 
empathy and understanding. And while I am not going to put 
forth any amendments to this Bill, perhaps next year when we 
are looking at the proclamation, we can address it at that time, 
and the Assembly will consider the language that they use when 
they are trying to relate to disabilities as it relates to injured 
workers. 
 
Having said those few comments, I want to commend the 
member from Moose Jaw North for bringing it forward. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, just in very brief response 
to the member from Swift Current, first of all I’d like to say that 
I sincerely do appreciate the sentiments that she brings forward 
and that it’s a matter that we’ve discussed before. And I agree 
whole-heartedly that, for workers who have been injured, 
empathy is much more  

valuable than sympathy in terms of assisting that process of 
rehabilitation where possible. 
 
The difficulty in finding the precise wording has to do with the 
fact that the Bill is providing recognition for workers who are 
also killed on the job and therefore the conclusion to use the 
word “mourning.” Just by way of clarification as well, and in no 
way to belittle the sentiments that the hon. member from Swift 
Current raises, I simply point out that the wording in entitling 
the Bill is entirely consistent with the proclamations that were 
declared in both 1987 and 1988 here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and is also consistent with proclamations 
declared in municipalities in this province, as well as by 
municipalities and provincial jurisdictions across the nation as 
well. 
 
Just finally one item, Mr. Chairman. I checked with Hansard 
just earlier today and noted that I made a slight error in my 
concluding remarks on second reading, where I made reference 
. . . in making reference to the day on which this particular 
recognition would occur. By a slip of the tongue, I used the 
phrase “April 27,” and I simple want to clarify, Mr. Chairman, 
on record, that is clearly the intent of the Bill that it would be 
annually on April 28 that the day would be honoured and that 
would be consistent with jurisdictions across the country. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There is a House amendment to clause 3: 
 

Section 3 of the English version of the printed Bill be 
repealed and the following substituted therefor: 

 
This Act shall be deemed to have come into force on April 
28, 1988. 

 
There is a subsequent amendment in French to go in on the 
French side of the Bill. 
 
Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to declare a Day of Mourning for 
Workers Killed or Injured in the Course of their 

Employment. 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendment now be 
read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move 
that Bill No. 5 be now read the third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1723 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Urban Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
begin to move along on these estimates, and I want to begin by 
asking the minister some questions on a subject which we 
addressed yesterday evening at some length, after which the 
minister indicated that he would make an announcement on his 
government's intentions and his government’s . . . with regard to 
policy on the electoral system of our urban municipalities. And 
I want to say at the outset that this afternoon we heard the 
minister announce a horrendous attack on the electoral system 
and the democratic process on the cities of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that that’s regrettable. It clearly is 
a position of the government and the right of the government to 
implement its policies; they have the majority. And based on 
that decision and their decision, the public will be the judge. 
 
I just want to remind the minister that the public was a judge in 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert and in Regina, and the public said 
to the politicians of legislatures that they appreciated the system 
of municipal elections which involved the ward system. And for 
the government to say now, arbitrarily, in spite of what those 
people said, that they’re going to wipe them out, I think is 
horrendous. 
 
Now I think it’s particularly horrendous and shows the 
confusion which exists on the benches of that government and 
the acquiescence of the back-benchers to some stronger 
individuals who obviously are in cabinet, when you see the kind 
of contradiction that the minister’s announcement today 
showed. And I want to ask the minister about it. 
 
The minister announced today that he’s going to be introducing 
legislation which will abolish the ward system of electing 
councillors and alderpeople to our city councils. He has said 
that they will not have an option. Oh, he will say . . . get up to 
his feet, and he will say: oh, but they have an option. They can 
either have a two-tiered system, where 50 per cent are elected at 
large and 50 per cent are elected on the ward basis, which is the 
worst possible, the worst possible arrangement. That’s the one 
shocking thing, is that having some options before him, the 
minister decided to take the one that’s the worst, the one that 
used to exist in Ontario, the one that used to exist in Ontario in 
a lot of cities, and they worked so badly that they have 
eliminated it. 
 
And the minister knew how bad it was, because he did say . . . 
As I pointed out to him in question period on March 22, he said 
the following: 
 

The modified ward system has some  

disadvantages because it leads to very confusing municipal 
ballots and because it would create two classes of 
alderman. 

 
And he was right. Now, Mr. Minister, since you so firmly 
believed that to be the case some two months ago, how can you 
now possibly defend your imposition of exactly that system 
which you are so critical of as announced by your statement this 
afternoon? Can you explain that clearly to the public of 
Saskatchewan and show that it has anything to do with any 
reasoning other than straight partisan politics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, straight partisan politics, I 
suspect, is what the NDP had in mind in 1973 when they 
imposed the ward system. And let’s get the matter of the 
plebiscites straight; let’s understand of that, once and for all. 
And I would like the member from Regina North East to admit 
this because it’s readily available. And for those people that 
may be watching on television tonight, if they’re not already 
sick and tired about hearing about this, there were two 
plebiscites in Regina. Two plebiscites in Regina voted down the 
ward system. The NDP government of the day arbitrarily 
imposed it. In 1976, there was a plebiscite in Saskatoon that 
turned down the ward system. The NDP did nothing to change 
it, and now they accuse us, Mr. Chairman, of doing that. 
 
(1945) 
 
We conducted a review that results in a new system for this 
province and yes, we, and particularly myself, gave serious 
consideration to requiring that the three Saskatchewan cities 
that currently have wards move completely to at-large elections. 
However there was concern expressed by the councils of those 
cities and also by SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), whom I have a high regard for and consult with 
very often. We listened, Mr. Speaker, and we are retaining, we 
are retaining a form of the ward system that the four largest 
cities may have if they opt for it. 
 
And it’s quite a contrast to the previous government, Mr. 
Chairman. That government, as I mentioned, imposed the ward 
system, and there was no compromise, there was no middle 
ground. And, in fact, that regime also introduced a Bill, Mr. 
Chairman, imposing wards on school systems in the large cities 
despite virtually unanimous outcry from the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and from school 
boards. And yet they introduced that legislation as well without 
having any regard for any of these people. We at least had some 
regard. 
 
Now the question, I suppose, can be asked that, you know, why 
is this government requiring cities which have wards to adopt a 
split ward at large? Well, you know, why is the move away 
from the full ward system not subject to a vote of electors? 
Well, as I said, we’ve got to compromise with them. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, let me quote the member 
from Saskatoon Westmount, who wrote in a letter to the 
Leader-Post on May 3, 1973, and I’ll quote what he wrote: 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1724 
 

The British North America Act puts the responsibility for 
creating local government institutions on the provincial 
government. The provincial government should design and 
put into effect the best democratic system of local 
government. 

 
And that’s exactly what we have tried to do, but we have done 
so with a great deal of sensitivity to the expressed wishes of the 
elected members of the city councils concerned. 
 
Now I’ll deal with another specific — some of the concerns 
raised with the split ward system from time to time in Canada. 
And I mentioned such two concerns a month or so ago in the 
press from which he quoted, the concern about the split ward 
system producing two classes of alderman. I have since 
discovered that that problem really only exists where a board of 
control is part of the split system. And that board of control was 
a very important part of that Ontario model and it gave special 
powers to those alderman that were elected at large. 
 
Our new model does not do that and, as a result, my fears in 
that regard have been dispelled as a result of consultations, and 
in fact my officials have been in touch with academics and city 
officials in Thunder Bay and in St. John’s, Newfoundland 
where the split system is used. And it seems that all alderman 
enjoy the same status legally and in the eyes of the voters. I 
think that that puts to rest his concerns. 
 
And I just want to emphasize one more time that the ward 
system was imposed by that opposition now, the government of 
the day in 1973. Despite plebiscites against it, they imposed it. 
 
We now, after extensive consultation, have agreed to a modified 
ward system that I think, as far as it relates to the taxpayers of 
the urban centres, will be totally pleasing to them. Because 
now, Mr. Chairman, they not only have the representation from 
their ward and their ward alderman to go to, but truly in a big 
democratic fashion for the first time since 1973, the voters of 
our major cities will be able to elect the entire council, a 
membership of six of 10. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, if the minister is so 
concerned about the voters of the cities of this province, I want 
to ask him: why will he not give them the right to choose 
whether they want to elect their alderman under the ward 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, he’s talking, of course, 
about plebiscites. At this time I would like to quote from 
Hansard what the now Leader of the Opposition, who was part 
of the government in 1973, when asked the same question of 
plebiscites. He said this: 
 

Plebiscites are costly and expensive procedures. So I urge 
those who call for a plebiscite to look at the realities of the 
situation. 

 
And he goes on to say . . . And as we debate this Bill more fully 
in committee, I have several quotes that I will attribute to the 
Leader of the Opposition on this matter  

and the matter of plebiscites. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I will let the Leader of the 
Opposition speak for himself. I only wish the Minister of Urban 
Affairs would speak for himself and for the government as on 
the matter of their policy. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you this: why will you not allow the 
voters in the cities of Saskatchewan to choose what system they 
want to have under which to elect their councillors or alderman? 
 
You are going to tell them that you’re going to impose a 
two-tier system. You’re saying to them that they might choose 
one system, and at large, but you’re at the same time saying 
you’re not going to allow them to choose the ward system. 
Now, Mr. Minister, why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve answered that 
more than several times. You know, they, in spite of two 
plebiscites against them in 1973, in spite of two plebiscites in 
Regina saying the ward system was not acceptable, they 
imposed it. In 1976, in Saskatoon, another plebiscite saying no, 
and they didn’t remove it. 
 
I can’t even begin to understand the argument, and neither will 
the people of the cities be able to understand that argument. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister still 
hasn’t answered the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re allowing a choice between two-tier 
system and an at-large system, I suppose that’s fair — and I’m 
not sure who’s going to decide that, the council or the electorate 
— if you’re going to allow that, as you have been quoted in the 
press, why won’t you allow them also to choose the ward 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The simple answer, I suppose, is the same 
way that you imposed the system. I still believe, I guess, in my 
heart of hearts that that plebiscite — those two plebiscites held 
in Regina where they didn’t want the ward system, that one 
plebiscite held in Saskatoon where they didn’t want the ward 
system, and you arbitrarily imposed it because you believed that 
that was your responsibility at the time; and I quoted the 
member from Saskatoon Westmount — I say the same now. 
 
I believe that it’s my responsibility to offer to these 
municipalities the very best form of municipal government they 
can have, because it’s designed for the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if you are so deeply 
concerned about arbitrarily imposing anything, why are you 
arbitrarily imposing this system and not allowing the 
municipalities to choose the ward system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Because the ward system was imposed on 
them by the NDP. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I ask you, Mr. Minister, did the voters in 
Regina and Saskatoon choose by vote, by large margins, to 
have the ward system in 1978 or 1976, I forget which, but in 
one of those years? Will you concur that  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1725 
 

they had a vote and by wide margins agreed that they preferred 
the ward system? 
 
And will you also agree that the city of Prince Albert, on their 
own, they voted and chose to have a ward system, something 
which now you are arbitrarily going to take away from them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there has been several votes 
taken, as we all know, on the ward system and plebiscites. And 
I still go back to my original argument: after two plebiscites in 
Regina — two — soundly defeating the imposition of the ward 
system, the NDP government imposed the ward system, just flat 
out imposed it. And here we have had some sensitivity and we 
have come up with a modified system so that those that enjoy 
the ward system indeed have the ward system; those that prefer 
to have the free democratic vote to change their council, also 
have that. 
 
And I believe that this debate that has been going on since 
1914, perhaps, maybe in 1973, maybe in 1956, maybe indeed in 
1936, the government of the day should have looked at the 
modified system as being a more appropriate type of 
government. This could very well be on the leading edge of 
new municipal government across Canada. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, are you aware . . . And I’ll 
ask you a straight, simple question without a speech so you 
don’t have to make a speech if you feel you’ve got to defend 
yourself to everything that the opposition says. Are you aware 
that in 1978 or 1976 the voters in Saskatoon and the voters in 
Regina voted and said they wanted the ward system as their 
electoral system in their cities; and are you aware that in the city 
of Prince Albert, in 1982, the people voted on their own and 
said that they wanted the ward system? Are you aware of those 
facts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Certainly I’m aware of those, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski Well if you are aware of them, Mr. Minister, 
why are you now denying them the right to do that by your 
action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose my original 
response is going back to the imposition of 1973. Against two 
plebiscites, the NDP still imposed it, and in 1976 after the ward 
system was in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: This is how rumours get started. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m still on camera. You guys behave like 
jerks, what do I care? You know . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Allow the minister to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose that a more sound 
question is, in 1976 Saskatoon had a plebiscite, three years after 
the imposition of the ward system by the NDP government, 
three years after it was imposed on the people of Saskatoon. 
And was it taken to heart by the NDP government? Not at all. 
The plebiscite, after three years, still wanted to get rid of the 
ward system. And did  

they listen? No. We listen. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s fair to say . . . And I’ve been on record as 
saying that I prefer the at-large system, but our government 
listened and we consulted, and we consulted with all of the 
various councils of the cities. We knew where they stood on the 
thing. And we talked to SUMA. And as a result of those 
discussions, Mr. Chairman, we felt that the modified system 
brings together the best of the two worlds. And as I’ve 
mentioned before and as I mention again, it will provide those 
that enjoy the ward system the opportunity to have their ward 
alderman, and conversely, those that want to have the 
democratic right to vote for the majority of their council will 
also have that right. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
minister, a few minutes ago, somehow tried to leave the 
impression that this five-and-five system or this half-and-half 
system — or as we like to call it, this half-baked system that 
you have — is somehow going to be at the leading edge of 
urban thought in Canada. If that’s the case, Mr. Chairman, it 
would be the first time in about six years that the province of 
Saskatchewan has been a leader in urban thinking in Canada. 
 
This is a government that’s characterized not by leading; this is 
a government that’s characterized by following when it comes 
to urban programs and when it comes to urban services. This is 
a backwards-looking government. And this is a very backward 
step, I would submit. There’s nothing leading or revolutionary 
about the minister’s idea, expect that it’s . . . even if it’s 
between a rock and a hard place . . . Overwhelming public 
opinion, overwhelming public opinion opposed to his 
imposition of an at-large system, and yet strong, strong calls 
within his own party caucus to do away with the ward system, 
especially in Regina, to ensure that there was a system that 
might not see the re-election of the kinds of councils that we 
had in Regina. Caught between those competing positions the 
minister offers this half-baked idea of his — and it is a 
half-baked idea. 
 
Mr. Minister, and I say it’s an old idea too, because no matter 
what he says about the boards of controls in Ontario, and that 
those boards of controls did not work and the boards of controls 
are — and those municipal councils in Ontario allowed for the 
election of aldermen in wards and allowed for the election of 
some at large, who were the known as controllers and sat on the 
board of control. And he says that that system didn’t work out 
in Ontario because those controllers were given special powers 
and responsibilities and that’s what created two classes of 
alderman or councillors; and that’s what created the 
divisiveness; and that’s what created many of the controversies 
in Ontario cities. And he says: well we’re not proposing to give 
them additional powers at this point, that is to say the five that 
might be elected at large, so we’re going to avoid that and 
therefore we’re going to be on the leading edge, the leading 
edge of urban thought in Canada. 
 
(2000) 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister that it’ll take about two council 
meetings after the next election for those that were elected at 
large to say to the rest of the council: we  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1726 
 

want some additional powers and responsibilities. We got 
elected at large. We didn’t get elected in a ward like you did. 
We want some additional powers and responsibilities. We’re 
answerable to everyone in this city as opposed to simply, you 
know, a person in a ward, and therefore we’re going to take 
that, and we have the power with the mayor to be able to do 
that. 
 
And I would submit to you, Mr. Minister, that’s what is going 
to happen, that you’re not going to be in any different position 
than the cities are in Ontario, cities that are turning their backs 
on that kind of system because they found it hasn’t worked, that 
it’s created divisiveness within their councils. 
 
It also tended to create some other unique little problems in 
Ontario cities that you may not be aware of, Mr. Minister — 
unique little problems where in some cities those elected to the 
board of controls sometimes tended to come from selected areas 
of the cities because of their background, their ability to run 
at-large elections. They tended to come from certain geographic 
areas in the cities, and tended to get together with the alderman 
from the wards in those areas and tended to display a great deal 
of favouritism for certain areas of the city to a much greater 
extent than has ever been the case under any ward system, and 
therefore creating even more of the problem that you say that 
you’re trying to get rid of. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I simply want to point out to you that you 
have a half-baked idea. It’s an old idea. It’s an idea that hasn’t 
worked very well where it has been tried, that cities elsewhere 
in Canada are turning their backs on them. And when you talk 
about the leading edge, sir, I would submit to you again that 
you’re talking about the rear end of urban thought in Canada 
because that characterizes your stewardship in that department 
and that characterizes your government when it comes to urban 
affairs — very definitely backward looking. 
 
This province hasn’t been at the leading edge of urban thought 
in Canada for some six years now. It hasn’t put forward good, 
solid ideas for how to improve life in our cities and our urban 
areas and how to improve on local government for some six 
years. And that’s because your party doesn’t believe in urban 
Saskatchewan; your party has no solution for urban 
Saskatchewan; your party doesn’t care to think about urban 
Saskatchewan except in the meanest, meanest of ways. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: isn’t it possible that the kinds 
of problems that I outlined to you with respect to Ontario are, in 
fact, the kinds of problems we’re going to have here now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously the 
member from Regina Victoria sets himself up as some leading 
expert on municipal affairs for this country. And I would like to 
remind him and the citizens of Regina, his record is quite clear 
on city council, so they can take it for what it’s worth. 
 
He made an interesting statement regarding Regina city council 
and he referred to “these kinds of councils”. I don’t have the 
foggiest idea because I have never referred to these kinds of 
councils and it’s curious to note what  

kind of a connotation he puts on these kinds of councils. 
 
And I suppose to keep this short because we’re going to debate 
this when the Bill is brought forward, I have to admit, Mr. 
Chairman, very humbly, that I don’t have the clairvoyant 
capabilities of the member from Regina Victoria regarding the 
future problems of boards of control entering into this. It’s not 
included in our legislation. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you’d have 
stopped to think about the system of urban government we 
have, that we need, you might be able to foresee some of these 
problems. Also, some experience, sir, in urban government just 
might help you to sort of identify future problems. 
 
You know, but you don’t seem to concern yourselves with the 
real problems of urban municipalities in Saskatchewan. You 
seem to concern yourself with your political agenda and how 
you can ram it down the throats of people in urban 
Saskatchewan. That’s what you’re concerned about. And if 
that’s what you’re concerned about you’re not going to be able 
to see the kinds of problems and kinds of concerns that your 
legislation might improve. 
 
And again, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you the kinds of 
problems that have been experienced in Ontario. Just what kind 
of reaction do you have? So you not see those as perhaps 
potential problems as a result of the system that you’re now 
going to impose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think I’ve got the best 
experience in the world as a municipal expert — I’m a taxpayer. 
And that’s all you have to be to be a municipal expert, is a 
taxpayer. And all of us are . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Oh, come on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Oh, come on, the member from Saskatoon 
says. You know, if you pay taxes you’ve got a vested interest 
and that’s exactly why this change has come about because now 
you’re going to have the opportunity. Their argument has many 
holes in it, Mr. Chairman. Their argument won’t hold water. 
We are retaining a flavour of the ward system, clearly. Half of 
the alderman will be representing wards. Those concerns will 
be addressed. The other half will be elected at large so that the 
taxpayer has the opportunity — as he rightfully should have — 
to elect his council. 
 
Now as far as it relates to setting up some clandestine type of an 
operation, some big board of control. They won’t have the 
powers to do that, number one, so I don’t fear that. And you 
laugh. They don’t have the powers to do that, number one; 
number two, if there’s five and five, are you telling me that the 
mayor is always going to side with the members elected at 
large? If you are saying that, your experience in municipal 
government relates to zero. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you have said that the 
taxpayers are the experts in urban government, and if that’s the 
case, why don’t you let the taxpayers sort of vote on this 
question and decide for themselves what kind of  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1727 
 

system it is that they need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ll quote the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount: 
 

The British North America Act puts the responsibility for 
creating local government institutions on the provincial 
government. The provincial government should design and 
put into effect the best democratic system of local 
government. 

 
And we believe that we are doing that, and we’re not imposing 
it the way you did when you took the at-large system, threw it 
out, and imposed the ward system. 
 
We have here a modified ward system that retains the best of 
the two models and as a result of that it’s not near the 
imposition that you put in. How can you ask me that question? 
The NDP government imposed it. We are bringing in a 
modified system that retains the flavour of the ward system and 
that provides the democratic opportunity to elect the entire 
council. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I think your ignorance 
again of urban legislation and how urban municipalities work 
has been showing. You said in response to my question that the 
legislation wouldn’t provide for any additional powers for those 
that are elected at large, and certainly the legislation at this 
point doesn’t, and I don’t suppose that your legislation will 
provide for that. 
 
But do you mean to tell me that a group of councillors couldn’t 
decide for themselves that only certain members of council, 
depending on how they’re elected, were going to be the chair 
people of committees, powerful committees within the council 
structures; that only certain members of council, say those 
elected at large, were going to act as deputy mayor; that certain 
members of council, say those elected at large, couldn’t be paid 
more than, say those who were elected through a ward system. 
You mean to tell me that none of those things are possible, 
given your legislation? 
 
Mr. Minister, your legislation is enabling legislation. There’s a 
great deal of scope for councils to make their won decisions as 
to who they want to favour in those councils and how they want 
to run their own affairs. And so I suggest to you that there’s a 
great deal of potential there for a group elected at large to take 
upon themselves additional duties and responsibilities, and if 
not de jure powers at least de facto powers in the running of an 
urban municipality. And you stand there and say, well it ain’t 
going to be. Well what proof do you have to say, and what 
proof do you have and what experience do you have to say that 
that won’t happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you can take a run at me personally. I 
mean, I’ve got used to that now; I see it in articles in the paper, 
and all the rest of it. So, you know, you can call me whatever 
you want to call me. I will ultimately be judged by the people; 
so will you. So I don’t fear that. 
 
Obviously the councils are going to run by what the majority 
decides. And are you purporting to tell the  

people of our province that the mayor, who has the 
responsibility of operating the entire city in the event that its a 
five-five or a four-four split — whatever — that the mayor is 
automatically going to side with one group or another? What if 
the ward people wanted to do some . . . You don’t trust 
anybody. I happen to trust my councils. I’ve always said that 
they’ve done a pretty good job under the circumstances, and 
now I’m providing them with the opportunity to do even a 
better job. Why don’t you trust them? 
 
What you’re saying is that you’re going to get a fancy group of 
influential people that are going to control city councils. You 
say you’re for the people — balderdash. You don’t care for the 
people; you don’t trust anybody. I happen to trust my alderman 
and I happen to trust my mayors. And if I can give them better 
tools with which to operate, it’s my responsibility to do that. 
And ultimately the taxpayer is going to reign supreme on this; 
and the mayor better pay attention; and he will. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I knew that if we asked this minister long 
enough, we’d soon get back to the comedy routine that he is so 
well known for. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, ultimately you said you were prepared to be 
judged by the people. I find that rather ironical coming from the 
mouth of this minister who, when he was ready to get judged by 
the people in the constituency he got elected in, had to flee 
because he knew that they were going to pass judgement and 
had to go somewhere else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now coming from anybody else, Mr. 
Chairman, that maybe would sound credible, but coming from 
this minister it has no credibility at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you said that you trust municipal 
councillors and you trust the mayors of municipalities. Now 
that’s hypocrisy at its worst, because I ask you now, if you trust 
the mayors and if you trust the municipalities, why won’t you 
trust them to put in place the electoral system that suits them 
best as they did in the city of Prince Albert in consultation with 
their electorate? Why are you taking that right away from these 
people that you pretend to trust? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m not taking any right away from 
anybody, and I’ll go back and I’ll quote the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount again, because it’s a pretty good quote 
and I enjoy it. “The British North America Act puts the 
responsibility for creating local government institutions on the 
provincial government.” That’s clear. And you imposed the 
ward system against all odds, against all plebiscites. You 
imposed it; that’s clear. 
 
Now I’ve offered them an alternative that you never did offer 
them, and I’ve come up with a compromise — and a good, 
good, honest compromise, I believe, because it gives the voters 
the best of both systems. 
 
And you, the member from Regina North East, of all  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1728 
 

people, calling me a parachute candidate when you move in 
from Humboldt to Regina North East, and I simply return to 
Regina South where in 1971 I sought the nomination for the 
election for the Liberal Party. My roots go back that far. My 
family grew up in Regina South, and I pioneered Albert Park. 
I’ve lived there that long, for crying out loud. I went back to my 
natural ground when that seat became open, and you contradict 
me that way when you go to Regina North East from Humboldt 
because you didn’t want to run there again — boloney. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Isn’t this a revealing discussion. Not only 
did this minister switch constituencies, he switches parties as 
well. Now this is the decisive minister who talks about giving 
some choices to the municipalities. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, will you explain carefully here, without too 
much rhetoric or great emotion, what choices you’ve given 
those municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Certainly. Everybody knows where I was 
coming from. I wanted the at-large system. They have the 
opportunity to join me in that desire if they so wish, or, 
conversely, I have modified my position, and I have said: fine, 
we will give you the split model which retains the flavour of the 
ward and which also allows the taxpayer to vote for the council 
at large. And that was not an option that was available to the 
people at the time the NDP imposed the ward system. 
 
Even after three years in Saskatoon, when the people of 
Saskatoon spoke out against the ward system — a plebiscite 
saying, no, we don’t want it — what did the NDP do? Nothing; 
they left it in. And you’ve got the audacity to say that I gave 
them no choice. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, don’t get too excited now. 
I know you’re sensitive because I know that you had an idea 
that you wanted to implement. You found you had no support, 
and you’re just too bloody stubborn to back off. That’s the 
problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Your reactions in this House this evening 
are proof of that because you refuse to answer some very strict 
and direct question that are relevant today. 
 
Now I asked you a question which you didn’t answer. You said 
you’re giving municipalities a choice. Now obviously you’re 
going to implement dictatorially a two-tiered system, where 
they elect half by . . . half on the whole, I assume, and the other 
half on some kind of a different ward — a modified ward 
system. That’s what you’re going to impose. What other choice 
do they have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I suppose you 
can say I backed off — stubborn little guy backed off. Fine. I’m 
proud of the fact that I listen, and I did modify my position, and 
I did back off. And I backed off to the point that my wishes are 
still available to them — the at-large system. 
 

And the other option that’s available to them is the modified 
ward system, where — and I answer your question directly, sir 
— where I indicate that yes, the flavour of the ward system is 
retained. We are simply cutting them in half and we’re putting 
five at large. And I believe that it will benefit the taxpayer. 
 
And it is the free, democratic right of the taxpayer to be able to 
vote in his entire controlling aldermanic candidates, if that’s 
what you’d like to say, because he votes for five at large plus 
his one ward. That’s six out of 10, or in the case of eight, five 
out of eight. So that as a result he has an opportunity, he has the 
best of two worlds; that is a democracy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now you’re getting close, Mr. Minister. 
Now that you’ve settled down, you’re getting a little closer. 
 
You say now that they will have an option: they can have the 
modified system or they can have an at-large system. Can they 
have a ward system if they so choose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now we’re right down to the nitty-gritty, 
Mr. Deputy Chairman. When the NDP imposed the ward 
system, that was it. One out of three choices was theirs — one. I 
have provided the opportunity of twice that many — two of 
three. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, will you confirm that in the 
1970s when that legislation was brought in that the voters were 
given the choice to choose any system they wanted — and they 
did in the middle 1970s — will you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I will confirm, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that 
in 1976 Saskatoon voted the ward system out and the NDP 
didn’t listen. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, Mr. Minister, did 
the Saskatoon people since then vote for the ward system or 
vote in favour of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I have conceded before and 
I will concede again, after a certain degree of comfort level and 
perhaps a little bit of apathy in the good times, and the people 
becoming used to a system . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t find this debate humorous at all. I’m 
discussing taxpayers’ dollars here; I’m discussing something 
very important to the taxpayers, and you haven’t seen me laugh 
or giggle about this thing from day one. 
 
And I find it very interesting that the NDP opposite sit there and 
find this whole debate on the ward system very, very funny, 
very, very comical. I don’t happen to find it funny one bit. This 
is a serious, a very, very serious decision that our government 
has made, and we’ve made it. And as a result, the taxpayer will 
clearly benefit from that decision. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, if I was the minister 
having to pilot this legislation through, I wouldn’t laugh  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1729 
 

either. I can tell you, Mr. Minister, you know as well as 
anybody else here, or people in the public and particularly in 
our urban centres, that what you are doing, you have no support 
for. 
 
I’m going to get into, later, on asking you some questions about 
where specifically you are getting your support and where the 
recommendations are and if you can table them in this House. 
Because I submit to you, through you, Mr. Chairman, to the 
minister, that he can’t do that. He can’t do that. And all that he 
is saying here this evening is a bunch of rhetoric which he 
cannot defend because one, in the world of democratic politics, 
can never defend an act such as this which arbitrarily takes the 
right of people who vote for whatever level of politics — takes 
that right away. And that’s what this minister is doing. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you still didn’t answer my question that I 
asked earlier. Since you’re going to allow municipalities 
through their councils to choose the modified system or choose 
the at-large system, what’s wrong in a democratic world also 
including then the opportunity to choose the ward system? Give 
them the three options. Why will you not give them the three 
options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, times change and with 
those changing times we were pleased to provide the two 
options — twice as many options as was provided by the NDP 
government in 1973. And in that debate, Mr. Chairman, where 
the same questions were asked for the same tabling of the 
evidence and for the same findings and the like to impose the 
ward system — which was a dramatic move at that time — they 
were empty. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can I ask you, Mr. Minister, since you 
are so well-informed of that debate, did the result of that 
debated not give municipalities the right to discard the ward 
system or to keep it if they so chose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Nine cities had that right and still operate 
at large. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the minister is ducking 
the question again. Mr. Minister, did not that legislation provide 
the right to municipalities to choose the ward system or to reject 
it if they so chose? Will you answer that question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Certainly the legislation included that. But 
because of a little technicality in Saskatoon, because of the fact 
that the vote came one year early, it wasn’t bound by the 
legislation. But yet in 1976 when the people of Saskatoon said, 
Mr. NDP Government, please remove the ward system, please 
return us to the at-large system, what did the NDP say? No, you 
got to have another one. Come on. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now we’ve confirmed that the voter, 
until this minister introduces the Bill, have had the right to 
choose; and they chose. They had the right to choose on 
whether they have a ward system for electing their council or 
whether they didn’t want to have the ward system. Now, Mr. 
Minister, since this they have always had this right. How can 
you now justify taking it away? 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we’re going to enter the 
debate of this Bill at this point in time, there is a provision there 
for a plebiscite, and we’ll debate it at that time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, will there be a provision 
. . . Is it policy for your government to provide the right to 
municipalities to choose a ward system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member knows full well 
that we cannot debate in anticipation of a Bill. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m not asking about the Bill, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, I’m asking about government policy. 
Government policy is to impose a modified system. 
Government policy is — and the minister has been beat down 
on that one to some degree — to have a system at large. Mr. 
Minister, is it also government policy to allow the 
municipalities to choose a ward system or any of the other two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the provision for them to 
choose the ward system is not there, the same way the provision 
for them to choose the ward system in 1973 was not there. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, I’ve got a smashing headache 
tonight, and I can barely comprehend what some of the things 
you are doing. And I think I’ve got a smashing headache 
because I’ve been listening to you for a number of hours trying 
to justify the unjustifiable. I think I’ve got a smashing headache 
because I’ve been listening to you hollering and screaming and 
trying to defend the defenceless with respect to the ward system 
and the changes that you are proposing. 
 
From the perspective of the ward system in Regina, in particular 
the north end of Regina, I want to enlighten you as to what the 
benefits have been. 
 
For the first time in memory, because of the ward system, 
people can now call up a councillor who represents their district 
and ask them questions about issues that relate to the city. 
People in the wards, in particular in the north end, can now call 
their councillors and request a specific councillor to provide 
specific information. 
 
People in these wards, Mr. Minister, can now call their 
councillors — and have been over the course of the ward 
system — to provide them with advice and direction with 
respect to issues which relate to their community. And in every 
case, Mr. Minister, the councillors in those wards are 
accountable to a specific neighbourhood. 
 
They, therefore, have been doing a fairly good job in general, 
responding to those requests of their constituents. They’ve been 
doing a fairly good job with respect to responding to advice 
from their constituents, and they’ve been doing not a bad job in 
identifying issues in their community and trying to resolve them 
in co-operation with the other councillors in the city. 
 
And what I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, is what is 
wrong, in your view, with these attributes of accountability? 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1730 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now we’re into something real good, Mr. 
Chairman, and I’m sorry that the member has a headache. And I 
won’t complain; I feel good. I feel real good because we made a 
good and proper decision. 
 
And you can stand here and listen to me for months for all I 
care. I’m prepared to debate this thing until the snow flies next 
fall. And when . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, I’m ready, 
I’m ready. And the people will speak out and they’ll speak out 
against it because I’ll tell you why . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The member from Regina North West is exactly right on. 
And that is why we retained the right to the ward system: they 
will still be able to call on their ward representatives; they will 
still be able to discuss their neighbourhoods. And as a matter of 
fact, the responsibility for that member, that alderman, has been 
increased because now he will have even more electors to 
represent and a greater area of the city to be responsible for. 
 
And that’s exactly the point I’m trying to tell you is that that 
flavour, that part of the ward system will still be retained and 
nothing will change in that regard. And your argument, your 
argument is worthless because the ward system is still in place. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Minister, my headache is getting 
worse because what you’re saying one moment, you defend and 
say the opposite the next moment. Now which is it? You say the 
remarks I’ve made have credibility with respect to 
accountability, or they don’t. Now tell me, which is the proper 
response? Could you clarify that because you’ve given us two 
answers to one question, both on opposite poles. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — You might have a headache, but you’re not 
that stupid. I explained it pretty clearly. The ward system 
flavour is still retained, they will still be able to call their ward 
representative. Don’t you understand that? 
 
There’s going to be five in Regina, five in Saskatoon. There’s 
going to be four in Prince Albert, assuming that the councils 
decide that that’s how they’d like to go, is with the modified 
system. And that’s exactly what I’ve been saying, is that this 
new model strikes a balance, a balance between the ward 
system and the at-large system, and it incorporates the best of 
both models. 
 
And I can’t even begin to understand how you can argue that, 
because the man on the street, my urban taxpayer, the one that 
has discharged me or charged me with this obligation, to ensure 
that I can provide the municipalities with the best form of 
democratic government that they have, will now have the 
opportunity to have his ward alderman and still be able to elect 
the councillors at large. Don’t you understand that? Don’t you 
understand how this model will balance itself off? 
 
Go back and talk to your people in Regina North West later on 
in this week and over the weekend, as I have done, and see what 
they anticipate with this. And you will find that they will accept 
this, and you will find that the NDP will back off of this, and 
that this will not be debated too much once the Bill is 
introduced. And they will recognize the fairness of this system, 
and this system will  

pass, and it will be accepted. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Minister, what you are proposing 
is not too difficult to understand. It’s a backwards step. You’re 
saying the ward system created the problems that exist in the 
city, and that eliminating the ward system will rectify those 
problems. 
 
You know, that’s more garbage than you can even count at the 
city dump. It’s a backwards step, Mr. Minister, because what it 
basically means is that rather than having accountability to a 
specific neighbourhood, you’re going to have five of the 
councillors who are not accountable to any specific 
neighbourhood and will be accountable on the basis of the 
ability to run for election, which is (a) wealth; (b) the ability to 
put together a machine, which requires a lot of money — 
example, wealth; or in other instances with the support of a 
particular machine which may or may not be of benefit. 
 
But the problem we’ve got, Mr. Minister, is that with this 
proposed bastardization of the ward system, we have not an 
effective, accountable system. We have a system that is 
backward; it’s not accountable. It doesn’t make any sense if 
you’re saying we’ve got to have half elected by constituency 
and half not elected by constituency, unless you’re willing to do 
that at the provincial level as well. Why don’t we elect 33 
MLAs on the basis of constituencies and let’s elect 33 MLAs on 
the basis of popular vote? Why don’t we try that, Mr. Minister? 
Think that would be a good way to go? You can’t have one 
thing for the goose and something different for the gander. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, if the member 
is suggesting that we operate in this House as all independent 
candidates without a legally elected government, without a 
legally elected opposition, and without all of the parliamentary 
system that exists in this tradition — that’s what he’s saying — 
I think that his headache is a little bit more severe than he 
believes, because he’s not thinking straight on that one. 
 
There is no way that you can compare the operation of the 
parliamentary system and this House and these legislatures the 
same way as you do a municipal government where the voting 
procedures are entirely different. And the electorate understands 
that. And that argument is hollow. And . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well if you’re suggesting, if the NDP is 
suggesting some other form of electing the government and 
coming in here, everybody sitting as independents and no 
government and no opposition, and see the chaos that would be 
created, well then let’s go ahead and do that. I mean, you know, 
we’d be prepared to listen to those things. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I’m trying to keep a reasonable description 
in this debate, and hear the member call, you know, this whole 
debate garbage and junk and the like. I mean, I’m trying to keep 
this at a serious level. If the NDP — and they’re laughing again 
about the ward system — if the NDP believes that the ward 
system is junk, and if the NDP believes that the ward system is 
garbage, and if the NDP believes that the ward system is a joke, 
then all I can  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1731 
 

do on behalf of the government is to apologize to the taxpayers 
of our urban centres for the NDP behaving in that fashion. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Minister, the New Democratic 
Party opposition does not believe the ward system is a joke, as 
you say, we believe that the ward system is an accountable 
system — that it’s a system which has provided a new view 
with respect to urban issues, and a very important view with 
respect to urban issues and an accountable view. 
 
You may recall, Mr. Minister — you’ve been around for a few 
years, perhaps more than some people would like — but you 
may recall when we had the at-large system, Mr. Minister. 
Decisions were made at city hall on the basis of a geographic 
location in the city. If you look at the city, you will note in the 
northern half of the city, a part of which I represent, has rail 
yards and rail spurs; it has industrial development; it has Ipsco 
and it has the city land fill site; and it has a number of other 
essential elements in a city, but they’re all concentrated in one 
part of the city, which is not the case in other urban centres that 
have had reasonable representation on a geographic basis over 
the years. And you will know that, and you know that better 
than I can tell you. 
 
So my question to you, Minister: why would you want to revert 
back to a system which does not consider all of the areas of the 
city from a reasonable point of view, as opposed to a warped 
point of view — not warped but a slanted point of view — and 
that one section of the city is developed in a more 
family-oriented fashion, for example, nice parks and fairly safe 
back lanes and well lit streets and lots of trees, and very little 
pollution; whereas the other part of the city which has not had 
representation over the years in the concentrated ways or even 
in the fair ways we’ve got now, has the land fill site, and the rail 
yards and the industrial development and a lack of trees and a 
lack of amenities that are important to families. 
 
They would not have had those amenities that we have now in 
the north end if it wasn’t for New Democratic Party MLAs in 
this city putting forward funds through the provincial 
government to build them and put them together; and(b) 
because we’ve had a ward system in the last 12 or 14 years 
which as said, well, if we’ve got 60 per cent of the population 
living in the north end of the city, then maybe we should have 
40 or 50 or 60 per cent of the funds spent up there for the 
purpose of benefitting families, instead of having 60 per cent of 
the people living in the north and having 20 per cent of the city 
revenues spent in the north, on 60 percent of the population. 
How do you justify that? 
 
How do you think your system is going to make this city, in a 
balanced view, a better place to live? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Boy, strange conversation from the 
member of Regina North West. I consider your constituency of 
Regina North West to be similar to my constituency of Regina 
South. As a matter of fact, you’ve got a lot more new homes out 
there than I do in the south, because I don’t have any expansion 
left in Regina South. And I don’t see where all this industrial 
site and everything relates to you seat. 
 

An Hon. Member: I’m saying the north end. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — If you’re talking about the north end of the 
city, I represented Regina North for four years. I’m very 
familiar with everything that went on up there. You have to 
remember, and I’ve said this on many occasions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: You should know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Absolutely, I should know. I’ve lived in 
this city for almost 50 years now, and I’m very proud of it. And 
I didn’t leave this city. 
 
And I’ve seen the at-large system and I’ve seen the municipal 
government operate on the at-large system. I’ve seen the ward 
system operate. We get down to one basic nitty-gritty here that 
you mentioned, and that I guess I happen to agree with: you 
said the NDP believes in the ward system. Fine. Now we know 
exactly where we start. 
 
Our government doesn’t believe in the entire ward system, and 
that’s why we still leave the flavour of the ward . . . And there 
they go, laughing again; they think that this is really humorous, 
Mr. Chairman. You think that the ward system is a big joke. I 
don’t, and that’s why we retained some of the flavour of the 
ward system in balance. 
 
And I’m prepared to debate the Bill when it come and when 
you can have a whole look at it and when you understand it. 
 
Let’s return to my estimates. Your member’s got a headache. 
Let’s finish the Urban Affairs estimates; the staff has been here 
for a long time; they’re going to be here for a long time when 
we debate the Bill. Wait till the Bill comes up and debate it 
then. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I suppose that’s another reason why I have a 
headache. We have here the Minister of Urban Affairs, formerly 
the MLA for Regina North — represented that district for about 
four and a half years and would have learned something from 
representing that district for four and a half years if he would 
have talked to some people up there about what their futures 
and what their hopes and desires were for their families and 
themselves with respect to their neighbourhood. 
 
You didn’t learn a darn thing, Mr. Minister, obviously, because 
what you’re doing now is, rather than, as Minister of Urban 
Affairs, capturing the opportunity to make this city, the capital 
city of this province, one of the best places to live in Canada, 
you’re attacking the very nature of the city rather than learning 
from your experience. You’re ripping it asunder by tearing the 
ward system apart and hoping with all hope that the next 
council will be elected from a certain district, from a certain 
perhaps economic position, that they will therefore put forward 
policies that don’t benefit the entire city or are not in tune with 
the issues of the neighbourhoods, but are in tune with the 
general more selfish issues, issues that they don’t have to 
respond in terms of accountability. 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1732 
 

What did you learn from being an MLA in the north end of the 
city? Why aren’t you capturing the opportunity, as Minister of 
Urban Affairs, to make this city the kind of city that all of us in 
this city that represent Regina want Regina to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if that member wants to 
start talking philosophically about my love and concern for the 
city of Regina, let’s start talking that. Let’s pit my experiences 
against yours, only for a moment. 
 
An Hon. Member: That might take all night, but not on your 
part. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, then I’ll take all night. I don’t know 
how many; I suppose I could count them — 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, I 
don’t know — operated businesses in this city, very 
successfully, I might add, not like some of the other unfortunate 
incidents where people have tried business in this city and 
didn’t make it. I did. 
 
This city has been very, very good to me. I raised my five 
children in this city, all in Regina South. They attended school 
in this city. I grew up in this city on the east side of Regina, and 
I learned how to street fight there when I was a kid and that’s 
why maybe I can do a pretty good battle in here. I don’t give up 
very easily against you guys. 
 
And following that, I enjoyed high school at Campion College, 
lived on the west side — lived on the west side. My mother, a 
widow that scrubbed walls, that scrubbed walls in this city to 
give my sister and I a proper living, that lived in a one-room — 
not a one-bedroom suite, but a one-room suite — and didn’t 
expect the government to build us a house, but rather went out 
and scrubbed walls, provided me with an education so that 
maybe one day her little Polish son could come along and do 
not bad. 
 
Well I won’t let you judge as to whether I’m doing any good or 
not, but I’ll let my taxpayers judge as to whether I’m doing any 
good or not. I’ll let the people that supported my businesses let 
me know if I’ve done any good or not. 
 
And then at the end of the day when it was all done and I 
decided to enter politics, I moved, and ran in Regina North and 
won that seat and represented those people, and I understand 
them very, very well. 
 
Now that member from Regina North West that’s obviously a 
lot younger than I, if he wants to talk about love of this city and 
quality of life for Regina, let him dare pit his living standards in 
this city and his experiences in this city and his love for this city 
against me. Let him dare do that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Minister, the MLA for Regina 
North West has conducted himself in a manner in this 
Assembly and in this city and in this province that his children 
and his spouse and his party can say with pride that they know 
John Solomon, or they know the member from Regina North 
West. And that’s more than I can say to the number of people 
that know the Minister of Urban Affairs with respect to what 
he’s done to the city of Regina. 
 

First of all, Mr. Minister, if had some love for this city, as you 
should have, having lived here for 50 years and raised your 
family, you would want to enhance the city of Regina, the 
capital city of our province to the point where people can be 
proud to say that they know the member from Regina South, the 
Minister of Urban Affairs; and they’re glad that he’s the 
Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
Frankly, Mr. Minister, I haven’t met a lot of people in this city, 
or very many people, that say they’re very happy to see the 
member from Regina South as Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
Rather than punishing the people in this city, rather than 
punishing the electors of Regina in general, as a government, by 
cutting back their grants, by cutting back their revenue sharing 
and others, and now by doing away with the ward system in 
Saskatoon and Regina, why don’t you take the challenge and 
jump on the opportunity to try and create some kind of an 
image for yourself that is a positive image, that is an image that 
will reflect well on your party and that will convey to the 
people of the city that in effect they are happy that this 
government and this minister represents them and is involved 
with urban affairs? 
 
But, frankly, Mr. Minister, you know the answer to those 
questions. You know that people are not pleased to see you as 
Minister of Urban Affairs. People are not pleased to see your 
government in power provincially because of what they’ve 
done to punish the voters, not only in the cities but in the entire 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to get back to the issue at hand here, and this is the 
destruction of the ward system. We have headlines from 
newspapers saying, time after time, “Keep the ward system 
businesses tell the member from Regina South,” the 
Star-Phoenix of April 23; “List of cities backing ward system 
growing,” another headline out of the Star-Phoenix, May 25 of 
‘88. And all of these individuals and groups and organizations 
saying, keep the ward system as it is. And rather than attacking 
and destroying the urban centres through destruction of the 
ward system, how about helping and building. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, to you is, can you tell this House 
and the people of Saskatchewan who has advised you to do 
what you’re doing. Is it Tim Embury or his firm that’s advising 
you? Is it independents like the former member from Regina 
Rosemont, Gordon Dirks? Is it Madsen Pirie or who is essence 
is advising you to all these things? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I answered this before and 
their research isn’t complete. They’ve mentioned the name Tim 
Embury. The other member, I believe it might have been the 
member from Regina North East, he didn’t mention him by 
name, but if indeed Mr. Embury did make some form of a 
recommendation I understand that it was made to the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce and I got it from the material. I happen 
to be a member of the Regina chamber and they had it in their 
publication. I can’t believe the member from Regina North 
West. The proof is 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1733 
 

here. We’re government. 
 
An Hon. Member: Is he from Manitoba too? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — We’re government. You’re not 
government. You’re opposition. So the people have spoken 
clearly who they want as government. I never questioned your 
reputation. I didn’t take an attack on you, nor will I. So I’ll 
leave it at that. And, you know, reputation . . . I’m proud of my 
reputation, I hope that you are, and I’m not about to suggest the 
statements that you brought into this House. 
 
I raised a concern for love and pride of my city, and my 
accomplishments and love and pride for this city abound, and 
everybody is aware of that. And I’m very, very proud of that. 
You bet that this move by our government was done because of 
the concern for the people of my city. 
 
I will once again quote . . . And there they go, Mr. Chairman, 
laughing again at this. And I will quote again from Hansard, the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale. Here’s what he said: 
 

Well I consider in Saskatoon the opposition to the ward 
system comes from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the 
board of trade, Mr. Speaker. I’m not worried about the 
editorial comments; I’ve long ago given up on the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and their editorial comments. 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I want to join my colleagues in discussing a very serious matter, 
that of the ward system, but I can’t resist rising to a bit of the 
bait when you talk about us on this side of the House treating 
the ward system as a humorous thing, as though we were some 
sort of stand-up comics. 
 
There’s two reasons, Minister, why you can never be a stand-up 
comic: one is you have to learn how to stand up; and the second 
one is that you are . . . I think I’ll head back rather than continue 
in that vein. 
 
Minister, the ward system abolishment is in no way democratic. 
You’re using the elimination of the ward system for your own 
petty political purposes. You see it as the final solution for 
Regina, Saskatoon, other cities, other urban settings in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I point out to you, Mr. Minister, that rural councillors are 
elected essentially in a ward system. They have a defined 
geographic location for which they are elected. That system has 
served all of Saskatchewan, certainly rural Saskatchewan, 
incredibly well for decades now. We have got the ward system 
in the cities now. We have things happening in an exciting way 
in the north end of the city now, thanks to the councillors that 
are there now and their immediate predecessors that have been 
actively working on behalf of north Regina. 
 
I challenge you, Mr. Minister, to do your ex-constituents proud. 
Do something decent for the more than 12,000 hard-working, 
honest people of Regina North and the other people of Regina 
North West and everywhere, literally everywhere in Regina, 
and particularly north of the creek. 
 

Do those people proud and include in this legislation another 
option, that option being to maintain the ward system. That 
would show that you truly do have love and pride in the city of 
Regina. I’d like to give you credit for having that, but the only 
way I’ll ever believe it is if you accept that amendment when 
the time comes, and there indeed becomes a third choice. 
 
My question is actually a fairly obvious one, and it ties in with 
the rural councillor question: why is it that having a ward 
system will be, and will continue to be, good in rural 
Saskatchewan and yet is no good, and you want to do away 
with it, in urban Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess if they’re all 
going to get up one at a time and ask the same questions, I’m 
prepared to stand up and answer them one at a time, give them 
the same answers. 
 
And I quote the member from Saskatoon Westmount. “The 
British North America Act puts the responsibility for creating 
local government institutions on the provincial government.” 
Clearly. Now the difference is between the NDP and us. 
 
The NDP in 1973 gave our urban centres absolutely no choice. 
They said, here you are, folks, here is the ward system. And 
that’s it. 
 
We are giving our voters, our electors, two choices: we are 
giving them a choice . . . And so the member from Regina 
North, that talk about divisions in rural Saskatchewan — those 
divisions are still going to be here. There will be five in Regina, 
five in Saskatoon, and four in Prince Albert, assuming that they 
want to go with the modified division system. 
 
And he spoke about politics. Again I will quote from Hansard, 
and the leader of the New Democratic Party in 1973, or the now 
Leader of the New Democratic Party. “I want to record . . .” 
 
An Hon. Member: You agree with my comments, do you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — They were pretty good comments, and I 
agree with this one, and I believe you, as a matter of fact. 
 

I want to record my personal view in opposition to party 
politics. I am opposed to the development of New 
Democratic Party politics at the civil level, and I say so 
now, publicly, as I have said so in times gone by. 

 
I believe that. And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member from Riversdale asked what the ward system has to do 
with that, and that’s exactly what I’m trying to say, nothing. I 
happen to believe that there is no room as well for party politics 
at the civic level. 
 
So when your member from Regina North stands up and says 
that we’re doing this for political gain . . . You know, the 
electors are intelligent, they’re sophisticated people that pay 
taxes. You know, if there would be some big political motive 
behind this, if that’s what you’re  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1734 
 

suggesting, then obviously a Tory that would be attempting to 
run on city council wouldn’t have a chance because in 
Saskatoon we only have one member now. So if that’s the case, 
your argument again holds no water. And in Prince Albert we 
have none. 
 
I can’t even understand how you can bring party politics into it 
at the civic level. There are none, and I agree with you. So if 
that’s the case, then all that we are trying to do is bring forward 
for the taxpayers a good, fair way that we firmly believe will 
assist the aldermen and mayor to help them operate their 
municipalities properly. Or I shouldn’t say properly, it’s the 
wrong word, but to help them operate more efficiently. If we 
can provide them with more tools to assist them in that matter, 
they will be able to do even a better job than they’re doing now. 
 
And the ward and the division system is still there, member 
from Regina North, but instead of 10, there’s going to be five. 
And now, your constituents in Regina North will have the 
opportunity, along with electing their ward alderman, to elect 
five alderman at large and therefore have six votes out of 10 on 
council. What’s wrong with that? What is wrong with the 
taxpayer being able to have six votes for his aldermen out of the 
10? That, Mr. Chairman, is democracy in action. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, the minister just 
concluded his remarks by saying that is democracy in action. 
And I do want to just take a little bit of time this evening 
because the minister has been quoting me repeatedly, and I 
became a bit insecure when he started quoting the member from 
Riversdale, but I see he came back to me again. I would 
reiterate the remarks that I made in 1973; they’re as valid today 
as they were in 1973, Mr. Minister. You’re not going to create 
any embarrassment to me by quoting back what I said in 1973. I 
stand by those remarks. 
 
What we have here and the minister says . . . And I think the 
problem here is that the minister says he’s a street fighter; the 
problem is he’s bantamweight — he’s just a bantamweight 
street fighter. 
 
The situation here is the democratic process. I have lived in 
Regina and Saskatoon prior to the ward system, and the 
situation in both those cities was such — and it was even more 
evident in Saskatoon — that the bulk of the alderman were 
elected from the Nutana side of the river, invariably. And in 
Regina, by and large, they were elected from the south part of 
the city. 
 
Now in order to make the democratic system work and allow all 
people to have something to do, to exercise their democratic 
muscles in the democratic system, they have to partake, and 
they have to see a reason to partake in the democratic system: 
therefore, the ward system. 
 
What did the system at large grow and perpetuate in our cities? 
It perpetuated a power bloc, a simple power bloc. The power 
bloc was insensitive to the needs of the whole population. It 
was very sensitive to some parts of those larger cities. The 
power bloc could feel the pulse very easy in some parts of these 
larger cities. 
 
What we needed in order to make the democratic system  

really democratic and to allow all the people to exercise their 
democratic muscles was a ward system. And therefore you have 
the ward system. 
 
Now what I detect here is that the minister is the cat’s paw. 
He’s the cat’s paw for that power bloc that feels it’s time to get 
back into municipal politics. They’ve been screened out of 
municipal politics, and it particularly galls the Minister of 
Urban Affairs as regards to the city of Regina. 
 
Now if we could separate the city of Regina and the city of 
Prince Albert and leave Prince Albert alone, and leave 
Saskatoon alone with our systems the way we want them, the 
minister the could take our his petty, vindictive, twisted 
priorities on the city of Regina. But we can’t do that in the 
democratic system. There has to be some uniformity. So what 
the Minister of Urban Affairs is doing, he’s focusing all the 
cities that have ward system into his way of thinking, into the 
exercising in the future of the power bloc which will be 
sensitive to that small clique of people that this Minister of 
Urban Affairs represents in this Chamber. 
 
The minister of Urban Affairs does not have the right to get his 
way in this legislature on this legislation, because he’s taking 
the responsibility away from all of the people. He is setting up 
the power bloc in the urban centres; and I tell the people of 
Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert or any other city in 
Saskatchewan, they will rue the day that they put the power 
bloc back in control of the large urban centres. 
 
The minister can do it over our wishes, but he’ll have to listen 
to our complaints; and he has already heard complaints from all 
over this province, from cities that are not even involved in the 
ward system. They are saying clearly to the minister, leave the 
system alone. The cities that are involved in the ward system 
have said clearly to the minister, leave the system alone. 
 
The minister takes great pleasure in referring to a vote in the 
city of Saskatoon in 1976, I believe it was. Well, that’s true, the 
city of Saskatoon had a vote on the ward system in ’76. But 
something that is equally as significant and diametrically 
opposed to the vote in ’76 was that the city of Saskatoon chose 
not to have a vote on the ward system in the proper year, 1977, 
when the law allowed it. They chose not to voice their opinion 
on the ward system. The minister ignores that — he ignores that 
and he keeps peddling this business about votes that took place 
in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
What the minister is saying to us is that we were wrong. I don’t 
think we were wrong because I stated the reason why the ward 
system was brought in: it was because power bloc politics were 
operating in the big cities. And the minister knows that. 
 
(2100) 
 
If we’re wrong . . . Time has shown that in fact we were right; 
we were right. And I claim no special congratulations for us on 
that behalf. We saw that there was a job to be done and we did 
it, but the minister cannot provide the same kind of rationale for 
the legislation he  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1735 
 

intends to bring forward whenever he brings it forward. 
 
And therefore the minister is taking the petty position that we 
were wrong in ’73 when we brought in the legislation, and 
therefore he reserves for himself the right to be wrong as well. 
And the old saying is that two wrongs do not make a right. And 
I would suggest to the minister, he’s making a serious mistake 
if he intends to force this legislation on the urban municipalities 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose if the NDP wants 
to maintain that they were right, why, I ask have only three 
cities out of 12 opted for the ward system? It was available to 
12 cities. Imposed, but still, all in all, available to all the cities 
— nine have not taken it. 
 
It’ll be interesting to see if the members from Moose Jaw get 
into this debate, where they have had the opportunity to go to 
the ward system since 1973, and Moose Jaw has not got the 
ward system. It’ll be interesting to see their debate when they 
get into it. 
 
And I’m not trying at all to embarrass the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount with his quote; I agree with him. The 
British North America Act puts the responsibility for creating 
local government institutions on the provincial government. I’m 
prepared to accept that responsibility, the same way that you did 
in 1973, and I accept that responsibility, but I accept it with a 
little bit of difference. Here we have democracy, true 
democracy, in action. I mean you can’t argue that, and using 
Regina and Saskatoon as an example, every taxpayer in Regina 
and Saskatoon will have the right to vote for six alderman out 
of the 10. Before they had the right to vote for one out of 10; 
now six out of 10. 
 
Now how can you even begin to argue that that’s not the 
democratic way to have it? And the fiction of some hypothetical 
power group that’s going to come along and control the at-large 
system, I can tell you that I saw a headline the other day that 
may not be fiction that the two cities better be careful with, and 
that is, where CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) 
have indicated that they will indeed organize and run their 
candidates. If that’s the case, I’m giving CUPE quite an 
opportunity to control the cities if that’s what you, the NDP, 
firmly believe will happen, that these at-large groups are going 
to control the cities. Well then, we all know where CUPE 
comes from. This is their big opportunity, and let the taxpayers 
deal with it at the time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Chairperson, I just want to put on the record some of my 
concerns with regard to the ward system. As my colleagues 
have stated throughout this discussion on Urban Affairs 
estimates, there is a flood of concern in urban Saskatchewan, 
particularly in Saskatoon, Regina and Prince Albert, that the 
minister is abolishing the ward system as we now know it. 
 
I just want to talk about the kinds of things that have been done 
in the community that I represent as a result of the ward system. 
In the late 1970s, it became apparent to people living in the 
Nutana area that developers in Saskatoon, because of the zoning 
by-laws, were moving in very quickly and tearing down many 
of the older  

homes in my neighbourhood and building apartments. As a 
result of the community association and people getting together, 
we were able to put together a petition, and we were also able to 
elect an alderwoman by the name of Kate Waygood to represent 
our area, who had serious concerns about the zoning provisions 
in our neighbourhood. 
 
As a result of Ms. Waygood being elected and the concerns 
being brought to the attention of city council, we were able to 
have introduced into our area zoning regulations that were 
planned, and therefore we would no longer have helter-skelter 
development in terms of apartment construction being 
interspersed with single-family dwellings. That was a positive 
advantage of the ward system. We had a person on city council 
who was there representing the interests of the neighbourhood. 
 
Since that time we’ve had the closure, temporary closure of the 
Lathey swimming pool, and people in the neighbourhood have 
once again been concerned about our community not having 
access to outdoor swimming pool facilities. Over a period of 
time, through our city alderwoman, we have been able to 
convince the city that Lathey swimming pool should not be 
closed permanently but should be upgraded so that children in 
our neighbourhood and surrounding area, have access to that 
kind of community service, a community service that taxpayers 
have paid for. 
 
And we have another example of how the ward system has 
assisted the business people on Broadway. The business people 
on Broadway were the first business group that applied to the 
city for a BID or a business improvement district. They were 
able to keep in touch with our city alderwoman, who was able 
to convey, along with the business people, to city council the 
need to redevelop the Broadway business district. 
 
Now I’m saying, Mr. Minister, that the ward system has been 
an appropriate mechanism in our neighbourhood in order that 
people in our neighbourhood could be represented. There have 
been times in the past in our city where all of the people on city 
council have come from a particular side of the river. We’ve 
also had that happen when it comes to school board elections. 
Our present school board, as I understand it, only has two 
people who are represented from the west side of Saskatoon, 
even though there are many school board issues confronting the 
people that live on the west side. 
 
The concern that’s been expressed to me by people living in our 
area is that how will we be able to maintain community 
representation by someone living in our area if we go to an 
at-large system. An at-large system means that you have to have 
money, and you have to have a lot of money in order to 
communicate the kinds of ideas that you have in terms of 
becoming a member of city council. The present ward system 
allows individuals, at not a great deal of expense, to run for city 
council, to distribute pamphlets, to go door-to-door and talk to 
the constituents in order to articulate why they want to be our 
representative on city council. 
 
Now I recognize that you’re proposing an at-large system,  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1736 
 

a combination of an at-large system and a ward system. But, 
Mr. Minister, you’ve even acknowledged yourself that the 
amount of work in terms of a person who will represent a 
particular ward will be doubled because the area they represent 
will be doubled. 
 
I go back to what one of my colleagues from Regina said: if the 
ward system is okay for rural Saskatchewan, why isn’t it okay 
for urban Saskatchewan? Why can’t people in urban 
Saskatchewan, for instance in the city of Saskatoon, elect a 
person that represents the concerns of that particular area or that 
particular neighbourhood in terms of the overall policies of the 
city of Saskatoon? 
 
I have not noted a great deal of inability on the part of city 
council to work together. I think that the city council in 
Saskatoon, with all of the representatives from around the city, 
have been able to work together quite co-operatively. They’ve 
been able to do that because they are interested in representing 
not only their neighbourhood but the overall planning and 
development of the city of Saskatoon and issues that affect the 
city as a whole. 
 
Now I know that the member from Weyburn is suggesting that 
my speech is the worst speech that he’s ever heard. I just want 
the minister to know that I’m not trying to be eloquent, I’m not 
trying to deliver a great speech. All I’m trying to do is articulate 
the kinds of concerns that have been brought to my attention by 
the people I represent, and I think that those kinds of concerns 
would be quite widespread in the city of Saskatoon. I have not 
heard people, very many people, express a pleasure or a desire 
to have the present system altered. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people I represent do not understand why you 
want to change the ward system. They think the ward system 
has functioned quite well in terms of the “our neighbourhood” 
and it’s functioned quite well in terms of the overall programs 
and services that the city delivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana is the first one that got it right. 
Congratulations. And the words are this: that we are abolishing 
the ward system as we know it. Yes, but we are introducing a 
new form of the ward system that you don’t seem to want to 
accept, that people will accept. 
 
And indeed the examples that you brought up could still occur, 
and particularly if it was good for the city as a whole. Now 
wouldn’t those neighbourhood people feel very good and warm 
about it all knowing that not only was it their own ward 
alderman that carried through that particular problem, but that 
they had the entire system behind them when that decision was 
made? 
 
And, you know, to start talking neighbourhoods and how they 
understand the neighbourhoods and visit there and how they 
feel so good, residency is not a part of the existing ward system, 
so that as a result, all of these little manoeuvres that you’re 
talking about now could very legitimately occur under the 
existing ward system. You could have everybody from 
Saskatoon Mayfair, that lives  

in Saskatoon Mayfair, representing all wards, or Regina South 
representing all 10 wards in either Regina or Saskatoon. So how 
do you balance that off with what you’ve been talking about? 
You can’t, because that’s not a requirement . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You’ll get another turn. 
 
So you know, when you’re talking that, you’ve got part of it 
right, but the ward system is still there, and they’re going to be 
able to still represent their neighbourhoods. Now they’re going 
to have the added capability of having the entire civic system, 
the alderman that are elected at large, also agreeing with it. And 
they just feel very warm and good about it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I believe that the city 
ward system in the city of Saskatoon had functioned very well. 
We have had representatives that have come out, 
neighbourhoods that have come together to represent a ward, 
and it has functioned quite well. 
 
See when you really think about politics in this province and in 
this country, those issues that affect the day-to-day lives of the 
individual citizens most directly are issues that are determined 
at the local levels, If you really think about it, the people on my 
block, on my street, in my neighbourhood, have an interest in 
what is happening at city hall, they have an interest in what is 
happening in terms of the services that are delivered to their 
families. I have had no concern, or very little concern expressed 
to me about the ability of individual alderman or alderwoman 
who represent the particular ward that they come from in their 
inability to represent the entire city. 
 
People believe that it’s important to have community 
representation on city council, just as people believe in rural 
Saskatchewan that it’s important to have individual 
representation on a particular municipal council — someone 
that comes from your area understands the day-to-day problems 
of the people who reside in that community. There’s nothing 
very startling about that, Mr. Minister. 
 
I guess I have to go back to my original question: what is it in 
the ward system that you find so disfavourable, so unbearable 
that you think it’s important to alter the ward system, to have a 
combination of ward and at-large? What is so wrong with the 
system as it now exists? Where have you gotten the kinds of 
concerns that say, do away with the present ward system, 
introduce a combination of an at-large and ward system? 
 
Who’s telling you to do this, Mr. Minister? The people on my 
street aren’t, the people in the constituency that I represent 
aren’t, and, I suspect, Mr. Minister, that it’s a few people who 
represent powerful lobby groups. Those are the people who 
want to alter the ward system; it’s not the average taxpayer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that important ward 
function will still be there. I can’t stress that enough. And you 
know, she talks as though the size of a ward now was three or 
four blocks long and two or three blocks wide. I mean, it’s a lot 
bigger than that. 
 
You know, you’re an MLA and you know a lot of people. I  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1737 
 

challenge you in your seat to, you know, name a whole pile of 
these good, friendly neighbours of yours, house by house by 
house, that are four or five or six blocks distant from your 
place. You won’t be able to do that. 
 
(2115) 
 
An Hon. Member: I can. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Oh you won’t be able to do that — come 
on. And I challenge anybody that’s listening to think about a 
block of houses or randomly select, at my choice, a block of 
houses, four or five or six blocks from their home — they won’t 
know their neighbours. A ward is a big place. 
 
But having said that, I do believe that the neighbourhood groups 
that would come all over from that ward would be fairly 
representative of that ward. And as a result, that’s exactly the 
flavour that we’re maintaining right now in this piece of 
legislation. And that’s why your argument is so hollow. 
 
I suppose that had we gone the total extreme as you did in 1973, 
and had we imposed the at-large system the way that you took it 
away in 1973, there would be a little bit of credibility to your 
argument. But we haven’t done that. We have balanced the 
situation. We have retained the flavour of the ward system, 
balanced it off with the at-large. 
 
Times change, time change. And with those times, the voters, 
the taxpayers democratically have every right to elect six 
members to a council of 10 rather than one. And that’s where 
your whole argument breaks down because the ward system is 
still there. We just didn’t take it away and say, that’s it — the 
way you arbitrarily imposed it. We’ve given them a modified 
situation to live with, a balanced approach. 
 
Now I know that you don’t want that because when you 
imposed the ward system, you just did it. You had no regard for 
the votes; you had no regard for the plebiscites; you had no 
regard for the input; you had no regard for the editorials; you 
had no regard for any of the comments. It’s all here in Hansard. 
I’ve read it and I’m going to continue to read it. You had no 
regard for any of that, and you imposed the ward system — 
period. No choice, no nothing, that’s it. 
 
We’ve come rather with a moderate approach, and we have 
taken what we believe to be the very best qualities that you can 
garner from the ward system. The people, those community 
associations will still have their same representation. They will 
still have a ward alderman. They will now as well be able to 
democratically select the majority of council, and that right they 
have never had since 1973. And that is the crux of the whole 
argument. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if we wanted to take your 
argument to the ridiculous we’d have an at-large system across 
this province and we would have people vote on the basis of an 
at-large system. And, Mr. Minister, we would be sitting as the 
government opposite, not you members. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, you still haven’t answered the question. 
You haven’t answered the question. I’m asking you very 
specifically: who was it that asked for this change to the ward 
system? Who was it that asked for the change? What it the city 
of Saskatoon? Was it the city of P.A.? Was it the city of 
Regina? Who was it? Was it a few people who represent 
powerful interest groups? Are they the people that asked for the 
change? Or was it the ordinary taxpayer in the cites that have 
been affected? Did they ask for the changes? And if they did, 
Mr. Minister, I would challenge you to table the letters. Table 
the support that you have for implementing these changes to the 
ward system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well we’re back to the original argument, 
Mr. Chairman, and you know it’s the same argument and I’ll 
have to go back to it. 
 
Unfortunately, where the member understood the ward system, 
she still doesn’t quite yet understand the parliamentary system, 
but as time goes by she’ll understand certainly the difference 
between the parliamentary system and the government in 
opposition role in the parliamentary system and the way we 
know it in here, and the difference between a municipal council. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Chairman, I made an announcement almost a year 
and a half ago now that a review of the ward system would be 
undertaken, and I asked for input and I received all kinds of 
input. And how do you table a document, as I explained the 
other day when I was having lunch in the member from Regina 
Victoria’s area, at the Hungarian Club, and right where I ran 
into a table, fortunately I didn’t get hurt. 
 
And you know, I’ve said a lot of things that have been 
misconstrued — where I saw the member shopping at 
Superstore, but I should have said I didn’t see the member 
shopping, I was informed that somebody saw them. Or I could 
have said I saw the member loading his groceries, and the 
member knows which one I’m talking about. 
 
But in any event, as I was walking out of the Hungarian Club 
after lunch, a group of about eight taxpayers — obviously 
tradesmen because, you know, the way they were dressed, they 
had their coveralls and they had their boots, work boots, and 
they had their tool belts and all the rest of it — and called me 
over and entertained a discussion on the ward system, at their 
persuasion, not mine. They called me over. And they said when 
are you going to do something about this ward system, because 
they wanted the opportunity to elect their council; they wanted 
the opportunity to elect the council at-large, and to be able to 
change their council, and not just have the right to vote for one 
single person out of 10. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve listened. I’ve listened 
with some care to all of what the minister has been saying here 
and I’ve had to reach this conclusion: that the arrogance of this 
government is such that it would cause it to do this kind of 
thing. It only takes a government of extreme arrogance to say to 
people, who in large numbers have said that they don’t agree 
with the government, that this government doesn’t care and it 
will do it anyway. 
 
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1738 
 

And I think that the arrogance was typified very vividly in some 
comments that the minister made in response to questions from 
one of my colleagues, when he essentially said: we’re the 
government. He said we’re the government and meaning, we 
will do whatever we want because we’re the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, that is arrogance at its highest. That is a 
member of the cabinet who is saying because he happens to be 
in government that the opinion of the people don’t matter. 
 
I don’t subscribe to that point of view and neither does the New 
Democratic Party because in our opinion, the opinions of the 
people do matter. And everybody who has had anything to say 
on this issue has said to the minister, don’t do it. Don’t fix it if 
it’s working and if it’s working well, don’t tear it down. 
 
Now I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that here is the real reason 
why this minister and this government is proceeding in this 
direction: this is really an attack on the cities, clearly an attack 
on the cities. Why? Because in the 1986 provincial election in 
the cities of this province, this government got wiped out. 
 
And instead of accepting that democratic decision of the 
population and listening to their concerns and trying to address 
them, the government is now saying we’re going to get even 
with you: we’re going to be vindictive; and we’re going to 
wreak some form of vengeance on the people of the cities 
because they didn’t vote for us. The voters of Elphinstone and 
the voters of Saskatoon Eastview reinforced that message in the 
by-elections, and in spite of all that, this minister still proceeds 
in his arrogant way, which exemplifies the arrogance of the 
whole government, to bring this legislation which he announced 
today. They still haven’t learned the lesson. They didn’t learn it 
after 1986. The people of two constituencies had an opportunity 
to send them a message and they have ignored it again. Now it 
takes a real extreme level of arrogance to do that. 
 
Now the minister said he wants to debate this Bill when it 
comes up for debate. Well I want to tell him so do we, and we 
will. And I just want to alert the minister — and this may be 
useful to him because the basis of his arguments today have 
been very supportive of his cause — that he’s going to have a 
lot of time to practise because some time in July he’s still going 
to be here debating that Bill. And he should know that, because 
this is only one example of the kind of other pieces of 
legislation which this government is bringing forward in this 
session only a month before the session would normally adjourn 
in the hope that they might be able to ram it through. 
 
Well I want to say to that minister opposite: be prepared. This is 
not an issue that’s going to go away, and at some time it may 
eventually pass, but it’s not going to pass before every citizen 
of Saskatchewan knows what this government is up to. 
 
I’m telling you, Mr. Chairman, that the arguments that the 
minister has had presented . . . that’s he’s presented to this 
House today have been absolutely unconvincing to anybody. 
Now I’ve heard him say that he’s consulted, 

 and my colleague the member from Nutana asked him some 
questions about that. And when he was asked the specific 
questions about where did he get this recommendation from, he 
doesn’t answer it because he knows he didn’t get any such 
recommendation from anybody. 
 
Now the last meeting he has had was with the president of 
SUMA and the vice-president of SUMA who immediately after 
seeing, meeting with the minister, talked to the media and said, 
we advised the minister not to do it; we advised the minister 
that the people of the cities should have a choice by vote. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, are you saying in this House that the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association which 
represents the cities, which represents the city of Regina, which 
represents the city of Melville, and Estevan, and Prince Albert, 
and Moose Jaw, all of which have written you letters in support 
of the position of the city of Regina — SUMA which represents 
those cities — are you saying that SUMA said to you that you 
should impose the modified system? Is that what SUMA 
specifically said to you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, SUMA said the same thing 
to them in 1973. Please. Please Mr. government don’t impose 
this ward system on us. Please. Did they listen? No. The cities, 
not only the councils in 1973, Mr. Chairman, not only did the 
councils say don’t impose the ward system, two plebiscites — 
two votes by the taxpayers of Regina in advance. Not one, two 
plebiscites said to the NDP, don’t impose the ward system. And 
it’s history now. So how they can even present that argument is 
beyond belief. 
 
To correct or explain something — not that explanation is 
required but, you know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I can 
take a lot of name-calling. Arrogance is one I have a little 
difficulty with. My comments regarding we’re the government. 
And you know, he tries to fool the people again. Don’t try to 
fool the people. Check Hansard and see how that remark was 
made, Mr. Chairman. It was made in reference to the personal 
reputation of myself and the member from Regina North West 
and the attack that he made. 
 
I chose not to get into a personal reputation, nor will I. And it 
was because of the personal reputation that I simply said that 
the voters have already decided on our reputation and we’re 
government — not anything to do with arrogance at all, but 
rather to do with a reputation argument that I’m not prepared to 
become involved in. I’m not going to get that low. I don’t have 
to resort to name-calling. 
 
And how you transcribe some degree of vengeance, vengeance 
of, you know, we’re doing away with the ward system, how you 
relate that the ward system has anything to do with our success 
or failure at the polls is beyond my comprehension. In 1982, 
Mr. Chairman, when the ward system was still in place in 
Saskatoon, we won ten out of ten seats; in Prince Albert, we 
won two out of two seats; in Moose Jaw, we won two out of 
two seats; in Regina we won eight out of ten seats. How in the 
world can you argue that the ward system hurts us? I mean, it’s 
crazy to even begin to think  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1739 
 

that kind of theory. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I said that I’m prepared to debate this Bill until 
the snow flies, and I am. And if it takes that long, if it’s 
necessary to debate this Bill until the snow flies to bring 
fairness to my taxpayers in my urban centres, I will stay here 
until the snow flies and give them the fairness and the 
democracy that they are demanding. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, this minister is going to 
have to be careful that he doesn’t run into any more tables; it’s 
obviously affected his performance. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask you to make a speech, but 
obviously when you get asked a direct question — and all 
evening, right from 7 o’clock, every time a direct question has 
been asked of you, you decide to make a speech and not address 
the question because you don’t have the answers. 
 
Now I’m going to ask you the question without a speech so that 
you can’t use that as an excuse to make one: can you tell this 
House and the municipalities of and the cities of this province 
that in your meeting with SUMA, they recommended to you, 
the president of SUMA recommended to you that you should 
impose the modified ward system in this legislation? Is that the 
recommendation you got from SUMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I admitted that to the press 
freely. What kind of a recommendation do you expect they’d 
bring me? I asked them an explanation that they couldn’t give 
me. I said, look, nine of twelve of your cities — nine of twelve 
— don’t have the ward system. If it’s so great, why do you want 
to keep it? They’re bound by their association. Their two largest 
members indicated that they wanted retention of the ward 
system. They’re an association of elected officials. 
 
Now I care about their opinion to the degree that they are 
taxpayers. So now when you have elected officials from SUMA 
— an association — coming forward, what other 
recommendation do you expect that they would bring forward? 
For crying out loud, doesn’t take very many brains to figure that 
out. 
 
And you know, I have responded and answered every question 
that I’ve been asked in this Assembly tonight. But you’ve . . . 
there’s an old analogy that I use. That’s like me saying you 
argue everything I say and you say, no, I don’t. I mean, you 
know, right off the stuff you’ve got it. Mr. Chairman, I believe 
that I’ve responded to every single question that has been raised 
this evening. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me get this straight, Mr. Minister, 
because this is important to get on the record because now you 
are saying, you are saying, Mr. Minister, that SUMA 
representatives- two members of SUMA — came to your 
office, and in spite of the fact that most of the cities of 
Saskatchewan said to them that you should not do away with 
the ward system and that you should allow the people of those 
cities to have the right to decide — in spite of that — that the 
SUMA president said to you that you should institute the 
modified system. Is that what  

you’re saying here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now you’re adding something new. Here 
you go again, trying to fool the people. Mr. Chairman, the 
member from Regina North East is notorious for that — just 
absolutely notorious. 
 
You accuse me of making a speech. You change your line every 
time. Now all of a sudden, now all of a sudden you’re not 
saying that the members from SUMA wanted me to retain the 
ward system, but now you’ve got this little hooker in there; 
you’re saying, oh and also the want you to put this to a vote. 
Now were you at the meeting? No, you weren’t at the meeting. 
You don’t know what was discussed at that meeting. 
 
And when you say two lone members of SUMA, I mean, I met, 
Mr. Chairman, with the president of SUMA, I met with the 
vice-president of cities. Now that’s from their executive board 
— you can’t do better than that. And a week earlier I had met 
with a whole bunch of people from SUMA — a week earlier. 
 
So don’t tell me that the consultative process has not been there. 
And I’m glad that I said consultative so easy; I had a little 
trouble with that word on television tonight, so I’ll have to 
practise it. In any event, this consultative process has been 
occurring regularly with all kinds of groups, with all kinds of 
people. 
 
And documentation — what can I tell you about 
documentation? What do you want, a petition? I’ve had other 
documentation that we could read out and you can bring 
forward, but if you’re going to bring forward any of that, and if 
you want me to start digging into my woodpile and start 
bringing forward the recommendation from various coalition 
groups and all the rest of it that say that they’re doing this for 
that and that and that — and I would have accepted the first part 
of their whole situation until they get to the ending paragraphs, 
and then they destroy everything that they want. 
 
So I think that I’ve been fair. I’ve responded to all of it. I would 
like to conclude with my estimates. Once the Bill is introduced, 
we’re going to have ample time to debate this Bill, line by line, 
where you can understand what we’re doing. You’re shooting 
in the dark right now. You might be awful embarrassed about 
some of the things that will be in the Bill that you’re going to 
have to backtrack from. Why don’t we wait? Give me the 
opportunity to introduce the Bill, finish these estimates. We’ll 
debate the Bill at the proper time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I know you would like that 
because you’d like to get it out of the way quickly because 
you’re going to get an awful lot of heat on this issue, which you 
have been getting. 
 
Now I noted some very important comment you made, and I’m 
glad you clarified it for me. You said that the President of 
SUMA and the vice-president of cities came to see you and 
gave you the recommendation that you should institute the 
modified system — that’s what you said. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if you didn’t say that the president and  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1740 
 

the vice-president of cities recommended to you that you should 
institute the modified system, I’m asking you then: who did? 
Who, in this consultative process, recommended to you that you 
should institute the modified system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there he goes again. You 
know, you’ve just got such a bad habit of doing that, of always 
trying to misinform the people. And I don’t know why you do 
that. I don’t mind sticking to the facts. 
 
But you know, I’d like to challenge you publicly one day, or 
let’s pull out Hansard — maybe we will — and look at the 
Hansard and, you know, would you admit that I didn’t say that 
if I trapped you with that? Probably not. You’d say, oh no, I 
won’t. 
 
But in any event, I have always said . . . I have said this this 
evening, and I’ll say it again many, many times — part of the 
consultative process — and SUMA was part of the consultative 
process, they indeed got me to back off from my stubborn 
position of going entirely to the ward system. And by retaining 
some flavour of the ward system and supplementing it with the 
good things that occur from the at-large system because nine of 
SUMA cities had the at-large system — so that’s not all bad. 
Why didn’t they go into the ward system? They didn’t want it. 
They didn’t want it. 
 
An Hon. Member: What’s their position on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I haven’t had the opportunity yet, nor have 
SUMA indicated to me what their official position is on this 
announcement. I haven’t heard. So I’m sure that I’ll hear the 
observations that they have to say about this announcement. 
And all I can do is say that this modified, this more balanced 
approach, was reached with all due respect to their arguments 
that they presented to me concerning the retention of the ward 
system as a whole. But they couldn’t convince me of the good 
of the ward system because only three . . . or nine out of their 
11 members didn’t have the ward system, had the opportunity 
to get it, wouldn’t implement it. They couldn’t respond to me 
with that. What else would an association of municipalities then 
say except that recommendation? I mean, that’s easy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, which of those nine cities 
recommended to you that the people in the cities should not 
have a choice as to whether they should have the ward system 
or not? Which of those nine cities gave you that 
recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t name offhand the 
ones that give me written notice that they wanted it retained. 
And what I have said is this: those nine cities that had the 
opportunity, I asked the question: if the ward system was so 
good — and this was SUMA’s official position to retain the 
ward system — if indeed the ward system was so good, why 
then do nine of the 12 not have it? Why then can you say . . . 
how can you say that the ward system is so good if nine of them 
wouldn’t accept it? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, can you then answer this 
question since you failed to answer the last one? Did any of 
those nine cities say that the city of Regina, which  

sent a resolution to you saying that the right of the city people 
to choose their electoral system should be preserved, that any of 
those cities you spoke of, the nine cities, disagree with the city 
of Regina to your knowledge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, if you were a member of an 
association and your two largest members wanted your 
association to help them carry forward a resolution, would it not 
make eminent sense that that would go — why would the cities 
. . . if Regina and Saskatoon wanted to retain the ward system, 
does it make sense at all, any sense at all for the other cities that 
had the opportunity to have the ward system and not implement 
it, why would then they say, well, yes, the ward system is good 
for Regina and Saskatoon but no good for us? I mean, it just 
doesn’t make any sense at all. 
 
I have to go back, Mr. Chairman, to my original position on this 
entire argument. I respect SUMA for their concern as elected 
officials, but I respect more — and I have to admit this — my 
urban taxpayer. After all, they’re my boss, and they’re also 
SUMA’s boss. 
 
And again, I just have to go back to the quote from the member 
for Saskatoon Westmount that the British North America Act 
puts the responsibility for creating local government institutes 
on the provincial government. And times change. And as a 
result of that change and as a result of the burden of the 
taxpayers, I believe that I have to provide the urban 
municipalities with every possible tool to operate as efficiently 
as they can. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it’s a 
well-known fact to the people of Saskatchewan that in the 1986 
election the people of Saskatchewan elected only two members 
of the present government from the four largest cities in 
Saskatchewan; that is to say, they elected two PC members 
from Regina and two from Saskatoon. That number from 
Saskatoon has, since the by-elections of course, been reduced to 
one. 
 
It should be no surprise then to the people of Saskatchewan, as 
it is no surprise to this Assembly and the members of this 
Assembly, that given such little representation in our four 
largest urban areas, that this government would begin to display 
an incredible insensitivity, and now also an arrogance, towards 
the people in those four largest cities and to the people in urban 
areas generally, but especially to the people in the four largest 
cities where the ward system might begin to make some sense. 
And it does make some sense, at least in the two largest cities. 
 
The ward system doesn’t make a great deal of sense, perhaps, in 
the smaller cities of this province. It may not make that much 
sense in an Estevan, in a Weyburn or a Melfort or Melville, 
because those cities are of a scale where an at-large 
representation still makes a lot of sense for those people. And 
that’s probably one of the reasons they haven’t asked for it. 
 
But it’s the people in the four largest cities especially that might 
tend to benefit from a ward system, and especially in Regina 
and Saskatoon, where when you talk of scale, a ward system 
begins to make sense. And I even see some concession now 
from the minister — given his half-baked  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1741 
 

idea to retain part of the ward system — that he agrees that the 
ward system has some merits for the people in the largest cities. 
 
But again it should be no surprise to people that we see an 
incredible insensitivity and arrogance. In the proposed changes, 
the proposed changes to the method of electing alderman in our 
four largest cities especially, because that’s where it has the 
greatest meaning, it should be no surprise that the proposed 
changes are simply a continuation of their insensitivity and their 
lack of understanding for the conditions in our large urban 
centres. 
 
The changes are a mean-spirited, narrow-minded attack on what 
they believe to be a system that they blame for visible 
opposition to their urban policies and programs. Now, that there 
should be opposition to their urban policies and programs again 
comes as no surprise to the people in urban Saskatchewan and 
again in the four largest cities. 
 
(2145) 
 
Now let’s review just briefly some of their records. This is a 
government, this is a government that has cut back drastically 
on urban revenue sharing it our cities and to all urban 
municipalities. And we see the effects of that, notwithstanding 
whatever the minister might say about his formula as to how 
those urban revenue-sharing grants are distributed, the impact 
was the greatest on the four largest cities. Let’s just make that 
clear. 
 
This is a government that has eliminated a community capital 
fund that was of great benefit to urban areas. This is a 
government that cut back on a system for urban transit. This is a 
government that has increased the cost of all municipalities 
through increases in the sales tax, but especially, especially to 
those urban areas that run a transit system because of the 
imposition of the gasoline tax. And that’s the record of this 
government. 
 
So in that context, opposition to the government from urban 
areas should not be surprising. And it should be no surprise that, 
for example, the people in Regina might say, enough is enough; 
that we oppose the government for shifting the taxation in this 
province from a system that . . . from a provincial system where 
there is a greater potential for fairness in taxation to one of 
property taxation. 
 
It should be no surprise that the people in Regina, as an 
example, would say, enough is enough. And it should be no 
surprise that their council — which has been largely 
representative because of the kind of system of election that we 
have, and therefore representative — it should be no surprise 
that that council will stand up to this government and say, 
enough is enough; we disagree with what you’re doing to 
Regina; we disagree with what you’re doing to large urban 
areas in this province; we feel that you’re discriminating against 
us. 
 
And it should be no surprise that that kind of opposition should 
be forthcoming in the face of your cut-backs and in the face of 
elimination of meaningful, significant grants and moneys to 
urban areas. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now what has been the government’s 
response? Does the government say, opposition is healthy; it’s a 
good thing? No. 
 
Does the government say, we’ll listen and try to be more 
sensitive? No. 
 
No, this government says that we really do not appreciate the 
opposition, can’t stand opposition, so we’re going to change the 
system that we hold responsible for this type of opposition. 
That’s what the government is saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now first the minister, first the minister 
flies up the flag-pole a system of total abolition of the ward 
system. He flies up the flag-pole a system of an at-large system. 
And — surprise, surprise! — he finds that no one in 
Saskatchewan salutes it. 
 
He finds that even people in rural Saskatchewan, who live in 
the R.M.s and who are used to a division system which makes a 
lot of sense to them, can’t support it either. They see it as a 
good system, frankly don’t understand why in the larger cities, 
given the massive scale of those cities compared to smaller 
centres, that those people should also not have a division or a 
ward system. And he finds little or no support at all in 
Saskatchewan for his idea of total abolition. So what does the 
government do? What does the minister do? 
 
Now he comes back and he says: well, we’re going to be 
moderate; we’re going to be reasonable; we’re going to listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan; we’ve consulted with them; we’ve 
listened to them. So as opposed to doing away with the ward 
system, we’ll only go half way. We’ll now have a system of 
where you can elect half at large, and you can have half of the 
ward system. 
 
Now I ask you: is this something that the people of 
Saskatchewan asked for? Was this the message that the 
government has received from council after council when their 
opinions were being asked on the ward system? Was this the 
message from city councils throughout Saskatchewan? No. 
 
Was this the message from their business friends at the 
Saskatoon board of trade? Was this the message from the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association that represents 
all urban municipalities? No, it was not. Was this the message 
from Saskatoon Eastview and Saskatoon Elphinstone? No, it 
wasn’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Because the minister made it clear. He 
floated this idea some time ago. That issue was debated in those 
elections, in those by-elections, and the people said, 
resoundingly, no, to your policies; no, to doing away with the 
ward system. They want no part of your government. They 
don’t want any part of doing away with the ward system. That 
was the message. The people made it clear, the people made it 
clear that they  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1742 
 

like the ward system; they want the ward system to stay. 
 
Why do they want the ward system? Because they know it 
provides for better representation. They know that cities in all 
. . . they know that the citizens in all areas of a city have a better 
chance of being adequately represented at their city hall. Under 
the previous system, as in Regina, most of the aldermen came 
from one area of the city. Under the ward system they knew that 
every area had one alderman. 
 
The people knew that the ward system provided direct access to 
help when they needed it. They know that you can cut through 
red tape and bureaucracy with the ward system. One phone call 
can put you in touch with the person that’s responsible, the 
person who is responsible to represent the interests of your area. 
They know that a ward system provides you with a 
representative who is accountable. They know that as your 
representative at city hall, an alderman must pay attention to the 
problems within the ward, particularly if that person wants to be 
re-elected, and so it is for government. If you want to be 
re-elected, you have to pay attention. 
 
They know that under a ward system you have a better chance 
of knowing who it is that you are voting for. They know that 
under the at-large system, to be faced with a list of 25 names, 
half of them who weren’t known to them, or more who weren’t 
known to them, that as with the board of education elections in 
Regina there was a very great chance that you just ended up 
picking alphabetically, and those that whose names started with 
the A’s and the B’s had a better chance of being elected. 
 
And they also know that they’re in a better position to judge the 
record of their representative under the ward system. They 
knew that under the old system that even if they knew the 
names of the alderman, they necessarily didn’t know what that 
person’s record might be. Those are the reasons that the people 
of Saskatchewan and in our large urban areas support the ward 
system. That’s why the people in the R.M.s support the ward or 
division system. 
 
I think my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana spoke eloquently 
and spoke well about why it’s important for the people in an 
area to have an alderman or a representative that they know that 
they can contact that has some sensitivity for the problems and 
concerns in their particular area. 
 
But this government, this government, Mr. Chairman, doesn’t 
listen; it turned its back on the people in our four largest cities. 
To them, the message that is coming out loud and clear by this 
action is that whatever else you say, we’re the government, 
we’re going to do what we want. Might is right. That’s the 
message that’s coming from this government. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that there is also another 
message, there is another message in this action of the 
government, and it’s an equally insidious message. And that 
message is: do not oppose us; do not oppose this PC 
government; do not speak against us; do not act against us, 
because if you oppose us, we will punish you. That is the other 
message that comes through loud and  

clear from your action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I say it’s an insidious message. It’s 
not a message that’s consistent with democratic traditions in 
this province and in this country and in the British 
Commonwealth. That’s not what the people in this country 
believe in. No, this government believes that if you’re a 
Legislative Law Clerk or a Legislative Counsel and you dare to 
attack the government, we’ll speak out against you. 
 
This government says that if you’re a non-governmental 
organization that deals with people in the social services area, 
and you have criticism, we’ll muzzle you. We’ll attach 
conditions to your grants to make sure that you don’t speak out, 
that you don’t speak out on behalf of the poor and dispossessed. 
 
This is a government, when it comes to an employee of the 
water corporation of Saskatchewan who dares to speak the truth 
about the water situation in Saskatchewan, says, well no more 
of this truth. We’ll suspend you. That’s this government. That’s 
their record. 
 
And what they’re saying is also, with respect to the system of 
local government, that if you elect people that dare to oppose 
us, we blame that system; we dare to change that system; we 
dare to exercise our might to accomplish our own narrow, 
partisan political ends. 
 
I guess the question that the people of Saskatchewan must ask 
themselves on this very grim day is: when will your campaign 
of recrimination, of retribution, when will that campaign ever 
end, Mr. Minister, because they fear, they fear for democratic 
tradition, they fear the actions of your government, they fear 
your message that might is right. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I come to the conclusion 
that the Legislative Assembly itself should speak out and should 
speak out loudly with respect to the actions of this government 
and especially the actions of this minister. 
 
So therefore I would move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Westmount: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its lack of confidence in the 
Minister of Urban Affairs for his inept handling of the 
damaging and arrogant change in the method of electing 
councillors in our cities, and accordingly supports a 
reduction of his salary to $1. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I find the amendment not in order. 
 
An Hon. Member: Why? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It’s not . . . Order . . . It’s not worded as an 
amendment, not relevant to the vote under consideration, and 
substantive motions are out of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, thank you for your ruling, Mr.  
  



 
May 31, 1988 

 

1743 
 

Chairman, and that’s why I asked the members opposite tonight 
to deal with the issue at hand, which was the estimates of Urban 
Affairs. And clearly they’ve debated a Bill that has not yet been 
introduced into this Assembly, and it’s unfortunate. And I 
suppose we can deal with the amendment at an appropriate 
time. 
 
But I have to point out a few things in response to the member 
from Regina Victoria. Yes, it’s true all rural municipalities have 
division systems in place — all of them do. And that’s the 
unique difference. In our urban municipalities, out of 511 or 
-12, only three have — quite a difference. And if you can’t 
understand that, the people out in the real world can. 
 
Every area is still going to have one alderman. One phone call 
will still be made to get your representative. But the big 
difference in democracy that the NDP refuses to accept is that 
you will now have the luxury, the taxpayer will now have the 
luxury of phoning five additional alderman for support for their 
problems. 
 
Our taxpayers believe in democratic rights — not like the NDP 
— and we are giving them back their rights to freely vote and 
control six of 10 alderman, not one of 10, but to indeed to 
control who they want to serve on their councils and who they 
don’t, with a majority vote. 
 
And the talked about the A’s win and the B’s, and if your name 
happens to be Gerald Zbytnuik, or whatever, you have no 
choice or no chance. Well that’s even a fallacy because the 
legislation contains provision to scramble the ballot if you so 
wish. So what’s the difference with that? Coupled with the fact 
that there is no statistics anywhere to indicate that that’s true. 
 
The cute saying that the member from Regina Victoria put in 
that might is right . . . Yes, with the NDP when they put in the 
ward system with no option, against two plebiscites, against the 
plebiscite that turned it down, and they said no, we’re not going 
to listen, you’re getting the ward system whether you like it or 
not. 
 
And we are still, Mr. Chairman, retaining the flavour of the 
ward system with a balanced approach and providing for the 
election of members at large. And that, Mr. Chairman, is the 
democracies that the taxpayers want, and that’s the relief that 
they’re looking for, and that is the relief that they will receive. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 
 
 
 


