


















































June 22, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 22, 1988 
 

2395 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 60 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the House 
was called at 5 o’clock, I was reaching the conclusion of my 
remarks, and that’s what I want to do by simply providing the 
evidence for the record and for the members and for the public that 
may be watching and that may be following this legislature other 
than today. 
 
The evidence would clearly support the need for this whole Bill to 
be stopped before it proceeds any further, and so that the public 
can have an appropriate time to have input so that their voice 
might be heard, and so that some rather very serious mistakes, 
which will have very damaging effects on many people and many 
businesses in Saskatchewan, are not put into place arbitrarily as 
seems to be the intention of the government at the present time. 
 
I made reference to . . . I drew to your attention the open letter to 
all Saskatchewan MLAs, which was sent by The Canadian 
Federation of Independent Grocers, which clearly said and 
documented at some length, the reasons why there was a need for 
an all-party committee. And I simply repeat what is said in the 
letter by this organization, which has got members all over the 
province — in the South and the North and the East and the West 
and in the centre. And that organization said to all of us, if we are 
sincere enough about our responsibilities as elected members of 
the Legislature. And listen, they said: 
 

. . . we urge all members of the legislature to oppose passing 
down responsibility for the control of shopping hours totally 
to the Municipal level, which experience suggest swill 
ultimately lead to wide open Sunday shopping throughout 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And they urge that there be an all-party committee to address this 
issue. 
 
I also, in my conclusion, was referring to a letter from a coalition 
of business people and church leaders and people who work in our 
shopping establishments, our stores and business places in the 
province, which again urge that there be an all-party committee, 
and the Bill do not proceed. And they wrote this letter to the 
Premier, himself. And the reason they wrote this letter — they 
don’t state it in here — but it’s clear they wrote to the Premier 
because they had given up on the minister. I do not know whether 
the Premier has responded, but he certainly has not responded in 
any public way. And once again, I think that indicates something 
about the quality of leadership on part of the Premier on this issue, 
as is the case on all issues since 1986 in Saskatchewan. 
 

Question I would ask is: if he did not reply, why didn’t he reply, 
Mr. Speaker? Are these people who represent people throughout 
all of the province not worthy of a response from their Premier? 
And if he did reply, Mr. Speaker, what did he say? Did he say, I 
don’t care, I don’t care what you’ve got to say, I’m going to let the 
Minister of Urban Affairs do whatever he wants in spite of my 
better judgement? Or, in fact, Mr. Speaker, did he bother to hear 
the message at all? I think it’s really quite deplorable when the 
Premier of the province will not address a letter and an issue that 
brought to his attention by literally thousands of business people 
and church leaders and citizens in the province through this kind 
of an organization. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also made reference to the fact that we’re not 
exactly the cutting edge of something new by the government 
proposing this legislation. In the province of New Brunswick this 
year, they brought in legislation going the other way because they 
had the experience of removing the province from some 
jurisdiction on the establishment of a common pause day, and it 
failed. It failed so miserably that the government in New 
Brunswick has now had to bring in legislation to do something 
different, to put it on the provincial government’s shoulders so that 
it bears the responsibility that it ought to have. 
 
The city council of Toronto has just this month passed, by a 
margin of 30 to two, a motion in the council protesting to the 
Ontario government legislation similar to what this government is 
introducing in this House at the present time. And at the 
government in Ontario is paying some attention and is listening, 
whereas this government pays no attention at all. 
 
And when I was finally stopping at 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I was 
drawing your attention to the newspaper article which was in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on Tuesday last, yesterday, June 21. And 
the headline, I think, speaks loudly and clearly when it says the 
city council, headline says, “City pleads for retention for ward 
system.” And it’s not the only city that’s doing that, and I’ll make 
some reference to all of the cities, even those who do not have the 
ward system, who have said to this government, “don’t proceed, 
don’t interfere, and take away our democratic rights to choose the 
electoral system that’s best for us,” but apparently it has fallen on 
deaf ears, Mr. Speaker. I hope that all of what’s happening in the 
last little while will still convince the government that it is on the 
wrong track. 
 
What the article said, Mr. Speaker, was that it will ask — and it 
refers to the Saskatoon city council — the government, through an 
urgent letter, not to change the ward system for the 1988 
municipal election in October. And aldermen also decided to ask 
the provincial government to provide a common pause day; both 
issues which I have spoken about which are addressed by this city 
council elected by the people of Saskatoon. 
 
It’s interesting the strength with which the city council of 
Saskatoon dealt with this issue, because the article says that the 
aldermen attacked the provincial government’s  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2396 
 

decision to get rid of the full ward system and replace it with a 
system of electing five aldermen at large and five by ward, or 
allowing a municipality to elect all aldermen at large, without 
giving that municipality and our cities an opportunity to pick the 
ward system if they chose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, alderman Donna Birkmaier is quoted as saying, she 
said, “That the government’s decision flies in the face of 
democracy.” And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is pretty clear with the 
feeling that exists throughout the province on this despicable move 
by the government opposite. 
 
So I have here, Mr. Speaker, the letter which the city of Saskatoon 
wrote, and it wrote this to the Premier, it wrote this to the Leader 
of the Opposition, it wrote this to the Minister, it wrote this to the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and all members from 
Saskatoon received a copy, including the Minister of Science and 
Technology. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the letter speaks for itself. The city . . . it says 
that: 
 

The council of the city of Saskatoon in its meeting held on 
June 20, 1988, resolved an urgent letter be sent to the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister of Urban Affairs, the 
Leader of the Opposition, and the Leader of the Liberal 
Party, and all MLAs representing the city of Saskatoon 
concerning the proposed amendments to the legislation 
dealing with the above matter. 

 
The city council wishes to reconfirm (it’s not the first time) 
its support of the present ward system. 
 
In addition, the council of the city of Saskatoon is of the 
opinion that the people should at least have a local option for 
the ward system as it presently exists. 

 
And I want to serve warning, Mr. Speaker, that if this Bill 
proceeds to committee, I will be moving just such an amendment 
that will provide the cities the opportunity to choose the ward 
system if they so choose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Because that is the only right and 
appropriate thing to do, and they will have to decide whether they 
will vote against that amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that’s the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association which 
represents over 500 urban centres in this province and thousands 
of people, hundreds of thousands of people in Saskatchewan, have 
written a very firm letter to the Minister of Urban Affairs, with a 
copy to others in this Assembly, in which they address both of 
these issues quite unequivocally and directly. 
 
And they say that . . . and this was done on June 17 and 18 at a 
special meeting of the board of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) in Saskatoon, and on  

behalf of all the members of SUMA, they passed a resolution of 
support for a province-wide common day of rest. And also, and I 
quote: “The SUMA board voted to strongly support the retention 
for the 1988 civic elections of the existing ward system.” 
 
I found it rather interesting reading on the last page of the letter, 
the following words, and they said, and it’s signed by the president 
of SUMA, Mr. Don Abel: 
 

I trust that given the respect which you have expressed for 
our association, you will also give serious consideration to 
these resolutions of the SUMA board and thus reconsider the 
proposed amendments to The Urban Municipality Act. 

 
And I would simply ask the minister, since he apparently had 
some respect for the views of SUMA at some time, does he still 
have enough respect for the views of SUMA to listen to what 
they’re saying and stop this legislation and let the public have 
some input? 
 
But it’s not only those arguments, Mr. Speaker. Even there are 
legal arguments which show that what the government intends to 
do with some of the other parts of the legislation is inadequate. A 
legal opinion by the city solicitor in the city of Saskatoon has said 
that: “The cities’ powers of enforcement are not significantly 
improved by these amendments when it refers to store hours.” 
 
So they’re going to turn it over to the municipalities who are going 
to get caught with the domino effect, but they have not even given 
them, according to this legal interpretation by the city solicitor of 
Saskatoon, they have not given them the power to be able to 
enforce those decisions. 
 
Now I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this government can’t even delegate 
authority. It really is not interested in how this issue is solved. It is 
only determined to get it off its shoulders so it doesn’t have any 
responsibility for it. 
 
Well I say to the members opposite, you do have responsibility for 
it. You can pass this legislation if you want because you have the 
majority. It won’t be easy and it won’t be fast but it is your 
responsibility, and whether you pass it or not, everyone in 
Saskatchewan will consider it to be your responsibility and will 
judge you accordingly when the time comes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now even the so-called mad dog legislation 
which the minister is so proud of . . . Here we’ve got 
municipalities having to increase property taxes dramatically. Here 
we have municipalities that have got their infrastructures 
deteriorating because they don’t have the funding to be able to 
repair them. Here we have municipalities that are not able to 
maintain their streets adequately, and towns throughout 
Saskatchewan whose sewage disposal systems are so old that 
they’re collapsing and they can’t handle them because this 
government has cancelled the capital grant program. And this 
minister spends all of his time boasting to the public about this 
marvellous mad dog legislation and not paying any attention to the 
other issues. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2397 
 

Nobody objects to that. It will address a problem that’s there. But 
the fact is, Mr. Speaker, cities already have that power and in this 
legal interpretation, the solicitor for the city of Saskatoon says that, 
“In our experience, the system in place in this city for dealing with 
complaints regarding dangerous dogs has been reasonably 
effective” — in other words saying we don’t need that legislation; 
we can do it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally, I want to just, without reading the 
letters, go through a list of cities who have written in support of 
the ward system and in opposition to the government arbitrarily 
removing it. First of all, the city of Regina, which has written to 
the Minister of Urban Affairs, first on May 13 of this year, in 
which they said that the provincial government is urged to respect 
local autonomy on this issue and let the voters and the people in 
the city decide the issue. 
 
The minister has been up in this House, and he’s saying, well 
there’s all these other cities who could have had the ward system 
but they didn’t choose to do it so it must be not any good. We’re 
going to get away with it. Well I want to show the minister what 
some of those other cities have said. 
 
The city of Prince Albert, on April 26, wrote a letter in support of 
the city of Regina resolution saying that the minister is wrong. The 
city of Weyburn did the same thing. It wrote, and I quote: 
 

Weyburn city council unanimously supported your council’s 
position opposing the abolishment of the ward system 
method of electing members to municipal councils in this 
province. 

 
Unanimously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1915) 
 
A letter from the city of Melville, the same message, saying that 
they support the position of the city council of Regina and they 
support the position of SUMA. And it says the following, and I 
wish the minister would listen because this is something he has 
been arguing counter to. It says: 
 

Even though the city of Melville does not operate on the 
ward system, a resolution was passed supporting your 
council’s position on this matter (referring to the Regina city 
council resolution). 

 
Here’s another one, Mr. Speaker, from the city of Moose Jaw. It 
doesn’t have a ward system either, but it supports the position of 
the city of Regina and of SUMA. And the list goes on and on and 
on, finally leading to things like a conclusion in the editorial in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of May 17, ’88, and since then in stories 
in the newspapers reconfirmed that the minister if flogging a dead 
horse — flogging a dead horse. And it says: 
 

The ward system is favoured by a solid majority of urban 
voters for the perfectly sound reason that it works better than 
the open system, particularly in growing cities such as 
Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what more evidence is 
necessary to convince anyone that this legislation is bad 
legislation. There is nowhere that anyone in this province of 
Saskatchewan agrees that the minister and this government are 
doing what’s right. The view out there, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
government is completely arrogant, it will not listen to anybody. It 
has a Premier that’s got a cabinet that’s out of control, and he 
seems to be either unable or unwilling to control that cabinet and 
provide the leadership in the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it’s not too late, it’s not too late for this out-of-touch 
government to get in touch out there. They’re getting the same 
letters as members of the opposition. And I welcome the members 
opposite, I welcome the members opposite, particularly the rural 
members whose communities are being threatened and whose 
business people in those rural communities, in many cases, are 
going to be devastated. 
 
I ask them to consider the motion which I am going to move now 
because I think this motion can do what is necessary. It’s not 
meant to be moved in order to be critical of this government, 
although I have been and will continue to be. It’s meant as a 
positive motion to try to get some positive method in which to 
resolve this situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And so I move, seconded by my colleague, 
the member from Prince Albert, the following motion: 
 

That the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Klein have all the 
words after the word “that” deleted and the following 
substituted: 
 
Bill No. 60 not now be read a second time because: 
 
(a) it undermines the basic principles on which our 

democracy is founded by restricting the legitimate rights 
of citizens to freely decide their system of representation; 

 
(b) it erodes the ability of citizens to make informed choices 

as to whom shall be their representatives; 
 
(c) it results in the form of representation which favours the 

election of the most privileged members of our society; 
 
(d) the abdication of provincial control over the setting of 

store hours is a serious threat to rural communities; and, 
 
(e) it will undermine the abilities of small businesses to 

survive and prosper while giving the corporate sector and 
large chain stores an unfair advantage. 

 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2398 
 

I move this motion, seconded by my colleague, the member from 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the member for Regina North East, seconded by the 
member for Prince Albert. Shall the Assembly take the motion as 
read? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, we want to hear it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — That the proposed motion of the minister . . . I 
would ask first of all, I suppose, in the interests of the House, since 
the hon. member knows that we cannot use the members’ names 
in the House . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did I? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Yes. If you could change the motion to “the 
Minister of Urban Affairs” from the minister’s name. 
 
Order. The question before the Assembly, then, is the motion 
moved by the member from Regina North East, seconded by the 
member from Prince Albert: 
 

That the proposed motion of the Hon. Minister of Urban 
Affairs have all the words after the word “that” deleted and 
the following substituted: 
 
Bill No. 60 not now be read a second time because: 
 
(a) it undermines the basic principles on which our 

democracy is founded by restricting the legitimate rights 
of citizens to freely decide the system of representation; 

 
(b) it erodes the ability of citizens to make informed choices 

as to who shall be their representatives; 
 
(c) it results in a form of representation which favours the 

election of the most privileged members of our society; 
 
(d) the abdication of provincial control over the setting of 

store hours is a serious threat to rural communities; and, 
 
(e) it will undermine the ability of small businesses to 

survive and prosper while giving the corporate sector and 
large chain stores an unfair advantage. 

 
The debate will continue concurrently. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to second this 
motion and endorse the remarks made by the member from 
Regina North East on this very, very mixed up Bill. 
 
What the government has done here is propose the exact opposite 
of what the people of Saskatchewan and the cities of 
Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan are really after. What this 
minister has done is: he is proposing a Bill  

which will outlaw democracy for the people who are interested in 
having a ward system. It will impose an electoral system which 
people do not want, it will remove their choice; and secondly, it 
will open up Sunday shopping, which nobody has asked. 
 
Now what has happened is it’s exactly the reverse of what the 
people of Saskatchewan really want. The people of Saskatchewan 
want the government to regulate Sunday shopping hours; they 
want them to take some action on it. And the people of 
Saskatchewan want the democratic right to be able to establish the 
electoral system in municipalities of their choice. That’s what they 
really want. 
 
What we have is a mixed up minister. He has mixed us up but it’s 
not unusual because this government has done things like this 
before. They’ve done exactly the reverse of the Saskatchewan way 
when it comes to setting up the economy, on setting up the basics 
on which to run an economy and on which to run a social system. 
Instead of providing the health and education social system 
infrastructure in which a good business environment can flourish, 
they’re giving money to the large corporations and depending on 
the trickle-down theory. Again it’s a complete reversal, a complete 
reversal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to approach this and give you a couple 
of anecdotal cases, Mr. Speaker. I was talking very recently with a 
good friend of mine, a senior citizen who lives on MacPherson 
street here in Regina, and when I was discussing this matter with 
him, when we discussed this matter of how they had mixed things 
up, he referred to a lack of brains on the part of the government. 
 
And when we discussed the matter of how the cities of Prince 
Albert and Saskatoon and Regina and Melville and Weyburn and 
Moose Jaw all objected to having imposed on them either the 
partial ward system or the at-large system of municipal elections, 
when they opposed . . . When you get opposition to this Bill from 
the coalition against Sunday shopping, from the Canadian 
federation of Independent Grocers, from numerous editorials, 
letters to the editor, examples like the city of Toronto which are 
going in the opposite direction — and the minister was given all of 
those statements, but in his arrogance, he refuses to listen; he 
refused to listen. In his arrogance he refused to listen and when the 
evidence is presented to him on the mess-up, he refused to react. 
 
So what my good friend said is that this minister is acting very 
much like a, a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Dictator. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well very much like a dictator, but I want to 
get his words, Mr. Speaker. And he said to me, and these were his 
exact words, that the minister has an ego of a Cadillac but the 
brains of a bicycle. Those were his exact words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert,  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2399 
 

three years ago we had our first election under the ward system. 
We voted it in; we voted it in twice, actually, to get it into Prince 
Albert. We voted it in once, and the council did not accept it at the 
time because they classed it as a plebiscite. We vote it in a second 
time. The citizens asked for it, got nearly a 60 per cent majority of 
people voted it in, and it is now in. It’s been in for one term, and 
the people are happy with it. 
 
And I want to tell you why they’re happy with it. When we have 
an electoral system as we have now, Prince Albert is divided into 
eight wards. Each ward is big enough so that if a person . . . or 
small enough so that if a person wants to get elected, he can use 
one of two methods or a combination of both. That person can go 
door to door knocking, and there’s enough time in a civic election 
for that person who may want to get elected to go to every 
doorstep and get to talk or, at least, get to see pretty well 
everybody in that particular ward. They can meet everybody in 
that ward, and the people in that ward can get to meet their 
prospective candidates and get to know them. That’s method one. 
 
The other method is to buy a lot of advertising and try to do it the 
impersonal way, through the television or through the radio or 
through printed pamphlets. Now the difficulty with restricting it 
just to the at-large system is that you restrict your method of 
campaigning only to that one method, only to the method of the 
television, the media — the expensive method. So what happened 
traditionally in our city was that there were people from the sector 
of the city that were well-to-do and could afford the advertising. 
Those were the people that had a preponderance of memberships 
on the city council. 
 
And now we have a situation where we have people who are 
represented from a part of the city that has never been represented 
before. They don’t even have complete water and sewer and 
paving facilities in Nordale and Hazeldell, across the river, but 
they now have a representative. And I think over time that the 
representative will be able to lobby more and more for that ward, 
and that things would even out a little better in the city. 
 
It is for that purpose that people like the system. Now there is an 
argument, of course, and the minister has continually presented it, 
that sometimes you don’t speak for the entire city. Well that 
argument is about as valid for a city as it is for rural municipalities, 
or about as valid as it is for the province of Saskatchewan. Sure, 
we have to look after our wards and our constituencies, but we 
also have to have the good of the province in mind, as well. 
 
What I really object to when it comes to the ward system is that 
the minister has actually outlawed the ward system now — 
outlawed it. Now if he really figured and he really believed in the 
people of Saskatchewan, he would have put three choices to the 
people. He would have said, well we want you to choose again. 
We don’t feel that the system that you now have is what you really 
want, but just in case, we’ll let you choose again. We’ll let you 
vote three ways: the ward system, the at-large system, and the 
half-at-ward, half-at-large system. 
 
But what has he done? He’s outlawed the one and he’s only letting 
us go for one of two systems. And that I object  

to. The minister is not listening, and that’s an example of his 
arrogance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to deal very briefly, Mr. Minister, on 
the topic of store hours. Last Sunday I was at home in Prince 
Albert, and on Sunday afternoon, along with 10,000 other people, 
we spent the entire afternoon and part of the evening celebrating 
what is known as Founders’ Day. 
 
Now people came to this from the city and from outside the city. 
We had parents bring their children. They sat on the river bank; 
they enjoyed each other’s company and their neighbours’ 
company; and we had a civic holiday which the city itself had 
proclaimed. We even had the pleasure of having a guest from the 
government side bring greetings. 
 
(1930) 
 
And you know, I would never have had the opportunity to have 
that member as my guest in my city if we had a tradition of 
Sunday shopping established in this province because I don’t think 
that the television station and the High Noon Optimists would 
have been able to swing off an event of this type. 
 
So that brought to my mind, what will opening store hours do — 
opening store hours to Sunday shopping — do to the fabric of 
Saskatchewan? Because if more people are spending time working 
in stores and more people are spending time shopping in stores on 
Sunday, then they must be doing less of either family time, or just 
visiting with their friends, or church time. They must be doing less 
of that because you can’t do both; you can’t be both places at 
once. 
 
Now there’s government that talks about family, and they made it 
one of their corner-stones, one of the corner-stones. But what is 
their action when it comes to family? Here we have a government 
that is going to open it up to store hours, going to open up the store 
hours to Sunday shopping — talks about families; here’s a 
government that’s opening up liquor outlets in all part of the 
province, franchising — that talk about the family. Who can 
believe them, Mr. Speaker? How can you believe a government 
who talks about families, but acts differently? 
 
What’s happened here is that they’ve reacted to some pressure. 
They’ve reacted to some pressure because we had people like 
Superstore and convenience stores opening up and the fabric of 
the business society changing slightly, and they don’t know how 
to deal with it. And they’ve got this little key word called 
competition, which they feel is the be-all and the end-all for 
everything. 
 
So they think, well everything will even out if we let everybody 
open it up. Well we know very well now from our short and 
limited experience of having several stores stay open over Sunday 
— in many cases against the law — that it doesn’t generate any 
new wealth. It doesn’t generate any new wealth; all it does is 
redistribute the  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2400 
 

wealth. And after people have had an experience with it, many of 
the people that I used to talk to earlier and I questioned about this 
issue now say, well yes, it’s kind of nice to go shopping on 
Sunday, but it’s really not necessary. 
 
And when I balance it out . . . And many people who now say, 
when they balance it out, know darn well that they can get along 
without it, and they tell me that they can get along without it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the question of asking the 
municipalities to do the legislation on store hours is a phoney 
excuse, very phoney, because you know full well and the 
government knows full well that there’s never going to be any 
way that all municipalities are going to get together and come up 
with some kind of a uniform scheme. And if we have it wide open, 
that means that every merchant in every small town, and I’m 
talking about towns other than Saskatoon and Regina, will have to 
open up their business in order to be competitive. And even then, 
it’s not going to work for them because they will not be able to 
keep up. 
 
So what we have here is another situation where the government is 
allowing the decisions for the people of Saskatchewan to be made 
in large corporate boardrooms, and I don’t like that, and I don’t 
think the government should put up with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — One of the minister’s arguments, Mr. Speaker, 
one of the minister’s arguments was that he couldn’t enforce it. He 
couldn’t enforce Sunday closing. 
 
You know, when I looked at this very same Bill, and I looked at 
the provisions, the provisions for enforcing the dog control 
legislation, the minister is willing to put a bite of $10,000 on 
anybody who is breaking the law under that provision. A bite of 
$10,000 — that’s for the dog owner. But that’s because that 
person will only be one person, likely. 
 
But he’s afraid to take on the corporations. He’s willing to put the 
bite of $10,000 on one dog owner, one person. That might be all 
right, but he’s not willing to put on the bite on any large 
corporation. And that’s I say, the real reason for them not coming 
up with store hour legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In summary, Mr. Speaker, in summary I 
would say that the minister is mixed up on what he is doing. He is 
doing exactly the opposite of what the people of Saskatchewan 
want. He is opening up business to Sunday shopping. The people 
of Saskatchewan don’t want Sunday opening. 
 
He is forcing down our throats an electoral system in 
municipalities, in the large cities, that is not wanted. It is not being 
asked for by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Business doesn’t want this particular Bill, families have  

not been asking for it, church leaders certainly oppose it, and city 
councils oppose it. If the government, and this minister, wants to 
save its skin on this Bill, it should pull this Bill immediately, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1951) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 14 
 
Romanow Pringle 
Shillington Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 
Simard Lautermilch 
Kowalsky Smart 
Atkinson Van Mulligen 
Hagel Koenker 
 

Nays — 25 
 
Devine Hardy 
Muller Klein 
McLeod Martin 
Andrew Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Lane Petersen 
Taylor Swenson 
Smith Martens 
Swan Gleim 
Muirhead Gardner 
Maxwell Kopelchuk 
Hodgins Britton 
Gerich  
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising that the members 
opposite would vote against an amendment to poll this piece of 
legislation — a piece of legislation which is just about one of the 
craziest pieces of legislation that I’ve seen in my time here in the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — The members opposite vote in favour of this kind 
of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and it just shows the kind of members 
that represent the PC Party here in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
This piece of legislation, which amends The Urban Municipality 
Act, rolls all into one big ball the ward system, the shopping 
hours, and the mad dog legislation. And it’s all under one piece of 
legislation, all mixed up, all higgledy-piggledy. And the member, 
the Minister for Urban Affairs, is just the kind of person that 
would put this kind of crazy legislation in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — The minister has stood in this House and said very 
sanctimoniously that he doesn’t want to impose anything on 
anyone, and therefore he’s allowing open shopping hours so that 
nothing is imposed. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2401 
 

And then what does he turn around and do, but in another piece of 
the very same legislation, he imposes on the cities of 
Saskatchewan a ward system . . . abolishment of the ward system 
. . . abolishment of the ward system as we know it now, no 
questions asked. 
 
Every person’s opposed to this ward system, representing in the 
groups that we’ve already heard about from my colleagues, 
they’re opposed to these changes in the ward system, and the 
minister goes ahead and does it anyway. He’s imposing something 
on the citizens of Saskatoon that was discussed in city council on 
Monday night. The city councillors are opposed to these changes 
in the ward system, and many other groups of people are opposed 
to it, as my colleagues have well demonstrated in the remarks that 
they’ve made and the evidence that they put forward here in the 
House. And yet you go ahead and bring it in. 
 
And our city solicitor has said that this legislation by . . . city 
council will have to make a decision by by-law. If they don’t, they 
make a decision by the by-law to disestablish the wards into which 
this system is divided. They have that choice before August. The 
city council can choose to abolish the ward system all together. 
That’s the choice they have — one thing. 
 
No choice as to whether they want to keep the ward system. A 
total imposition of a point of view that says the ward system has to 
go, and they can choose not to have it at all. If they choose not . . . 
if they choose to wait, then, as I understand it, a municipal ward 
commission will be set up and they will decide — they will 
decide. 
 
So much for local control. A municipal ward commission will 
decide how the city’s going to be divided into wards, how many 
wards, and then the at-large system comes in as well. This mixed 
up ward and at-large all in one, from a minister who says he 
doesn’t want to impose anything. That is just a joke. Absolutely 
taking away local control from the municipalities that already have 
the ward system, and the municipalities across this province that 
see that the ward system is a good way to go. 
 
The ward system is important because it gives people, ordinary 
people, a chance to run for city council, and it takes away the 
power of people privileged, and people with connections and lots 
of money to spend on their election. And that’s the reason why he 
wants to do away with the ward system. He wants to impose his 
system on people whether they want it or not. 
 
City council has written a letter, as my colleague, the member 
from Regina North East, has pointed out. The city council in 
Saskatoon has written a letter, dated yesterday, confirming its 
support of the present ward system and being of the opinion that 
the people should at least have a local option for the ward system 
as it presently exists. 
 
But the Minister of Urban Affairs does not believe in people 
having at least a local option. In spite of what he says, these are the 
kinds of actions that prove exactly where this government is at in 
terms of local options, in terms of any choices, in terms of any 
democracy. This is the kind of action that shows that you’re not in 
favour of democracy, you’re not in favour of local options, you’re  

not in favour of consultation because you’ve ignored all the 
consultations and all the communication that you’ve got that says 
that the ward system is good and should stay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And the city of Saskatoon in very polite in this 
letter. It says: “It is respectfully requested that the views of the city 
of Saskatoon be considered when the proposed legislation is 
reviewed.” A very polite request from the largest city in 
Saskatchewan, from the city that I’m proud to represent, 
respectfully requesting that you reconsider this legislation. And I 
am absolutely demanding on their behalf that you reconsider this 
legislation and that you pull this legislation. It’s absolutely 
unacceptable to impose the ward system, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now when it comes to the store hours, you turn around and you 
have quite a different argument. You want to give every business 
in Saskatchewan the free choice, every community a free choice 
on store hours, Mr. Minister. An absolutely ridiculous concept to 
think that rural municipalities across this province have an equal 
decision making in the store hours issue. 
 
What you have said is a free choice and what you have said is 
local government, is absolutely a failure of this government 
opposite to impose or to bring into play fairness and justice and 
democracy for the municipal systems around this province. 
You’ve failed to do that. 
 
You’ve said it’s competition, Mr. Minister. It’s no competition for 
a small independent business to be up against Superstore or 
Eaton’s or The Bay. That’s absolutely ridiculous. And if you think 
that’s competition, you should really have a good think about what 
that word means. 
 
(2000) 
 
These businesses are not competing. And I represent the 
downtown area of Saskatoon and I know, and I’ve talked to a lot 
of small, independent businesses in the very heart of Saskatoon. 
The downtown area of Saskatoon is having a real struggle to 
survive against the malls in Saskatoon. And downtown we have a 
lot of independent businesses. 
 
And now the minister . . . the Minister of Urban Affairs is 
laughing at me when I mention the malls. That’s how he much he 
knows about urban affairs that he doesn’t even understand what is 
happening to independent businesses in terms of control by the 
malls. And if you don’t . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — If you don’t understand how the malls control 
business in this province, you should go out and do some more 
learning before you have the right to stand up and be the Minister 
of Urban Affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — So let me tell you about the malls in relation to 
downtown Saskatoon, Mr. Minister. Let me tell you since you 
don’t seem to know and you think it’s a joke. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2402 
 

Every independent business that is inside a mall has to abide by 
the rules of the malls, and the malls have big stores attached to 
them. It’s very often in the malls that the big stores want to stay 
open on Sundays. It’s the big businesses that want to stay open on 
Sundays. It’s the small businesses in the malls and in downtown 
that are going to be hurt. They’re going to be hurt and the 
downtown area of Saskatoon is going to hurt the most. 
 
But you don’t care about the downtowns of the cities and you 
don’t care about the independent businesses, and you certainly 
have shown that you don’t care about the small businesses in the 
rural areas. And I’m really surprised to see the members opposite 
who represent rural constituencies voting against our amendment 
and voting in favour of your legislation because it’s going to hurt 
the rural communities badly. 
 
And in that way, perhaps as a member representing the downtown 
area of Saskatoon, I should be in favour of it because the 
businesses will all come into Saskatoon. The business will come 
into Saskatoon on the Sundays and the rural areas will hurt the 
most. The rural areas will hurt the most. 
 
And you had an opportunity to bring some order into this chaos. 
You had an opportunity to stand up for fairness and justice for the 
smaller rural communities and the businesses out there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — You had an opportunity to do that and you’ve 
failed. In this democratic system you’ve imposed something on 
people that they don’t want. They don’t want it, they don’t need it, 
and it’s going to hurt Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan 
people very badly. 
 
It’s going to hurt the people that need to have a common day of 
rest, but apparently you have no respect for that concept at all — 
no respect for families getting together, no respect for friends 
getting together, no respect for people who want to have a day in 
church and a day with their families afterwards. 
 
All you want to work for are big business. No other interest, no 
other aspect of our community life seems to mean anything to you, 
Mr. Minister, or to the government opposite. 
 
For some reason you’re prepared to put this legislation in place 
which is very, very unpopular in this province. And I can only say 
that there must be some vested interests somewhere encouraging 
you to do this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re doing it for Peter Pocklington. 
 
Ms. Smart: — You’re doing it for Peter Pocklington. I’m sure 
you are. The Deputy Premier says he’s doing it for Peter 
Pocklington. 
 
Those are the kinds of businesses . . . He’s admitted it. He’s 
admitted it. It’s the Superstores and the large businesses that are 
putting this pressure in. It’s not the  

independent businesses. When they’re in the malls, they’re not 
going to have any choice. The businesses are not going to have the 
choice that you say they’re going to have. 
 
And what you call a choice is just a sham; it’s absolutely smoke 
and mirrors. You want to talk about choice and you want to talk 
about democracy, and you impose no choices and you impose no 
democracy. 
 
And in the middle of it all, we have the mad dog legislation. Well I 
can have some comments to make about the kinds of mad dogs 
that I would like to see controlled by this legislation, and 
unfortunately they’re not. And I would like to go on record as 
saying that I’m very much in favour of control of dangerous dogs, 
but I want the people of Saskatchewan and people of Saskatoon 
and Saskatoon Centre to know that when I vote against this 
legislation, I am not voting for dangerous dogs. I’m voting against 
dangerous dogs, I’m voting against the dangerous dogs opposite, 
and I’m voting against them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre, in her 
enthusiasm, has uttered an unparliamentary remark, and I ask her 
to withdraw and apologize for that statement. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well I apologize, Mr. Speaker, if I’ve crossed the 
boundaries of parliamentary language, and I withdraw the 
statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Okay, thank you. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Many of my constituents, some of whom may be 
watching tonight, will perhaps have been surprised to see me lose 
my cool like this. They’ve many times told me they’ve wondered 
why I haven’t before now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — But on this piece of crazy legislation that rolls the 
ward system, the store hours, and the mad dogs all into one, I feel 
very strongly that this legislation needs to be opposed; that people 
don’t want it; that it’s very unfair of the minister to ram this 
forward like this ; that the changes that are proposed are going to 
hurt a lot of people in Saskatchewan, a lot of working people who 
need to have that day off together with their families, a lot of small 
business who are going to have one heck of a time surviving, if 
they can survive at all. 
 
And the fact that you want small-business people to work seven 
days a week in order to compete with the Superstores and Eaton’s 
and The Bay is shameful. It’s shameful to bring in legislation that 
forces that on people in Saskatchewan. And from my point of 
view, it’s completely unacceptable. We’ve need that day of rest. 
Many working people have fought hard in the past, Mr. Speaker, 
for that day of rest, and now this party opposite is bringing in 
legislation that destroys it. 
 
It took a long time for people to get it, but this is the government 
that goes backwards into the past, not  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2403 
 

forward into the future — backwards into the past where people 
have to work 12-hour days, 16-hour days, seven days a week. 
That’s what this government opposite wants. And if you think I’m 
joking and you laugh because you think that what I’m saying is 
silly, you just talk to the small businesses; and if you’re laughing, 
it just proves you haven’t talked to the small businesses. You’re 
completely out of touch. You don’t know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — They don’t know what it’s like to run a small 
business. They don’t know what it’s like to be controlled by larger 
companies and by malls that have the kind of control over you; 
that say, if you’re going to work these hours, you have to work 
these hours. You have no choice and you’re a small business and 
you’re trying to survive. And you’re doing irreparable damage to 
Saskatchewan by bringing in this kind of legislation. 
 
And I want to talk just briefly once more about my concern about 
abolishing the ward system. The ward system gives ordinary 
people a chance to participate in representative democracy, and by 
destroying that ward system, you are destroying that opportunity 
for people to participate who haven’t got the money that the very 
wealthy people have. 
 
And by destroying that opportunity, you’re taking us back into the 
past again, Mr. Minister. This is not progressive; this is not 
forward-looking. Putting control of the city councils in the hands 
of people of privilege is regressive; it’s unacceptable to us on this 
side of the House. It’s something we feel very strongly about and 
that we must speak out about, in support of all the people, and the 
groups of people, and SUMA, and the people who are running for 
city council, and the other people who have a great concern about 
this ward system. 
 
There’s nobody that supports it. There’s nobody that supports this 
legislation. There are a lot of people who support the ward system 
the way it’s been because it’s given ordinary people a chance to be 
represented on city council. And this wild idea you have that 
somebody who’s on city council has to be elected at large in order 
to speak for the whole city is total hog-wash — it’s total 
hog-wash. If that was the case, you would all have to run for 
election to represent the whole province, and if you did that, the 
two cities of Saskatoon and Regina would wipe you out. That’s 
what would happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And on this side of the House we believe in having 
a system of representative democracy where there’s a division, 
there are local units, that it’s feasible to represent, that you can go 
out and talk to the members in Regain Wascana or 
Kelvington-Wadena or Weyburn and you can talk to the people 
that you want to represent and you can come here and represent 
them. 
 
And you’re denying that at the local level. You want to go back to 
some sort of a hodgepodge system where only a few people can 
get elected because they have to cover the entire city, and they 
have to have the money to pay for that kind of campaign. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have said many, many important 
things about this legislation and we have been discussing it at 
length, and I know that many people have other comments that 
they want to make. So I am very reluctantly going to give up the 
discussion because I have a lot more that I would like to say on 
this. It’s a very important piece of legislation and it’s an example 
of the kind of muddled up legislation that this government is 
bringing forward. 
 
Because I know other colleagues have things to say, I would like 
to move the adjournment of the debate at this point. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 61 — An Act to 
amend The Local Government Election Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to say a few 
words on this piece of legislation. Some of my colleagues have 
tried to address and reason with the Minister of Urban Affairs over 
this matter. This is, as members will know, consequential to The 
Urban Municipality Act and has some other sections in it as well, 
but that is the primary thrust of it and that’s why the Bill’s being 
brought forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what it takes to make an impression on 
members opposite. I cannot imagine a more forceful presentation 
of public opinion, from a variety of sources, on the amendments 
under The Urban Municipality Act and the ward system in 
particular. We have had the public express their views; we’ve had 
the cities express their views; SUMA has expressed their views. 
My colleague from Regina North East read a number of comments 
from people, some of whose . . . most of whose political affiliation 
I don’t know; some of them I know to be of NDP persuasion, 
some of them I know to be of Conservative persuasion — all of 
them saying, don’t take away the ward system. 
 
If they’re getting this from our supporters and their supporters and 
those who are neutral in the middle, I’m just not sure what it takes 
to make an impression on this government. I’m really not sure 
what this government thinks it’s doing. Some have said that this is 
the final solution to the quarrel that the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden and the member from Regina South have 
had with the Regina city council. This is their way of bringing it to 
an end. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s going to come to an end, but not 
quite in the fashion that this government thinks. I will make a 
prediction that most of the current members of city council will 
still be alderpersons long after these people are hustling trying to 
find themselves another job after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And indeed this piece of legislation will form 
an important part of the final solution to the  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2404 
 

argument but not quite in the way you think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a good deal more I want to say on this Act. 
There is more I want to say on The Urban Municipality Act, and 
the two should be dealt with together. I therefore beg leave to 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 64 — An Act to 
amend The Tax Enforcement Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
to say that this Bill is not consequential to The Urban Municipality 
Act. It does not deal with the ward system. It does not deal with 
the devastating store hours legislation. There are some questions 
of clarification that need to be asked. 
 
Generally I see a lot of merit in this particular Bill. It gives 
municipalities certain powers which are in the modern day 
required. It updates some of the old legislation, so I do not have 
anything to say on second reading other than we’re going to let it 
go to committee and see if the minister, at least on this one, can 
provide some appropriate answers. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(2015) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 72 — An Act 
respecting the Saskatchewan Municipal Board be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to let this Bill 
proceed to committee as well, but I do want to make some brief 
comments on it because although it may, on the outside, seem to 
be very straightforward legislation, it does have some rather 
serious implications. Clearly the Bill consolidates the powers and 
the responsibilities of three current agencies, the Local 
Government Board, the Provincial Planning Appeals Board, and 
the Saskatchewan Assessment Appeals Board. 
 
That is argued by the minister who spoke for the Bill as being a 
more efficient way of doing things and making a bigger operation 
than it is now, in each case, independently. The argument is made 
that it will eliminate the duplication of services and will be more 
efficient. That’s the arguments that are made. 
 
The question though, Mr. Speaker, that I think everyone should 
ask is: will in the end this be the creation of an ineffective monster 
because of its bigger size, which gives a lever for developers and 
financiers to get their way at the expense of the public good and 
what is in the public interest? I’m not sure that this government is 
capable to addressing that kind of question, or whether they care 
to, but I think it’s a question that has to be seriously addressed. 
 

I know that the Saskatchewan urban municipalities is addressing it 
and, although they are supporting the Bill, have some of those 
reservations, as do municipal councillors. 
 
As I studied the Bill, I discovered that it’s modelled on the Ontario 
Municipal Board which has not, I might say, distinguished itself in 
the provision of rationality or fairness in municipal decision 
making. There are a lot of hookers with the Ontario legislation and 
the Ontario board that I wish that the government opposite had 
looked at . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well a member opposite 
laughs. The Minister of Urban Affairs laughs as he laughs at every 
business man in Saskatchewan who is saying to him that his store 
hours legislation is a disaster. 
 
And I want to say to the minister opposite, that if he’d laughed less 
at the people of Saskatchewan and listened to them more, that he 
might be able to do a better job than what he’s done and what he 
continues to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the 
Ontario situation. In that province the board is an extremely 
influential body which has developed the reputation of 
second-guessing local democracy. Developers and people with 
money are by-passing municipal councils and municipal decision 
making by taking their case to this municipal board. And they 
have the money and the backing, legal backing to do this. The 
average citizen does not have the money or can afford the legal 
backing to do it. 
 
Now the other aspect of this Bill is the appointment of the board 
members, 10 of them. The government is going to appoint those 
board members. We saw today in question period why that is such 
a dangerous situation with this government. 
 
Who is going to be appointed the chairman of the Legal Aid 
Commission? When asked in the House, the Minister of Social 
Services refused to answer because he didn’t have the courage to 
stand by his patronage appointment in which there would be 
supplementary questions. But outside in the hallways, when asked 
by the press, he admitted that he’s going to appoint the former 
campaign manager for the former Conservative candidate in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview as the legal aid commissioner, 
while he is firing some other people who have been recommended 
and appointed by legal aid bodies throughout the province. 
 
If the government appoints members to the board for political 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, rather than people who have the required 
expertise, there is every possibility of decisions being made in 
favour of individuals and organizations or big business based on 
political favouritism instead of on what is right and what is in the 
public interest. 
 
And the Minister of Urban Affairs, with the way his attitude has 
been throughout to the public of Saskatchewan, is quite capable of 
doing that, Mr. Speaker. This is an important consideration and 
one that  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2405 
 

will need careful watching by municipalities and by the 
opposition. And you can be assured, Mr. Speaker, that we will be 
watching with great interest when appointments are made and how 
the decisions are then disposed of. 
 
Another point to be made briefly, Mr. Speaker, is that with the 
absorption of the Local Government Board into this new 
organization, there is a danger that it may be diluted. And I hope 
this doesn’t happen, and I say that to the minister sincerely. 
Municipalities in the province will tell you, every one of them, 
although they have had arguments with the Local Government 
Board, they will tell you, in spite of that, that it has done an 
excellent job, and has in many instances prevented municipalities 
from getting themselves into serious financial difficulty and has 
assisted other municipalities in getting out of financial difficulties. 
 
If its role, if the role of the Local Government Board is weakened 
because of the creation of this large organization, the loss to 
Saskatchewan municipalities would be a very serious one. 
Municipal people have expressed their concern about this even 
though they generally support the legislation, which is a credit to 
attribute to them. And so I urge the minister and the government to 
keep this in mind and to make sure that the functioning of the 
Local Government Board is not diluted by its amalgamation. 
Making one larger organization of bureaucracy, I say, Mr. 
Speaker, is not always the efficient or the most effective way of 
doing things. 
 
With those reservations, which I will be asking the minister about 
in committee, I will conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, and 
indicate that the opposition is prepared to let the Bill go to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hodgins that Bill No. 83 — An Act 
respecting the Operation of All Terrain Vehicles be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had, since my 
colleague, the member from Regina Centre, adjourned debate on 
this, we had an opportunity to look at it, and we are prepared to let 
this proceed in committee so we can deal with it clause by clause 
where we can get clarification and answers. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 93 — An Act to 
amend The Ambulance Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, another one of my colleagues, 
the former minister of Health, wishes to speak on this, and so for 
now, I will adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the  

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 88 — An Act 
to make Certain Changes in the Statute Law with respect to 
the Investment of Moneys Held pursuant to Certain Acts be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a 
few more remarks with respect to this particular Bill, and start by 
saying that historically the investment management for various 
pension funds in the province and those that implicate public 
funds is so far as Government of Saskatchewan moneys, that the 
investment management of those funds has been handled by the 
Department of Finance. 
 
The legislation before us, in concert with other legislation before 
this House, proposes to sever this relationship. And the question 
must be asked who will now provide the investment management 
function that, at this time, is being provided by the Department of 
Finance; but it is proposed to be curtailed. The legislation would 
appear to leave this question up to the individual pension funds, 
but it would also appear that behind the scenes the government is 
encouraging the relevant funds to come together as a private 
corporation, as a client-owned private corporation, that would then 
provide the investment management function now being provided 
by the Department of Finance. 
 
It is our opinion, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance has not 
offered a sound explanation as to why this change is required. No 
reason has been advanced as to why the Department of Finance 
could not and should not continue to provide this service. 
 
Now we know that the investment management function will need 
to be expanded in order to meet the growing demands of the 
various funds. It’s know that, even as the funds now approximate 
total some 4 to $5 billion, in the next few years that size, the size 
of those funds will escalate rapidly, and therefore the investment 
management function needs to be upgraded, needs to be expanded 
in order to meet the demands of those funds. 
 
We also know that this government will use any and every 
opportunity to shift responsibilities and functions from 
government departments and agencies to private agencies, to 
outside of government control. That is their very clear, ideological, 
philosophical direction. And it’s no surprise that it should come in 
this fashion because it comes in concert with many of the 
legislation that the government has proposed. It comes in concert 
with the many actions that the government has undertaken in the 
last few years where they have made it clear that if there is 
something that is being done by government, that they look for a 
way for that to be done outside of government. And that is their 
philosophical, ideological direction. And I would say that no good 
reason has been advanced by the government why, in this 
particular case, the Assembly should support their direction, their 
leadership, in this matter. 
 
And in the absence of good cause, we are not opined, Mr. Speaker, 
to support the Bill. We think that the government needs to give 
more than vague assurances about complexities of the investment 
market, the expanding needs of pension funds; needs to give more 
reason than  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2406 
 

simply that to say, that is the reason we are curtailing the 
involvement of the Department of Finance, curtailing the 
involvement of the investment management unit — and one which 
I might say is generally recognized as having done a very good job 
for the pension funds in Saskatchewan. 
 
There has never been, there has never been, Mr. Speaker, any 
criticism of the Department of Finance when it comes to handling 
the investment management of the pension funds in 
Saskatchewan. There has never been any criticism. So I guess one 
might ask: if it ain’t broke, why fix it? 
 
But again, as with so many other aspects of this government’s 
activities, it’s a matter that they have their ideological blinkers, 
they have their philosophical direction. That is the thing that 
sustains them, that is the thing that carries them, and that is the 
reason, I would submit, in large part for the Bill that we have 
before us today. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now related to this, I feel that — and feel it strongly — that the 
government owes the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
an explanation as to what exactly it proposes to do in the way of 
an investment corporation of Saskatchewan, what it proposes to do 
in lieu of an investment management function being handled by 
the Department of Finance. 
 
We feel that the Minister of Finance should be tabling for full 
discussion all of his plans before asking the Assembly to improve, 
in the form of the legislation before us, only a part of his plans. 
 
There have, in the last few months, been documents circulated to 
the media, to the opposition, which purport to be an analysis and 
study by a James Marshall outfit from Toronto, who’s been 
contracted by the government to review the options available to 
the government, to tell the government whether it should expand 
the investment management function within the Department of 
Finance, whether it should go the way of an investment 
corporation of Saskatchewan, as proposed — that is to say, a 
private corporation incorporated under the business Act — or 
whether it should be an independent Crown corporation, much the 
same as the type of relationship that exists in Quebec for the 
reporting of the investment management of public sector pension 
funds to the Quebec legislature. 
 
We feel that the minister has an obligation and a responsibility to 
table those documents before the House so that those documents 
can be discussed fully. He should be outlining the options to the 
course that he is now pursuing, and we say that in the very least 
that he has an obligation that, even if he is fixed on a particular 
course, to lay that before the Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan, and all those pensioners that are involved in these 
decisions. And again, this involves many thousands of people in 
Saskatchewan because many pension funds are implicated 
 
We feel that he has a responsibility before we proceed  

further, before we proceed further, to come to this House and to 
say, here is the alternative that we have to the Department of 
Finance. The minister has been very vague — very vague. All we 
have is reports that have been leaked to us, leaked to the media. 
We are to assume that the direction that is offered in those reports 
will in fact be the direction of the government. We feel that there 
should be an opportunity to debate that point. There should be an 
opportunity to debate the constitution of an investment corporation 
of Saskatchewan, whether that should be a Crown corporation of 
some sort, whether that should be a private business corporation. It 
apparently is the direction that the Minister of Finance favours at 
this point in time. 
 
The minister says that all of the pension funds support his 
proposals, support the legislative proposals that are before us, and 
relatedly support the proposals that he has for an investment 
corporation of Saskatchewan. He says that they support that, but 
we’re not quite sure what it is that they’re supporting. He won’t 
bring the information before the House. He won’t tell the 
Assembly just what it is that he is planning. He won’t tell the 
people of Saskatchewan, and especially the many thousands who 
have pension funds that are implicated in this, exactly what he is 
up to. 
 
And he says that all the pension funds support his proposals, that 
all agree with his proposal for an investment corporation of 
Saskatchewan. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that judging from the 
minutes of a recent supervisory board meeting of the public 
employees’ superannuation plan, that agreement is less than 
unanimous. 
 
And I have with me the minutes of a meeting of the public 
employees’ superannuation plan from Thursday, March 3, 1988, 
and there was a discussion between the members of the board and 
those representing the investment corporation in the person of the 
deputy minister of Finance, and an Andrew Smith of James P. 
Marshall Consultants of Toronto. 
 
And it’s indicated that the board had a wide-ranging and 
free-wheeling discussion regarding the proposed investment 
corporation of Saskatchewan. And the following represents a 
summary of the key points raised by the board. And among the 
points that are listed by the supervisory board is the following, and 
I quote: 
 

It is not true that all parties are in agreement with the 
principle of the investment corporation. Many members of 
the plan feel that when the plan was instituted (that is to say, 
the superannuation plan), there was a guarantee that no 
administration fees would be charged to the plan. Many 
members would prefer to have the investment and financial 
service division of the Department of Finance hire more staff 
rather than to create a private corporation. 

 
And they go on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 
 

We must be given the opportunity to discuss the investment 
corporation with our members and other parties. The 
timetable for creating the  

  



 
June 22, 1988 

2407 
 

corporation is too tight, adding to the unease. 
 
And even if the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, stands in this 
Assembly and assures us glibly that there is complete and full 
agreement about this proposed investment corporation of 
Saskatchewan, that everyone agrees, I would say that there is 
unease, that there is concern, that not all share his opinion. We feel 
again, that given the billions of dollars that are implicated in this 
legislation by his actions, and given the thousands of 
Saskatchewan people that are implicated in this, that he has a 
responsibility to the Legislative Assembly to put all of his plans 
before the Assembly before we should be asked to approve of only 
a portion of his plans. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to the question of accountability. Now 
ostensibly the role of investment managers is to invest funds 
subject to the guide-lines of those who are responsible for 
administering the respective funds. But you know, and most in the 
investment community know, that in reality investment managers 
take on a far more proactive role than that. That is to say, they do 
more than simply react to the guide-lines set forward by the 
various pension funds; they will tend over time to give advice on 
investment strategies, and increasingly, the funds become captive 
to the expertise, become captive to the kinds of advice being 
offered by the experts that they have hired to do their work, that 
they have been charted to manage the investments; and that we 
have, in effect, a somewhat of a reversal of the roles and we find 
the pension funds becoming captive to those investment analysts. 
 
And we say that inasmuch as that is recognized, and that is 
something that the Department of Finance would in the normal 
course of events have been doing and now has proposed, or we 
understand it is to be proposed to be done by a private business 
corporation, we feel that therefore there is less accountability of 
the Legislative Assembly in this particular matter. There will be 
less opportunity for public scrutiny of the Legislative Assembly 
when it comes to the billions and billions and billions of dollars of 
pension funds that involve public dollars for the Legislative 
Assembly, and we feel that is a step backwards. 
 
Also on the question of accountability, I want to point out some 
words that the minister indicated. He said that the Bill also 
exempts a number of funds from the authority of the investment 
board. The current legislation permits the investment board of 
cabinet to determine investment policy to be followed by these 
funds. 
 
Now he says that it’s important that linkage be eliminated and that 
the investment authority be clearly vested with a plan sponsor for 
its board. Now that may well be the case, but we feel that there 
were good reasons that, in some instances investment management 
decisions had to be cleared by cabinet, because we’re talking 
about billions of dollars — billions of dollars that have 
implications for the economic health of this province. And 
therefore the cabinet had its say, at least in terms of some of the 
funds, as to how that money was to be invested. 
 
We think that there are probably good reasons to retain that kind 
of control, to retain that kind of supervision of  

investments. And I just might point out, the good example of that, 
Mr. Speaker, is the latest example that has been floated by the 
Premier of Saskatchewan. And even though members on this side 
of the House and many in the financial community have grave 
misgivings about the Premier’s proposal — and I speak of his 
proposal for equity financing — even though many have grave 
misgivings about the Premier’s proposals, supposedly, supposedly 
there is an opportunity given the existing legislation for the cabinet 
to exert some influence on at least some of the funds, to be able to 
say that this is a worthwhile investment for the people of 
Saskatchewan and therefore some of the pension funds should be 
invested in that. 
 
Now in this particular case I disagree with the Premier, and as do 
many in the financial community, because they think that the 
Premier’s ideas, and frankly the ideas of the Tory MLAs’ report 
on equity financing, is a half-baked idea; has little or no appeal for 
the people of Saskatchewan; will not solve the farm debt crisis. 
 
And I’m pleased to hear, Mr. Speaker, that for once the Deputy 
Premier, the member for Souris-Cannington agrees with me that 
the idea of the Premier for equity financing is a half-baked idea — 
should not be proceeded with. And even if it’s a bad example, 
even if it’s a bad example, Mr. Speaker, it nevertheless provides 
an example of where there might be a congruence, potential 
congruence between the objectives of the province, the Legislative 
Assembly, the people of the province on the one hand and the 
billions of dollars that we have in pension funds on the other hand. 
This legislation proposes to remove that; proposes to remove that 
linkage; proposes to remove the accountability that is there in the 
current legislation — not only to the government, but I would 
submit to the Legislative Assembly as well. 
 
And in speaking of accountability, there are other ways to proceed 
in this, as I indicated earlier. As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, 
the experience in Quebec is something different where there is a 
Crown corporation that reports to the Quebec legislature. In fact, 
the report that was done by James Marshall indicated that, in terms 
of alternative investment management structures: 
 

The first alternative is that of an Independent Crown 
corporation. In essence this is the reporting relationship that 
the Caisse de Dépôt has to the Quebec Legislature. 
 
(And) This structure would offer the following unique 
features: 
 
The Corporation’s Board of Directors would be accountable 
to the Legislature through a Minister. 

 
Accountable to the legislature through a minister. Now it goes on 
to say that: 
 

An independent Crown Corporation can be established 
relatively quickly . . . would be unique to Saskatchewan, the 
general concept is well established. 

 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2408 
 

But the other alternative: 
 

The second alternative is that of a Client-owned corporation. 
 
And it talks about what that concept would involve. But nowhere, 
nowhere, in this report, in the advice that was offered to the 
minister, does it suggest that there would be any type of 
accountability to the legislature through a minister. 
 
So therefore we stand opposed to this Bill because it limits 
accountability to the Legislative Assembly. That is something that 
we need to guard against. That is something that I would submit, 
Mr. Speaker, has been so wrong with this government. They have 
become so power hungry that they have sought any and every 
opportunity to limit the authority of the legislature, to limit the 
accountability to the legislature. 
 
We think those are regressive measures because, after all, the 
legislature is the people of Saskatchewan. The government is 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, and it needs to be 
more than accountable every four or five years at election time. 
There also needs to be accountability between elections. That is 
the function of the Legislative Assembly, and again we see a 
limitation on that accountability, and that again is a good reason 
for us to oppose the Bill. 
 
(2045) 
 
I want to just make a further comment and that is that we 
understand that the alternative, the alternative to the present 
arrangement — that is to say that investment management being 
handled by the Department of finance — the alternative will be an 
investment corporation of Saskatchewan which will be a private 
corporation, a private corporation which will not be answerable to 
the Legislative Assembly. And the minister will in no way, the 
Minister of Finance will in no way be answerable to the 
Legislative Assembly because this is a private, private business 
corporation. That is what’s being proposed. 
 
Now among the various proposals for this private business 
corporation is a suggestion — is a suggestion, and I would suspect 
it will become a recommendation and will be acted upon — is a 
suggestion in the reports that have been given to us that the 
Minister of Finance, for the first couple of years, will have 
virtually all of the say, that the say will not be given to the various 
pension funds for a period of two years. And it’s called an interim 
period. 
 
And it’s suggested that this might ease the transition from 
investment management being handled by the Department of 
Finance, by the province of Saskatchewan, to a wholly-owned 
client corporation, a private business corporation, is to ease the 
transition. But it also sets the stage, and it’s clearly indicated as 
such, for the Minister of Finance to give great direction and 
control in a private business corporation that is not answerable to 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
And among the things that the minister will be able to do is to 
appoint the first chief executive officer of that  

corporation. Now if that were a Crown corporation, if that were a 
Crown corporation, we would at least be able to take the minister 
to task in the Legislative Assembly; we would be able to take the 
minister to task in the Crown Corporations Committee; we would 
be able to ask him and his officials about the handling of that 
corporation. We have no opportunity to do that under the 
proposals that are being quoted by the Minister of Finance, and 
that is regrettable. And I say it’s doubly regrettable because of the 
kind of government we have and because of the kind of minister 
that we have. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is not a government that is known for its 
careful financial stewardship when it comes to the fiscal affairs 
and the public moneys in this province. This is a government and a 
Minister of Finance that is known far and wide not only for 
incompetence, but clear, clear misdirection when it comes to fiscal 
management and spending of the public purse. That’s what the 
Minister of Finance is noted for, and that is one of the things that 
this government is noted for. Because you have to remember, Mr. 
Speaker, that contrary to all of history, this is the Minister of 
Finance, this is the government, that one year projected a deficit of 
$400 million and came in at $1.4 billion after the election 
campaign, in less than a year later. 
 
So, one, there is a real, real question, a real question not only about 
the competence of this government when it comes to fiscal 
matters, but there is a question also about the misdirection of the 
government, and I would submit, its less than honest purposes at 
times when it comes to financial matters. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, this government is know far and 
wide — far and wide — and has established, I think, a sound 
reputation, a sound reputation for incredible patronage, incredible 
patronage. This is a government that has appointed former cabinet 
ministers, Paul Schoenhals to head up the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, has appointed other Tory friends, Mr. Hill, George 
Hill, the former president of the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan, to be the president of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. 
 
Now at least in those instances, those two gentlemen, with all of 
their Tory ties, have been appointed to be presidents or chairmen 
of a Crown corporation. And at least those Crown corporations are 
answerable in some way to this Legislative Assembly. And the 
ministers in charge of those Crown corporations and the officials 
concerned in those Crown corporations must, at some time, 
answer to the people of Saskatchewan through this Legislative 
Assembly, whether it’s through the Assembly directly, or whether 
it’s through the Crown Corporations Committee. I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, whatever they do, they have to answer the questions, at 
some time, to the people of Saskatchewan in this Assembly. 
 
But in this particular case, there is no requirement for the Minister 
of Finance to do that, and I fear gravely. I fear gravely, given his 
record of fiscal incompetence, given this record of misdirection, 
given his record of patronage, to turn this person loose with a 
private corporation, answerable to no one, involving billions of 
dollars in Saskatchewan. That is just simply not acceptable to us. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2409 
 

With some other government, with some other minister, that might 
be an option for us. But I tell you, with this minister and this 
government, that is simply not an option for us. We cannot support 
the Bill on those grounds as well. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, finally, Mr. Speaker, there is a great fear, a 
great concern on the part of the many pensioners in Saskatchewan 
whose funds are implicated by these actions of the government, 
who are simply concerned and are fearful, fearful that there might 
be some investment reversal at some future time, but that there is 
no more tie to the Government of Saskatchewan, as such. 
 
They are concerned that in the past and up to now, investment 
management has been handled by the Department of Finance, and 
if there were to be an investment reversal, at least the Government 
of Saskatchewan should claim some responsibility, should claim 
some obligation to assist the pension funds that might have gotten 
into trouble as a result of the investment decisions made by the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Now luckily, that hasn’t happened because the Department of 
Finance officials have acted wisely over the years to ensure a good 
return on pension funds. But there is a great fear, Mr. Speaker, a 
great fear, notwithstanding that record, that that may not be the 
case in the future. We know the kind of stock market crash that 
occurred last fall. We know that there are residual fears out there. 
 
The Minister of Finance has said nothing, has done nothing to 
assure the people of Saskatchewan as to that particular problem; 
that there might be an investment reversal in the future. And he’s 
proposing to very clearly sever the relationship between the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, and the pension funds; and that is something that is 
of great concern to the many thousands of people who have their 
deferred wages invested in the various pension funds. 
 
And it’s for all those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we stand opposed 
to the legislation before us. We do so on the grounds that no good 
reason has been advanced by the government as to why we should 
depart from the traditional practices that seem to have served us 
well. We don’t know why they want to fix it if it ain’t broke, and 
they won’t tell us. 
 
Secondly, we don’t know very much, at least in the way of an 
official statement from the Minister of Finance, just what the 
alternative will be. And in most cases, that when there is a 
departure or some change in legislation before use that affect the 
Legislative Assembly, that affect the province, we are presented 
with an alternative. In the case of Sunday shopping, we know the 
alternative is that the municipalities shall handle it. In the case of 
the ward system, we know the alternatives are at-large elections or 
some hybrid system. But in this case there has been no clear 
explanation by the government as to what the alternative is. We 
can only surmise. 
 

And on the basis of what we surmise, we have grave concerns, 
grave concerns about accountability and very grave concerns, Mr. 
Speaker — given the record of this government when it comes to 
fiscal management; given the record of this government of its less 
than honest direction of the financial stewardship of this province; 
and given its very sound record, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
patronage — that something will go wrong, given the temptation 
for the Minister of Finance and the government to indulge 
themselves in a private business corporation that will not be 
answerable to this Legislative Assembly; will not be answerable to 
the people of Saskatchewan, will only be answerable to their own 
consciousness; will only be answerable to their own practices. 
And on the basis of their record, we fear that greatly and it is for 
that reason, all those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we plan at this 
point to propose the Bill. 
 
We think that we would say that if the government were to come 
forward with more information, were to come forward with more 
reasonable proposals, give us an opportunity to debate the 
alternatives, we may come to the conclusion that what they have 
to offer may in fact be a good thing for pension funds in 
Saskatchewan and we recognize at this point that those pension 
funds say they support it, even if there is unease and lack of 
support. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, based on what’s before us today, there 
is no way that we will support this Bill. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time and referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 45 — An Act to 
amend The Department of Revenue and Financial Services 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially 
consequential to the previous Bill and we would also stand 
opposed to this particular Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 46 — An Act 
respecting Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting 
from the enactment of The Department of Revenue and 
Financial Services Act, 1988 be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 101 — An Act to 
amend The Revenue and Financial Services Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2410 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(2100) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Legislation — Ombudsman 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 
 
Item 13 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, I have with me tonight Earl 
McKeen, the assistant Ombudsman, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like to 
welcome the assistant Ombudsman to the Assembly this evening 
and thank him for his co-operation. I’ve had the opportunity to be 
over to the Ombudsman’s office and meet with the Ombudsman, 
and talk about some of the challenges and issues facing that office. 
And I appreciate the co-operation extended to me during that visit. 
 
And I would like to wish that office well in a tough job, but a 
fundamentally important role. I would also like to commend the 
staff of that office for continuing to — very good staff — for 
continuing to do a very good job over many years, under very 
difficult circumstances, some of which I’ll talk about in a few 
minutes. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to make a few comments this evening, and 
then I will ask a few questions. I regard the Ombudsman’s role in 
the province as an extremely critical function. The very office is a 
symbol of integrity, of impartiality, and of fairness. It’s an office 
where all citizens can turn if they wish to address any grievance of 
a policy or a procedure or a service nature against any government 
department or agency of the government. 
 
So I view that office as a citizen advocate, if you will, and one 
that’s above the political system. In this day when government 
decision making and functioning so profoundly impacts on the 
lives of people, the opportunity to appeal and seek resolutions of 
issues and problems must be strengthened. 
 
In other words, the role and the mandate of this important office 
must be preserved, and I would argue, even expanded as an appeal 
mechanism for citizens of the province. This is why I was very 
upset last year to hear our Premier and the member from Melville 
talk about or question whether or not this office is necessary in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was particularly concerned that the Premier, as leader of the 
government, and the Minister of Social Services, where the 
majority of complaints were against that department — and I 
realize that a number of those complaints are by the nature of the 
department — particularly concerned that those two individuals 
would question the need for that office and be somewhat critical of 
the role it was playing. 
 
I’m very pleased that these two members are not talking that way 
this year. I think the very fact that our Premier and our Minister of 
Social Services have been so critical  

of minority groups in the province reinforces, in my view, the 
need to strengthen the Ombudsman’s office. Indeed, it’s the very 
policies and unfair practices of this government, particularly over 
the last year and a half, that makes the Ombudsman’s office so 
vital for the protection of ordinary citizens in the province. 
 
And while I’m thankful that this office has survived your 
incredible surgical cuts — at least in terms of being preserved and 
thus allowing the office to function — I am concerned, Mr. 
Minister, as I examine the budgets of the so-called watch-dog 
agencies in the province, including the Ombudsman’s office, since 
1982. As one analyses the budget reductions since 1982, in other 
words over the longer term, over the six and a half year period, by 
the actions of this government, one notices the erosion of staffing 
and operational funds with all of the watch-dog agencies, not just 
the Ombudsman’s office. 
 
Specifically, just in passing, I’ll refer to the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission. Last year staff took a 10 per cent cut in order 
that no one would be laid off, which is a decision they made to try 
and deal with the work load. Since 1982 they’ve lost positions and 
operational funds. It’s well known that the staff are not able to 
respond without long delays in terms of human rights concerns, 
and I know that the staff there are extremely overworked and 
overtired. That’s one of the offices, the watch-dog agencies that is 
being eroded by this government. 
 
Provincial Auditor as well, another watch-dog agency that has 
been concerned about not being able to get information from this 
government about lost positions and lost operational funds. Of 
course the Ombudsman’s office, in fact, this government has been 
hostile to that office in the past. I think that would be fair to say in 
your usual “kill the messenger” approach to things. The Minister 
of Social Services, recently in his personal vendetta for some 
reason — a minister who likes to push his weight around — still 
continues to be critical of the former person in that office. 
 
When you look at the budget reductions of the Ombudsman’s 
office, along with the criticisms of ministers of the Crown who are 
supposed to be responsible, and you look at the cuts to legal aid, 
another agency where people turn to for help — when you add all 
of those up, the political agenda of the eroding rights for 
Saskatchewan citizens is very clear, Mr. Minister. 
 
Your government has not filled the chairman of the Legal Aid 
Commission vacancy — at least publicly. And that may have 
changed today; we didn’t get answers to that. Your government 
has not filled four of the seven vacancies at the Human Rights 
Commission which signals a lack of commitment to that 
watch-dog agency — lack of minority representation on that 
commission. Your down-sizing, deleting of positions, delay n 
filling positions at the Ombudsman’s office and your refusal to 
recognize the budgetary requirements of that office indicate to me 
your strong lack of commitment to preserving the rights of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What other conclusion can the public come to other than that: (a) 
you’re eroding the role and importance of the  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2411 
 

watch-dog function in the province; and (b) that you do not want 
to be publicly accountable to the people of the province? You’re 
afraid of the people of the province. By decreasing the staff 
available to the Ombudsman’s office, in a sense what you’re doing 
is you’re muzzling the agency, because they cannot perform the 
duties and responsibilities in a timely fashion as required to under 
the Act. And I can tell you, Mr. Minister, from the by-election in 
Saskatoon Eastview, the public does not trust your commitment 
and ability to protect the rights of citizens in the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, a further evidence that you’re eroding the credibility 
of the Ombudsman’s office is in the manner in which you have 
appointed this particular Ombudsman. And I wish to be clear, Mr. 
Minister, I’m not being critical of the Ombudsman; my comments 
are directed at you. I do not wish to rehash the details of that 
appointment, but only to put on the record that as a way of eroding 
this office, you have placed this Ombudsman in a very awkward 
position, starting his term without consultation with, and without 
the support of the official opposition in this province — 
unprecedented in Saskatchewan and no doubt the country. 
 
You broke the long-standing tradition, Mr. Minister, in this House 
of all-party input and agreement, and you’ve tinkered with the 
principle of impartiality and the principle of independence, 
independence from the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — And I won’t repeat the comments . . . the public 
comments of that day, but you have placed a cloud over the head 
of the Ombudsman, and this was unfair to Mr. McLellan. 
 
For future reference, I would plead with you to follow the proper 
procedure, although you won’t have to worry about it, I just 
realized, because you won’t be in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I can assure you that if there’s . . . I can assure 
you that if there’s anyone left, we will make a commitment now to 
consult with you and have a your input in the next appointment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Minister, regarding . . . I’d like to switch 
focus a little bit. Regarding your lack of commitment to this public 
watch-dog agency, I would like to just quote, if I could, a 
comment from the Star-Phoenix, April 22, 1988. And I know that 
you’ve said in this House you don’t read the Star-Phoenix, so I’ll 
read it to you. The headline is, “New Ombudsman revives old 
complaints about money.” And I quote: 
 

While the face is new in the provincial Ombudsman’s office, 
the complaint is the same — not enough money. The office 
has higher expenses and is operating with two fewer 
workers; the case-load has remained constant with the  

previous years. 
 
And between 1982 and 1987, Mr. Minister, there was a 10 per 
cent increase in the number of complaints registered with that 
office; yet in the same period there was a 20.2 per cent decrease — 
or from 16.8 to 13.4 positions — a 20.2 per cent cut in staff. So an 
increase in six years of 10.2 per cent of complaints; a cut of 
one-fifth of the staff, 20.2 per cent. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Minister, first of all, if you would acknowledge 
that that, in fact, is the case. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What? 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well listen, okay? They don’t listen. I repeated 
that twice . . . Okay, I’ll repeat it again, Mr. Minister, a third time. 
Between 1982 and 1987, the 10.2 per cent increase in number of 
complaints registered with the Ombudsman’s office; yet there was 
a 20.2 per cent decrease in staff. And I’m asking, Mr. Minister, if 
you would acknowledge that this to be the case. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know that that’s the case, and I 
don’t have numbers with me tonight that go all the way back to 
1982. And I know that the member doesn’t really expect me to 
have numbers that go back to 1982 in my hip pocket. I’d be very 
happy though to pull those numbers and forward them to the hon. 
member. 
 
And the hon. member did touch on the appointment of the last 
Ombudsman, and I know that he didn’t, at any time, question the 
credentials or the credibility of that particular individual. And I’m 
happy to hear that, because public opinion will indeed be his 
licence. And public opinion as it relates to that particular 
individual, I think has been . . . You can argue process all you 
want as it relates to how the appointment was made; but you 
cannot question, I think, that person’s credibility or credentials. 
 
And as it relates to how the appointment is made next time, when I 
am responsible, when I am still responsible for the Ombudsman’s 
office — and remember it’s a five-year appointment with a 
one-term renewal, so that’ll be about nine years hence. When I’m 
appointing the next Ombudsman, I will make sure that all of the 
bases are covered up in advance so that . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And Mr. Speaker, in an effort to be . . . I’m going to make a 
serious, serious effort to get through this evening in a very humble 
fashion so that we can deal with . . . And the member for Regina 
Centre will be one of the very first that I will consult with. And I 
already know that he will recommend Don Cody, and we may 
have some difficulty with that. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to 
pull the numbers, both the budget and positions, from 1982 to 
date. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, those are the figures 
that I have, and I would be happy if you would just confirm those. 
The point I was trying to make is that, that I tried to make in my 
earlier comments, is that since 1982,  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2412 
 

you’ve continued to undermine that office and restrict its ability to 
do its job because you cut the staff in those six years by 20 per 
cent. That was my point. And I’m sure you’ll find that those 
figures are accurate. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in the year 1986 to ’87, two positions were cut 
from that office. In other words, a 13.5 per cent decrease. And 
what I’m concerned about is that obviously this is a reduction in 
service. It’s a reduction in service to the public; it’s a concern that 
the work-load demands on staff mean that they’re not able to 
perform at their peak; and thirdly, of course, it must result in 
delays in terms of investigations. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Delays? No delays. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well I would like to ask . . . that’s my next 
question, if I could ask you: from the time a complaint is received 
and there’s a decision to investigate, what is that time period, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If a formal investigation is indicated, 
there is an investigator assigned within five days of the original 
complaint. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Okay. Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, how long 
before the investigation is dealt with — before the investigation 
starts — before the investigation begins once it’s assigned to an 
investigator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In the normal course of events, once an 
investigator is assigned to a case, the investigation begins, 
normally, that very day. You can appreciate that an investigator in 
the Ombudsman’s office, on average, would carry about 60 files at 
any given time. A priority-type file . . . if it’s considered to be a 
priority-type file, of course it would move faster than a file with 
less of a priority. 
 
I don’t know if we could, with the stats that we have here, could 
come up with an average time period for you. I don’t know that. I 
suspect that we could calculate that and get it to you. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Minister, I have here some case examples. 
And I’m not suggesting that this is the situation on all occasions, 
but nevertheless, these are important examples: where a family 
contacted the Ombudsman’s office in July of ’87 and it was 
mid-October before the investigation began. So that was three 
months. And this was an issue with a social assistance concern. In 
their point of view, it was a crisis, and it was not dealt with . . . the 
investigation did not begin for three months. 
 
Two other examples out of Workers’ Compensation Board, where 
these people were not happy with the decisions there and 
approached the Ombudsman’s office in the fall of ’87. And these 
were independent examples of each other, but both were told that 
it would be three months before their case would be taken up. 
 
Again, I’m not suggesting that’s typical, but there’s three 
examples that have come to our attention and my concern . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I doubt if they’re the only ones 
that would come to our attention, and I think that’s kind of an 
arrogant comment, to say that.  

These were legitimate concerns that people brought to our 
attention. 
 
At any rate, that’s bound to happen when you cut 20 per cent of 
the staff and your case-load does not decrease. And that’s my 
concern, that in these three examples, it was three months before 
the investigation started. And I would suggest that . . . And I’m not 
criticizing the staff, but when you delete positions and you freeze 
vacancies, as was the case last year as indicated in the report — 
frozen positions, and you lose positions — it hardly instils in the 
public a sense of confidence that their grievances will be 
addressed. 
 
Mr. Minister, on November 5, 1987, you reaffirmed your 
government’s position that the Ombudsman should get around to 
rural Saskatchewan, should get to the North, that outreach and 
travel within the province, around the province, is a priority and 
we certainly supported that. 
 
The Ombudsman talked of his desire to do that in the report. On 
page 1, I quote: 
 

The office will, during the middle months of 1988, travel to a 
number of the larger centres in the province in an effort to 
reach as many of the citizens of Saskatchewan as possible, 
and to inform them as best as we can of the various areas 
where we might be able to assist them in their dealings with 
the bureaucracy. 

 
On April 22, the Leader-Post printed an article and I quote, and 
I’m quoting the Ombudsman, and I quote: 
 

Loss of money this year will force the office to cut back on 
telephone and travel costs, meaning the Ombudsman will be 
less visible in outlying areas of the province. 

 
This is a quote that was attributed to the Ombudsman. 
 
This is contrary to your . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — By who? 
 
Mr. Pringle: — By the Leader-Post. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh well, I don’t believe them and never 
have. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well you don’t believe the Leader-Post either, 
well then I’ll refer you to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll refer 
you to the Ombudsman’s report then, Mr. Minister, where he talks 
about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. It’s more credible? 
Okay . . . where he talks about any further reductions to the budget 
will make it very difficult to travel around the province, and I 
don’t mean that as a direct quote, but that was the gist of his 
remarks. And of course we’ve seen a budget cut, and so I know 
that the restricting of the Ombudsman’s ability to travel around the 
province is contrary to your desire that he should do that because 
you said a year ago that was a priority of this government. It’s 
certainly contrary to what the Ombudsman would like to do. It’s 
contrary to what we would feel the Ombudsman should be doing; 
and I would say it’s contrary to the public’s desire for that  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2413 
 

office. I think this is another example of a cut in service, lack of 
accessibility of the Ombudsman to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You like to talk about your support to rural Saskatchewan. I think 
this is another example of a cut to an office that is able to address 
grievances of the government. 
 
And I guess my point is, how do you expect the Ombudsman to 
travel around the province in light of the comments about having 
to cut back? 
 
From 1987-88 budget year to 1988-89, in terms of the operational 
funds of this office, it was a 10.8 per cent decrease from $103,600 
to $92,400 — that’s leaving as constant the 70,700 that was 
transferred from the property management corporation. In other 
words, the Ombudsman was given $3,600 less to travel with. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: how can the Ombudsman fulfil his 
mandate for the public if he travels less and is less visible? And do 
you find this inconsistent with your comments of November 5, 
1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The question is accessibility and travel to 
the outlying areas. I freely admit that the budget that the 
Ombudsman’s office is a tight budget, and that it can’t be 
tightened any more and still have the Ombudsman office function 
as it ought to function. 
 
Having said that, while they are operating in rather tight 
circumstances, they are still visiting in rural Saskatchewan and in 
the North. Yesterday the Ombudsman was in Nipawin; today the 
Ombudsman is in Prince Albert. They have a regular schedule for 
the rural visits. There are four of them planned this spring in the 
North, for instance, and I expect others planned in other parts of 
the province throughout the year. But, you know, I appreciate fully 
what you’re saying as it relates to the tight budget. 
 
The budget is tight right across government, and the Ombudsman 
doesn’t escape that. You can be assured that when the next budget 
cycle comes around that I will be arguing for more support for the 
Ombudsman’s office. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m pleased that the 
Ombudsman is able to be out in northern Saskatchewan like you 
say he is. 
 
I guess what my concern was that we continue to see cut-backs 
each year, by and large, over the six-year period, and at some 
point there’s got to be a point where the service is deteriorated. 
The Ombudsman himself said, in his report of ’87, “Any further 
funding cuts would make it very difficult to provide the service.” 
He has experienced a cut in these estimates, and I guess I’m 
reinforcing that we continue — when you consider inflation and 
increased office costs that he talks about, increased travel costs — 
that this office continues to fall further and further behind. And I 
stress my earlier point, that the ability to perform the service as 
required under the Act is severely in jeopardy, in my view. 
 
(2130) 
 

I’d like to turn, if I could for a few minutes, to the contents of the 
report itself. And I see that the areas of social services, corrections, 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and Workers’ Comp 
still have the highest number of complaints from the population. 
And I feel pleased to see that one of those has come down; the 
Workers’ Comp complaints have come down. 
 
Regarding the child care report of the previous ombudsman — 
that is, The Rights of Children: The Urgent Need to Improve a 
System in Crisis — I’m troubled by the report of the Ombudsman 
where he says that there’s been no formal response by the Minister 
of Social Services to that report which stressed that children are in 
crisis. And I find that somewhat disconcerting because I thought 
the process was that ministers were supposed to respond on formal 
complaints of the Ombudsman’s office. And of course I’m not 
surprised because the Minister of Social Services does not think he 
is accountable to anybody, not even an office of this Assembly. 
 
At any rate, a concern I have is that I’m not satisfied — I don’t 
know if the public is satisfied — to be told that there are 
encouraging signs that things are turning around in Social 
Services. And I guess I would feel better if, first of all, there was 
some response to the Ombudsman’s office. And I would like to 
know, are there any plans, specific plans to monitor the concerns 
raised in that report and any concerns about the 146 
recommendations that the Ombudsman’s office made to the 
minister? What are the plans of the Ombudsman’s office to 
monitor the child care situation that we were told a year ago was 
in crisis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Under the former Ombudsman there were 
several complaints received in this particular area, and based on 
the complaints, the decision was made by the former Ombudsman 
to monitor . . . and investigate and monitor for some period the 
complaints that came in in that particular category. And even 
under the . . . and that decision was made by the former 
Ombudsman, not this one, to monitor and make assessments 
ongoing. And even under the former Ombudsman, it was 
determined that based on their investigation and advice to the 
departments, there had been significant progress made. And the 
Ombudsman of the day . . . Ombudsman of today, additionally 
reports that he will continue to monitor what the previous 
Ombudsman had already set out to monitor, and he, as I 
understand it, reports progress as well. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you. One more question in relation to this 
particular area and this particular report that we were talking 
about. The Ombudsman’s office, as I understand it, expresses 
some concern in this report about corporal punishment in foster 
homes, and goes on further to say that staff in the department and 
foster parents would like some direction, some clear direction in 
this regard. And I wonder if it’s still the position of the 
Ombudsman’s office that corporal punishment in foster homes is 
not appropriate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This is an issue that arose under the 
previous Ombudsman as well. And I think he characterized it as 
an unacceptable form of punishment, the question of corporal 
punishment. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2414 
 

I can’t tell you whether the current Ombudsman would accept that 
as an unacceptable form of punishment or not. I suspect that he 
would. I don’t know; I’ve never asked him. But the fact of the 
matter is, there has not been a complaint of this nature lodged with 
the Ombudsman, certainly in the memory of the assistant 
Ombudsman in recent months. So it’s a decision they haven’t had 
to take. It’s not something that they’ve had presented to them. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well, I’m still a bit uneasy about that, Mr. 
Minister, and I appreciate that you’re not able to advise me of that 
tonight. I would like to know, if I could, though, if you could 
advise me at some time as to whether or not it’s still the official 
position of the Ombudsman’s office that corporal punishment in 
foster homes is not appropriate. If you could advise me of that at 
some point, I’d be happy to receive it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’ll attempt to do that, Mr. Chairman. I 
think the previous Ombudsman, in fact, was looking for some 
direction on that, and it may well be that this Ombudsman, if 
asked the question, would be looking for some direction on that, 
but I’ll attempt to do that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Minister, in light of what I’ve called this 
evening the erosion of the budgetary requirements of this office, 
and indeed the other watch-dog offices such as the Human Rights 
Commission and the Provincial Auditor — and, of course, my 
concerns about legal aid in terms of people not being able to 
access legal aid services — in light of the reductions in staff to the 
Ombudsman’s office over the last . . . well, not only over the last 
six years, but from ’87 to ’88 two positions, and in light of the fact 
that at least some people are experiencing delays in the 
investigations getting under way, and in light of the fact that the 
Ombudsman reports to this entire Assembly, I wonder if you 
would consider next year having prior discussions with the 
opposition before setting the budget of this office for next year and 
subsequent years. And I think that that way the health of that 
office would not be left to the whim of your government, in this 
case, or any government. But that particularly with the kind of 
cut-backs we’ve seen to that office, I wonder if you would 
consider consulting and involving us in the setting of the 
requirements of that office, in consultation with the Ombudsman, 
by, say, an all-party committee in the next fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, that hasn’t been practised 
in the province of Saskatchewan. It may well be in other 
jurisdictions, I don’t know. I would be surprised if that were the 
case in other jurisdictions as it relates to setting the budget. I know 
that there are other jurisdictions where an all-party committee sits 
to make the appointment of the Ombudsman, but I’d be surprised 
if that were the case as it relates to the Ombudsman. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I would have a little difficulty in committing 
to that particular process here. I don’t rule it out of hand, I mean, 
because I haven’t given it 30 seconds’ thought, but my initial 
reaction is that I would not recommend it to my colleagues. 
 

Mr. Pringle: — Well that is disappointing, Mr. Minister. It may 
not have been the practice in the past and it may not be the 
practice anywhere else in Canada, but I think we’ve seen a lot of 
cuts in this province over the last year and a half that haven’t 
compared with anywhere in Canada either. And so that’s my 
point. 
 
I personally don’t have confidence that you’re going to protect the 
commitment, the funding commitment to this office to make sure 
that people can access, in a timely fashion, grievances that they 
may have with the government. So that’s the reason for making 
the request and I would be pleased if you would think about that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll think hard. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank Mr. 
McKeen and all of the people in the Ombudsman’s office for their 
dedicated service to the people of Saskatchewan. And I want to 
thank Mr. McKeen for making me looking reasonably 
knowledgeable about the Ombudsman’s office tonight. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I would like to join with the minister, Mr. 
Chairman, and say thank you very much for coming. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Provincial Secretary 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 30 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, on my left is Bill Clarke, 
deputy provincial secretary. On my right is Elizabeth . . . 
Elizabeth, that’s a difficult name — Smith, and Elizabeth Smith 
was formerly responsible for the administration of the Provincial 
Secretary, but has recently gone to another job. The new person 
responsible for administration is Bill Huber, who is sitting directly 
behind me. And so I have the whole crew here tonight, Mr. 
Chairman, to guide us through the estimates of Provincial 
Secretary. 
 
(2145) 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to welcome your officials here this evening, Mr. Minister. 
We’ll try not to keep you very long, and thank you for coming and 
your co-operation. 
 
My questions are primarily of an informational nature here. I note 
that in the increase in total budget, the 10.9 per cent, and I note 
that the person-years is remaining the same at 8. And I’m 
wondering what the $20,200 increase is in personal services. 
There’s no increase in staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The vast majority of that is, I recently . . . 
I was going to say acquired, but that’s not  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2415 
 

quite the way to say it, but I have a deputy that is a senior deputy 
from government who is costing me more than the previous 
deputy that retired, and that makes up for the vast majority of that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well in terms of the budget, I note that the 
increase in other expenses is 17.6 per cent, and I’m wondering 
what the increase there is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You will recall there was a move in 
Saskatoon. The former cabinet office in the Sturdy Stone Building 
was . . . I’m having trouble with words, I was going to say 
abandoned it, but what really happened is we opened . . . We 
opened a new store-front office, if you like, at street level and that 
is the additional cost for that, what is now called the Premier’s 
office in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Just to clarify, so that’s where the amount, that 
increase, is going — towards that office? Is your department 
paying for all of that office, the new Premier’s office, or just part 
of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Premier’s office in Saskatoon is the 
responsibility, budgetary responsibility, of the Provincial 
Secretary. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well it is interesting that you chose the word 
“abandoned” the Sturdy Stone Building, because I wanted to ask a 
couple of questions related to that. I spent eight years there. That’s 
not a bad place. It’s very accessible to the public. And I’m 
wondering why that decision may have been made to move there, 
if that’s appropriate to as you that. 
 
Secondly, is the space that the cabinet office vacated still vacant? 
Is that part of the empty office space that we’re talking about in 
terms of the $8.4 million that we’re spending a year? Is that part of 
the vacant space or did someone else move into that space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I have no idea whether that space is 
vacant or not. We’re not paying for it because we’re not in it, and 
it’s my colleague, the Minister responsible for the property 
management corporation, could answer that question. 
 
But the activity, and the interest, and the accessibility of the 
street-level office — or the ground-level office downtown, had 
incoming traffic quadrupled in a demonstrated interest in stopping 
in to see the people at the Premier’s office that might be able to 
handle some difficulty or problem that the people may have. 
 
The 10th floor of the Sturdy Stone Building, I think you will 
admit, is not the most accessible place in the world. I wasn’t there 
for eight years, I give you that. But SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation), a Crown that I’m responsible for, is in 
that building, and I didn’t find that it was all that easy to find 
SMDC where . . . on 22nd Street East in Saskatoon at street level. 
I think you will admit that’s far more accessible and easily 
identifiable than the 10th floor of the Sturdy Stone Building. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me what is the total 
amount that the Provincial Secretary pays for the  

Premier’s new office on 22nd Street? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes I will. Are you talking space or the 
whole . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I guess I’m interested in what is the total budget 
that the taxpayer is paying for. The Premier moves out of the 
government building that’s there already, moves in across the 
street under the rationale of being more accessible. And I would 
like to know: what is the total budget that that office is costing the 
taxpayer, broken down by salaries and operating costs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. The administrative cost of the 
space is . . . Not the space. The administrative cost of the office is 
$246,000 and a bit, 246,000 rounded. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — So, Mr. Minister, you’ve moved the Premier’s 
office. The cabinet office then has moved from a space that was 
government office space across — that cost nothing — moved 
across the street to the tune of, in the space alone, $246,000, and 
you’re not sure whether the space back in Sturdy Stone is still 
vacant or not. In other words, it doesn’t appear as though the 
Premier was pushed out of there because the space was needed for 
someone else. 
 
I’m wondering, at $246,000 a year, why wouldn’t the Sturdy 
Stone 10th floor be acceptable. I think that’s a tremendous amount 
of money when everybody else is getting cut back, like the 
Ombudsman’s office. And I’ll have some more questions in terms 
of that office, but I’d like to make the point that, why would you 
go from the space he was in across the street and spend almost a 
quarter of a million dollars? And is there a long-term lease on that 
space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’re not sure if the member understood 
what I meant when I said the administrative cost of that office is 
about $246,000. That is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s 
for the administration of the office. That means telephones; that 
means people; that means power bills, I expect; that means 
whatever it costs to run the office. That does not include the space. 
This cost would have been there if we were on top of the Sturdy 
Stone Building. 
 
Now if you’re asking me what the cost of the space is, my answer 
will be the same as it has been all along. My colleague from the 
property management corporation has indicated that for 
commercial and competitive reasons he’s not about to give that 
information. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would like to know: last 
year you indicated in estimates that there were two employees in 
that office. I wonder if you could tell me how many there are 
today, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There are two positions on the payroll of 
Provincial Secretary and one person under contract, as opposed to 
employee, of Provincial Secretary in the office of the Premier in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Who are they, Mr. Minister, and what are their 
salaries, please. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2416 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. Dianne Kimmerley, clerk steno 2, 
annual salary of $19,500 rounded. Peddie, Susan Peddie, 
administrative assistant, annual salary of $22,000 rounded. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — And who’s under contract, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Lyall Watt, director of the office of the 
Premier, is on a contractual arrangement. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I wonder if you could tell me at what salary and 
what’s the nature of the contract. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a personal services 
contract at the rate of $4,000 a month, rounded. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Minister, you indicated to me that, if I heard 
you correctly, that the other expenses would have been the same 
had the office still been over in Sturdy Stone as it is now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. I said those expenses 
would be paid. Administrative costs would exist no mater where 
the office . . . 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Yes, sorry. Okay. That administrative costs 
would have existed whether in Sturdy Stone or where they are 
now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or on top of the Sturdy Stone . . . 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Or on top of Sturdy Stone. Right, okay. 
 
Would you provide me with the costs, the administrative costs 
over the last five years in Sturdy Stone? Would you do that? You 
may not have those tonight, but would you provide those for me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll give it to you in writing. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I’m sorry, I . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. I can go back with very little 
difficulty to when it was transferred to the Provincial Secretary, 
which was two years ago. To go beyond that is a little more 
difficult, but if you’ll be happy with going back two years, I’ll 
provide that for you. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Okay, thank you. I’d be interested to see that. I 
guess the point I would like to raise, or I’d like the people of the 
province to know though, is that here is a Premier who is the first 
to cut back on all the other services in the province, and I’ve 
outlined earlier how he has cut back on the watch-dog, so-called 
watch-dog agencies of the province to the point where it’s very 
difficult for them to even operate, yet the tenth floor at Sturdy 
Stone in Saskatoon, which has been good enough for previous 
premiers and cabinets, is not good enough for this Premier, and so 
he moves across the street. And I would be very interested to 
know later in the estimates just what the cost of that space is. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you, in terms of looking at Public Accounts 
for ’86-87, it lists two people under other 

 expenses in the schedule of payments. I wonder if you could tell 
me what kind of work Don Richardson does for the Provincial 
Secretary and what his salary is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Don Richardson is now Lyall Watt. Don 
Richardson is no longer there. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Okay, thank you. Glen Caleval is listed as being 
paid $27,109, and for what period was he employed with the 
Provincial Secretary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, Glen Caleval worked in 
my office from April 23, 1986, to April 30, 1987. That same Glen 
Caleval proved to be such a talented young fellow that I persuaded 
the caucus to take him on as a research officer, and he is still in our 
very caucus doing excellent work, and I’m very glad that we were 
able to attract such a bright young fellow to our caucus office. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — A couple of more questions, Mr. Minister. I see 
the provincial inquiry centre increase of 32.6 per cent on other 
expenses; I’m just wondering what that is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Long-distance telephone calls. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Someone here says, those inquiring about the 
drug plan. Is that right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that’s not quite right. They were my 
constituents wondering where I was. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Okay. One more question: I note subvote 9 — a 
program advisory branch, personal services, other expenses, total 
of $262,500 . . . five person-years, that appears to be something 
new. If it is, I wonder if you can tell me what that division is? 
What’s its purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, when my new deputy 
came over . . . remember my old deputy operated . . . when my 
previous deputy operated, or was my deputy, she operated by and 
large out of my office with support people from . . . like Elizabeth 
Smith from Finance, and so on. When my new deputy came over, 
we set him up in the department because he took on additional 
responsibilities as deputy provincial secretary. And there were five 
positions set with the new deputy and only three of them are filled. 
So that explains the additional sums required there. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Minister, it appears you’ve got so much staff 
that you can’t keep everybody straight. And I know that you’ve — 
you and your colleagues have really increased the number of staff 
around you very substantially. 
 
Three of the positions are still vacant. Is the intention not to fill 
those? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which one? 
 
Mr. Pringle: — You said three of the positions are still vacant. 
Maybe those could be transferred to the Ombudsman’s Office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Did you say opposition office?  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2417 
 

They could use the help. 
 
No. In fact these are projected requirements and the people that 
we’ve been able to attract are, of course, regular people and the 
work-load has been handled by these people. 
 
The total authorized complement, if you like, in the Provincial 
Secretary is 21. Throughout the whole organization we have seven 
vacancies. And if we can continue to function with those seven 
vacancies, obviously we will be looking at deleting those positions 
as we get into the next budget cycle. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — As it stands, of these five positions you’ve only 
got two filled, is that correct? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Three filled. Would you be able to provide me 
with the names of those people and their job descriptions and their 
salaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. First one is Robert Hersche, 
project co-ordinator, $4,301 per month . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes. Background: he’s a Master of Arts, director of research of 
Sask Housing, director of research, Culture and Youth, manager of 
research and budgets, Parks, Recreation and Culture. 
 
The second one is Diane Tucker, $3,606 per month; Master of 
Arts, assistant to Deputy Minister and a consultant at Culture and 
Rec prior to coming to this office. 
 
Third one is Audrey Wall, and she is office manager in the Deputy 
Minister’s office, and her monthly salary is $2,205, obviously per 
month, and that’s redundancy. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, as I understand the Provincial Secretary’s department, it 
is the keeper of the great seal of Saskatchewan, and it issues all of 
the letters, patents, commissions, and other documents requiring 
the seal. 
 
And as I understand it, it issues the provincial certificates 
authenticating the appointments and signatures of notaries, and it 
. . . also certain other officials, and it prepared the proclamations 
bringing Acts into force. It also grants permission for 
organizations to use the province’s coat of arms, great seal, and 
floral emblem. That is the function of the Provincial Secretary. 
 
That being the case, Mr. Minister, how do you explain the 
decision by your government to move many of the functions of the 
Premier’s office out of the Premier’s office and over to the 
Provincial Secretary’s office? Is it simply to hide the expenditures 
that have been allocated by your government, the political 
expenditures for the Premier’s office, get it out of those kinds of 
estimates and bury it over here, when you’re supposed to be the 
great keeper of the great seal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, there are a couple of reasons, Mr. 
Chairman. Number one . . . 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Is this the political office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Number one, and . . . I like to think so. 
But having said that, I am also the Deputy Premier, and we have a 
Premier who has more than just Executive Council and those 
functions that go with Executive Council. He’s also Minister of 
Agriculture and does that job very well. 
 
So those things that you would argue that a premier would 
ordinarily be responsible for, sometimes it can legitimately be 
argued that the Deputy Premier would take up some of that load in 
the event that the Premier has additional loads, as compared to 
other premiers. 
 
Now, to go back a little bit. I remember in the previous 
administration when the department of intergovernmental affairs 
was in the department of the attorney general and the 
responsibility, in those days, of the Leader of the Opposition 
today. That is not the case any more, Mr. Premier, or Mr. Speaker 
— I’ll get you straight yet — Chairperson, tonight; that’s fine. I’m 
in a conciliatory mood. That is not the case today, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The department of intergovernmental affairs today is now in the 
Office of the Premier, and so each, I mean, each to his own. We 
have decided, in our wisdom, that the Premier’s office shall be 
responsible for these things, and the Provincial Secretary’s office, 
who happens to also be the Deputy Premier, shall be responsible 
for the great seal, in addition to the inquiry centre and a few other 
things. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the only problem with your 
explanation is that the Premier’s office that is on 22nd Street in 
Saskatoon does not, and the expenditures for that office does not 
fall under the Premier’s estimates. They fall under the Provincial 
Secretary’s estimates, and the Provincial Secretary is supposed to 
be the great keeper of the great seal of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, earlier my colleague from Saskatoon Eastview 
asked you about the administrative function of the Premier’s office 
in Saskatoon, and you led us to believe that there was $246,000 
spent on administration and this includes things like telephone and 
people and power, and those kinds of things. Well, I’ve added it 
all up, Mr. Minister, and it looks as though we’ve got about 
$100,000 in salaries. And I’d be interested in having a further 
explanation by yourself as to how this $246,000 is being spent by 
your government, money that really is the property of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I just want to point out, the member gets a 
little testy because I, as Provincial Secretary, pay the rent on the 
Premier’s office in Saskatoon, and I just wanted to point out to her 
that the Provincial Secretary also pays the rent for that member’s 
office here in the Legislative Building. And I’m sure that you 
wouldn’t want me to be delinquent in those payments. 
 
So you know, I mean, that just happens to be where the 
responsibility is, that’s all — budgetary responsibility, as it relates 
to . . . Okay. Telephones, advertising,  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2418 
 

automobiles assigned by CVA (central vehicle agency) will make 
up the vast majority of that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So you’re telling me, Mr. Deputy Premier, in 
charge of the Premier’s main street office in Saskatoon, that 
there’s $246,000 that is being spent for the administrative function 
of the Premier’s office in Saskatoon, and $100,000 would go to 
salaries for Lyall Watt, the kingo cowboy, Robert Hersche, Diane 
Tucker, and Audrey Wall, and the rest of the money would go to 
telephone, advertising and automobiles. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like a further explanation. I’d like you to break it 
down and give me a description of how much you spend on 
telephones, utilities, advertising, contractual services, legal 
services, all of those kinds of items that one would normally find 
in a statement of operations that would be available to the public. 
Let’s break that down a little further, Mr. Minister. 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll break it down. Mr. 
Chairman, I’ll break it down at least a little bit, but before I do that 
I want to point out to the member that when she talks about Robert 
Hersche and the other names that I associated with the office of 
the deputy provincial secretary, they are not the king of cowboys 
that you are talking about when you allude to the Saskatoon office. 
They are people who are long-time civil servants — probably here 
long before I was — and they are loyal support people to the 
deputy provincial secretary. And I point this out only because I 
believe that you believed that you were talking about different 
people, and I wouldn’t want you to go through life carrying that 
embarrassment. 
 
Now as it relates to the breakdown . . . As it relates to the 
embarrassment, we pay $100 . . . Okay, in our budget for this year 
we pay $100, and that’s for rent of grounds, buildings, other, and 
that’s under code 0231. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s the Premier’s office in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s the Premier’s office in Saskatoon. 
 
In code 0234, for the rental of other equipment and material, $360; 
rent of photocopiers, $1,800; advertising development costs, 
$10,000; advertising and . . . I expect this abbreviation means 
advertisement placement, $50,000. 
 
Okay. Printing and publishing, that’s under code 0243, nothing; 
sign writing services, $100; printing and publishing, 
non-promotional, $500 — 500 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 
I’m half blind. I can’t see all this. 
 
Repairs to office equipment and furniture, $300; employees’ meal 
costs, $200; employees’ transportation in-province, $1,000. I’ll 
take you to a big one. Central vehicle agency charges, $11,000 — 
$11,200; telephone rentals, $12,000, another big one. 
Miscellaneous computer and word processing, $2,000. And that’s 
some indication of the kind of breakdown that exists there, Mr.  

Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, can you tell me whether 
rent is included in this administrative function? Can you tell us 
that, whether occupancy fees are included in this administrative 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What fees? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Occupancy fees are included in this 
administration item for $246,000, or is rent and occupancy fees 
another budget item that you haven’t yet told us about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As you call it, occupancy fees are not part 
of what I’ve just set out. Rent NOE. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. So, Mr. Minister, where is the rent? Is 
the rent possibly in the item no. 5, payments to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, which in this year, if you look 
at 1987-88 in comparison to 1988-89, has gone up practically 
$600,000. Is this where the rent on the Premier’s little office on 
22nd Street is located? And, Mr. Deputy Premier, is the $600,000 
the amount that you’re paying to one Ken Achs, a loyal 
Conservative Party supporter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Did you say Ken Achs? He’s a terrific 
guy and a great Tory, but I know of no contract that the Provincial 
Secretary has with Ken Achs. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, you know, we shouldn’t let the fox in 
charge of the chicken coop, because, Mr. Deputy Premier, it seems 
to me that you’re trying to be foxy tonight, and you know, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, it’s just not working, it’s just not working. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Premier, everybody in Saskatoon knows the 
following. The Premier’s office and the cabinet office used to be 
located in Sturdy Stone. Sturdy Stone was paid for a long time 
ago, Mr. Deputy Premier. Your government paid no rent to Sturdy 
Stone to have the Premier’s office and cabinet office located there. 
But some few months ago, it became obvious to everyone in 
Saskatoon that Ken Achs was have some difficulty, some 
difficulty, Mr. Deputy Premier, in occupying the development that 
he had been involved in on 22nd Street and, I believe, it’s 4th 
Avenue. 
 
And what happened shortly after that, Mr. Deputy Premier, was 
that the Premier’s office was moved from the Sturdy Stone 
Building over to 22nd Street, and we now see a nice, big, blue sign 
on 22nd Street that takes up much of the front of this new 
development, and it’s called “Office of the Premier,” in nice blue 
letters, or nice blue signage. Some people have wondered, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, what you’re paying Mr. Ken Achs, who is a loyal 
Conservative Party supporter, to rent the space that is located in 
his building on 22nd Street. 
 
I shouldn’t say some people — a good number of people — 
because they don’t believe it makes any sense to have space 
vacant at Sturdy Stone, space that is already owned and paid for 
by the provincial government, and move across the street and pay 
large sums of money to rent Ken Achs’s building when you are 
cutting back on  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2419 
 

prescription drugs to people, you’re cutting back on the 
school-based children’s dental program, you are cutting back on 
social services, when you were cutting, cutting, cutting. 
 
And I want to know, Mr. Deputy Premier, how much money is 
being paid to one Ken Achs? And I’d like to know, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, how long you have agreed to lease that particular space 
for the Premier’s office in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, those decisions are made 
by the property management corporation. We pay, at the 
Provincial Secretary, $1,513,600 to the property management 
corporation for accommodation. That accommodation includes 
rent, operation and maintenance charges, office furniture rental, 
space improvements, telephone co-ordination and management, 
any taxes associated with the following properties, Mr. Speaker: 
— the Legislative Building except for the space used by the 
offices of Executive Council; the Legislative Building; the 
Legislative Library storage at 3211 Albert Street; the Legislative 
Library satellite office, the Walter Scott Building; the Provincial 
Inquiry Centre, first floor of the T.C. Douglas Building; Office of 
the Lieutenant Governor at Government House; SEDCO Building 
in Regina for storage of bulky building materials for the 
Legislative Building; program advisory branch, 6th floor, 1855 
Victoria; the electoral office storage, Rollo-Flex Building; 
electoral office, school trustees’ building; and Office of the 
Premier in Saskatoon at 315-22nd Street. Mr. Chairman, the total 
that we pay, or expect to pay to the property management 
corporation for all of that, is $1,513,600. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, you’ve just told me 
that you do have arrangements through Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation to rent the Premier’s office in Saskatoon 
on 22nd Street. And I’m asking you how much are paying to rent 
that space? And I’m asking you how long you . . . what sort of 
term you have with Achs, Ken Achs, your loyal party supporter, 
for the rent of that space? Is it 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, 10 years, or 
25 years? And I think, Mr. Deputy Premier, you should be 
forthcoming tonight with that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member will put her own 
interpretation on to whatever I say, in any event. But I’m telling 
you that we do not have a contract with anyone but the property 
management corporation. The property management corporation 
will decide and make the decisions as to who occupies what space. 
And it has been the policy of the government since November — 
get this, Mr. Chairman — since November of 1976, since 
November of 1976. In order to minimize any impact on market 
conditions, it has been government policy not to disclose any 
rental rate information for government properties, and so that 
information isn’t even known to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On a line-by-line basis we have . . . Like, we get the bill, you 
know, from property management, and we pay the bill. The bill 
this year is going to be $1,513,600. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well it’s odd that the bill’s going to be  

$1.516 million when item 5 on page 70 in your blue book says that 
the payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation is going to be 2.1 million, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I haven’t finished. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, I’m sorry. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — It seems to me whenever we start to talk about 
some of these little deals that you’ve entered into . . . and I’m 
thinking of the deal at Rosetown with Doug Friend in the 
Department of Highways, and I’m thinking of the Parkridge deal, 
and Wolfe and Gloeden, and I’m talking about the Parkridge 
nursing home in Saskatoon, and Wolfe and Gloeden. 
 
(2230) 
 
We now talk about this other little deal that you have with one 
Ken Achs, a loyal Conservative Party supporter. You use the 
excuse that, oh no, I can’t tell you, it’s the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation’s function; talk to the minister of 
privatization when his estimates come before this House. You use 
the excuse, oh we can’t let that information out because it might 
hurt people commercially. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, our position on that, Mr. Minister, is that that is 
total and utter nonsense. The real problem, Mr. Deputy Premier, or 
Mr. Minister, is that you don’t want people to know, you don’t 
want people to know what kinds of money is rolling out of the 
provincial treasury to reward your loyal Conservative Party friends 
who just happen to be real estate developers. That’s the problem. 
 
And I’m serving notice now, and you can get the minister of 
privatization geared up for this, that we will want to know how 
much money is being paid by the Provincial Secretary, through the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, to Ken Achs, 
through Mid-West Development. We’ll want to know that. We’ll 
want to know how much money is going from the Department of 
Highways, through the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, to one Doug Friend, who’s taken off to Kelowna. 
And we’ll want to know how much money is being paid out by the 
Parkridge nursing home in Saskatoon to Wolfe and Gloeden, 
through the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Premier, I would ask you to ask your friend, the 
minister of privatization, to get all the information together 
because we have the right to know that information and you can’t 
hide behind your excuse of, we can’t let that information out 
because it might hurt people commercially. That’s nonsense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, this is not an original idea, 
and I don’t take credit for it. I happen to think that it’s a good idea, 
but this has been government policy since 1976. That was the year 
after I sat in that very chair, Mr. Chairman, that the Leader of the 
Opposition sits in now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, that’s 
right; I sat over there — right. That’s right, I’m sorry. 
 
Now, the policy since 1976, Mr. Chairman, is as follows:  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2420 
 

that in order to minimize any impact on market conditions, Mr. 
Speaker, that it has been government policy since 1976 not to 
disclose rental rate information for government properties. 
 
I would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the building that 
her and her colleague have been talking about in Rosetown, that 
they claim to be sitting there vacant and gathering dusty, has in 
fact not existed for some time, Mr. Speaker. It’s been rezoned for 
residential, and I understand that there’s streets being built and 
houses being built and the new building, Mr. Speaker, is serving 
the province very well. And Doug Friend, who happens to be a 
business man in Rosetown and, I suspect . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A good, loyal supporter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I expect, I hope he is — I hope he is. But 
in any event, Mr. Chairman, the final question, or the — maybe 
it’s not the final one that she asked, but it’s at least part of the 
question that she asked. The total paid to the property management 
by the Provincial Secretary, you’re right, is $2.1 million. Of that 
2.1, 1.5 and bit is for rent; postage is 10,700; photographic 
services 2,000; photographic services subsidy is 87,000; and 
renovation and capital projects is, rounded, a half a million. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 — Statutory 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Provincial Secretary 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 30 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank my 
officials. I would particularly like to thank Elizabeth Smith for her 
dedicated service over the last few years, and wish her well in her 
new position in Social Services, and naturally thank the critic for 
the very cordial way in which estimates were handled this year. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank the 
minister’s officials for coming, and for their co-operation tonight. 
Thank you. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Local Government Board 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 22 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me 
Mr. Oren Wilson, the chairman. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few questions to 
ask of the minister dealing with the Local  

Government Board and also dealing with the Local Government 
Finance Commission, which I hope the minister will be prepared 
to give some answers on. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier this evening we dealt with The Municipal 
Board Act, and I indicated that although there are some merits in 
the legislation, there clearly are some problems that one may need 
to address as time goes by. One of the things that I am concerned 
about is: what role will the function of the Local Government 
Board play under the new organization, the new super 
organization which you’re putting together and which you’re 
amalgamating three different agencies and which may result in a 
huge organization in the name of efficiency? 
 
My experience in the past has shown that simply making 
something bigger does not necessarily make it more effective. It 
may improve the inter-agency communication, but in that process 
I would hope that some assurances can be given, and some 
explanations to those assurances provided on how the role of the 
Local Government Board will not be diluted to the point where it 
is less effective than it is now. Can you provide some explanation 
and give some assurances on that effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I was hoping that what 
we could do tonight would be the estimates of the Local 
Government Board as they appear in the blue book and leave the 
legislation to the proper time when it’s in committee. And you 
know, if we’re going to do the committee legislative work now, 
then I suppose I could say that that’s all right with me, but at the 
end of the day we’re not going to approve the legislation, we’re 
going to approve this estimate. So all I can do is tell the member 
that when we get into the debate on the legislation, I’ll provide all 
those details. 
 
Right now, to give you some degree of comfort, I suppose all I can 
say is that the latter part of your statement is correct. We see a 
very efficient operation coming out of this, and I think that it’s fair 
to say that if the total board operating in one unit knows what each 
other are doing, they can effectively avoid a lot of problem s as it 
relates to the future. I see the streamlining of this board as being 
very efficient and continuing with the same work. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well since these estimate are going to be 
providing the money and the resources for which you will pay for 
the operation of this board, Mr. Minister, you’re going to have to 
answer some of the questions in your estimates. And I simply ask 
you: can you tell me how the Local Government Board will fit 
into the new structure and organization for which we’re going be 
approving some money here today? Is it going to be a separate 
entity within the larger organization, or is it going to still remain 
. . . or is it going become part of the whole thing, with one director 
running the thing and trying to have three different agencies 
answer to this person? Can you at least give us that explanation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that probably the 
best explanation has been heard by the member as he attended the 
SUMA regional conferences when Mr. Wilson explained the new 
operation. The Local Government Board will be operating the 
same way as it does today, and it will be doing the same functions 
as it  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2421 
 

does today, but it will be doing them in conjunction with the other 
two boards so that the left hand will know what the right hand is 
doing, and in a lot of instances, hopefully avoid some controversy 
that can come up the line because they will then be able to truly 
recognize that as they make decision in one area, it could be 
conceivably impact in another and avoid that situation. But the 
role of the LGB (Local Government Board) will continue to be the 
same. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s interesting to have you say, Mr. 
Minister, that until this board is established, the left hand has not 
been knowing what the right hand is doing. Can you then tell us 
what the problems have been, and give us some examples where 
there has been obviously something gone awry? I’ve not been 
aware of any problems that way, but you obviously are. Can you 
tell the House what they are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Hopefully, Mr. Chairman, one of the major 
ones that the member would be familiar with, I’m sure, is the 
assessment appeal board, where we ended up with quite a backlog. 
And the backlog was primarily due to the fact that we couldn’t get 
a quorum in place for the hearing. Well this way we could take a 
member from the core board, supplement the appeal board, and 
away we go, and the hearing could be accomplished without 
delay. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, these assessment appeal 
board members which you couldn’t get enough of to attend a 
quorum, how are they remunerated? Are they on a retainer of 
some kind, or they get paid only on a daily basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — They receive pay on a per diem. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Strictly per diem and expenses, so that if 
they attend a meeting, they remunerated; if they don’t attend the 
meeting, they don’t get remunerated? And secondly, how long has 
this problem of not being able to get a quorum existed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — What you indicated about the per diems and 
everything is accurate. And if they don’t work, they don’t get paid; 
if they work, they get paid. 
 
We ran into a problem with the chairman who had a health 
problem, and the quorum was five. The new Act of the quorum 
will be three, and with the provision of substituting, and I believe 
that it’ll go a long way in assisting us to operate effectively. 
 
(2245) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you have board members 
who you appoint now, you will be appointing new board 
members, and some of the money that we’re providing for this 
legislation, we’ll provide for you, will have to pay for that. 
 
Can you tell this House what your intentions are about the existing 
board members on the Local Government Board? Will they be 
part of the new organization, or are they all up for grabs and will 
have to resubmit their resumes to you and then you will decide 
whether they get  

reappointed? Or do they have some kind of tenure because they 
have been appointed — in some cases, I understand, they have 
been appointed for a term. Does that term expire with the 
legislation, or do they have some assurance that they will be part 
of the new organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, in all cases they are appointed 
for a term by order in council, I believe. And as far as I know at 
the present time, the majority of the board is going to be 
transferred to the new board, for continuity sake and all the rest of 
it. 
 
Certainly I’m not in any position to say what’s going to happen in 
the future as these boards are moved around. Everybody knows 
that this board in particular requires expertise to it, and they’re 
going to be dealing with things that they’re going to have to be 
very familiar with. So I would suspect that you’ll see the majority 
of the existing members included in the new board. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I hear you say, Mr. Minister, the majority 
of the board members. Should that lead me to conclude then that 
not all of the board members will be appointed to the new board 
and that some of them will not be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, at this point in time I think I 
can honestly say that I haven’t given any discussion at all to the 
make-up of the new board. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wish you would, on 
behalf o the municipalities out there, because the legislation was 
going to pass in this session. And I know you don’t have to 
implement the legislation immediately, but I happen to know also, 
in talking to many municipal people, that there is some concern 
about where this is all going to fall into place. And instead of the 
process you used with some of your other legislation, Mr. 
Minister, dealing with ward systems and store hours, where you 
pretended to consult — you asked SUMA to deal with it at their 
convention, and they dealt with it at their convention, and they 
clearly said to you what they did not want you to do and they 
wanted you to do, and then you went out and did something 
altogether different. This has led municipal people to worry about 
what your intentions and your plans are here. So I simply will say 
to you I hoe that you will inform them rather quickly, so that they 
know where they’re going to stand — not saying that having 
informed them they can rely on you to keep your word to them; 
that’s another question. 
 
I simply will leave it at that because — and I say it on behalf of 
those municipal people who have spoken to me about it, that 
although they, in general, favour the Bill, there is some concern 
about the continuity, in spite of the assurances they’ve been given, 
because they don’t know what’s going to happen. And when you 
say some, or the majority, or part of the board will be appointed, 
that signals to them that maybe there is some danger to what’s 
going to be the final result. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one more question on this. 
There are going to be employees that are going to be affected in all 
of the three agencies. What assurances can you give here in this 
estimates review that all of those employees will be able to retain 
their employment? 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2422 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, I think it 
would have been presumptuous if I would have come in here and 
said yes, there’s this board change and that board change. You 
very well know that this Act has been on the drawing board for 
over a year now, and I didn’t know whether you were going to 
pass it again, or pass it or not, or whether in fact it was going to be 
there. So we know that we have to co-ordinate a lot of things if 
this Act is indeed passed, and not the least of which are the 
hearings, along with the board. There’s several different things. 
That’s why the Act is written in the way it is, with a date at some 
time in the future so that everybody has some degree of comfort as 
it’s processed. 
 
With regard to staff, the Act provides that all of the existing staff 
will be transferred to the new board, and the staff will have 
nothing to fear. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Do you anticipate, and I read that portion of 
the Act, but maybe I didn’t phrase my question correctly. Do you, 
then, can you give an assurance that in this transfer there will not 
be reductions in pay or reduction in benefits, or demotions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I understand that there is nothing along that 
line contemplated at all. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad that we 
have got that on the record, and I will take your word for it, 
believe it or not. 
 
I have no further questions on the Local Government Board as 
such. As I said in the debate on the Bill, we will be watching 
carefully on how you put it together, the appointments of the 
people you put onto the board, to see whether they have the kind 
of expertise that they must require to have, and whether we’ll have 
another Mr. Morgan, like the one who was appointed to the Legal 
Aid Commission and the whole reams of other people who have 
been appointed, unfortunately, only because of political expertise 
rather than expertise in the field to which they are going to have to 
apply their talent. And I will leave it at that. 
 
I want to ask you some questions now, Mr. Minister, about the 
Local Government Finance Commission. And I know that you’re 
going to get up and you’re going to say, oh, but that’s in the realm 
of the Minister of Finance. 
 
I have here Hansard which you made some statements in the last 
estimates that were considered, Mr. Minister, and you said that 
although the Minister of Finance will be the lead agency on the 
total review of the finance commission, all of the work — and I 
paraphrase here — will be done in consultation with the main 
players that the finance report deals with. In other words, SUMA, 
you were suggesting, would have been involved in this review 
process, which I submit to you has not taken place at all. And what 
you said last year has not happened. 
 
Can I ask you then, as the minister responsible to SUMA, what 
role, if any, SUMA has played in this review process since the last 
estimates that you were in here about a year ago. 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as the member knows, SUMA 
withdrew from being a part of that report, and as a result of that 
withdrawal I suppose that would have indicated that they really 
didn’t have too much interest in it. I can’t say that. 
 
Nevertheless our discussions with SUMA continue on a whole 
array of financial matters as it relates to municipalities. And you 
know, one of the typical examples I suppose that we could say this 
year is the revenue distribution formula that was used, that SUMA 
asked us to use. And so our discussions with SUMA continue 
regularly, and that’s about all I can tell you about that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I guess I’m not surprised that that’s all you 
can tell me, Mr. Minister, because there has been absolutely no 
follow-up made on the Local Government Finance Commission 
report. Some . . . I believe it was something like $500,000 or more 
was spent on this report. It was a massive study, I thought very 
well done. There is some great recommendations in it that any 
responsible government would be considering. You have not 
considered one single one of those recommendations, after 
expending that kind of money, of significance. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, can I ask you then: why has there not been in 
this part year the review of the local government commission 
report, as you said in this House there was going to be, because the 
Minister of Finance yesterday was not able to say what review 
there was, and you’re not prepared to tell us in this House what 
role SUMA has had, and you should know that. 
 
Am I to conclude then, Mr. Minister, that there has not been this 
review done of the Local Government Finance Commission 
report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say that, 
although my colleague has not, perhaps, issued a formal statement 
on the review that has occurred, that some of the 
recommendations that were made by that commission have indeed 
surfaced and have been accepted. And others, as it relates 
particularly now to the areas of restraint that must be shown, we 
haven’t been able to proceed in other areas, if indeed the 
government chooses that that would be the direction that it should 
take. So I think in that regard, if you’re looking for a formal 
statement, I believe that that would be the Minister of Finance, and 
whether he chooses to make one or not would be within his 
jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Indeed, Mr. Minister, except he wasn’t able 
to make one. You’re the minister in charge of Urban Affairs. You 
ought o have an interest in those aspects of that Local Government 
Finance Commission report which affect your portfolio. I don’t 
think it’s unreasonable for us to expect that of you. 
 
So I simply ask you another question, Mr. Minister. Can you 
report to this House, under your jurisdiction, those parts of the 
Local Government Finance Commission report which you say the 
Minister of Finance has considered and has implemented; under 
your particular jurisdiction, which of those recommendations have 
been  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2423 
 

reviewed, considered, and recommended and implemented? Can 
you give that to this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say, because 
most of the recommendations involved new financial dollars, new 
funding, that that’s under the area of the Minister of Finance. I 
think that’s understandable. But one of the major 
recommendations that was initiated that the members opposite are 
familiar with was the formation of the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is getting to be a bit 
of a joke. Are you saying to this House that the Minister of 
Finance will have made some decisions on the financing aspect of 
that commission report and implemented them, and you wouldn’t 
even know as the Minister of Urban Affairs? Is that what you’re 
trying to tell this House? Or can you tell us which of those 
financial decisions were decided on and have been implemented in 
the area for which you are responsible? Were any of them 
implemented, Mr. Minister, or are you prepared to be honest with 
this Assembly and say none of them were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think, Mr. Chairman, I very clearly 
indicated that the only one, because of the involvement of new 
dollars, was the implementation of SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency). 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Isn’t that fascinating. Oh, is it $500,000 you 
spent on this report commission? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Probably more. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — More than $500,000 spent on this 
commission, and all that you have been able to do in putting it into 
effect is establish SAMA, which was being discussed and 
promoted before you even thought of the idea of a municipal 
finance commission. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is ridiculous. It is just another example of how 
your government is operating. You have set up study after study 
after study in order to try to buy yourself some political time, and 
then when you’ve got this massive expenditure of taxpayers’ 
money and you’ve got the report — and in this particular one an 
awfully good one because you had some good people in it — you 
put it on the table and then on the shelf and you let it pile up with 
dust. 
 
How in heaven’s name can you call that being responsible? You 
have implemented one recommendation, which was not new 
because it was considered even before you set up the commission, 
and that is the establishment of SAMA. And you almost bungled 
that one; not you, your former colleague in that position who tried 
to exclude the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
and only brought it in because the members of this side of the 
House made it happen, and the school trustees protested so loudly 
that you had to include them. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you have given the 
answer that you have, can you provide some explanation why 
that’s the only recommendation that you have been able to 
implement? 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Sorry, I didn’t catch the question. 
 
(2300) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I think being that’s it’s almost 11 
o’clock, we’re going to have to shut this down, but soon. But I 
want to ask him a question, this: can you explain why, after having 
this single most comprehensive report on municipal financing that 
has ever been done in Saskatchewan — if not in Canada — you 
have been able only to implement one recommendation, and that 
is the establishment of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency)? Can you say why you’ve been able to 
handle only that one and not deal with some of the other very 
significant and important aspects of that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve said it before and 
I’ll say it again: in spite of some of the good recommendations that 
are in there, our basic problem is clear. This is a time of restraint. 
The report was completed just when the government had to start 
addressing the spending. Basically most of the recommendation 
included new dollars, and the government just simply didn’t have 
the new dollars to cope with those recommendations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, but you certainly had, 
you certainly had something like $3 billion to give to the oil 
companies. You got $3 billion to turn over to the oil companies 
and tax royalty holidays, but you’ve got a report that gives you 
some good advice. And you say to urban governments, we’re not 
going to give you a cent, because we want you to sock it to the 
property taxpayers and get it off the backs of those people who are 
trying to raise their families out there, because we’ve got to spend 
this money on our friends in the oil industry who are already 
making multi-billion dollars of profits. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that is no kind of a responsible answer. I’m 
not surprised at that. I’m not surprised that we’re not getting any 
answers, because I don’t expect to get any answers from this 
minister, in the same way as the chambers of commerce, and the 
SUMAs, and the local governments of this province have given up 
in frustration and know that they’re not going to get any answers 
from you as well. 
 
You ram your way around and you try to impose on them the 
wishes of your government when they give you advice after you 
ask for it. You stick them in the eye and you say you don’t care, 
and you’re going to do what you want in spite of what they say. 
And if you don’t think that’s true, you better spend some time 
talking to some of those people, because that’s what they’re 
saying, and that’s what they’re saying all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I don’t think it’s worth the time of this House at this time of 
night to pursue any more questioning when we can’t get any 
answers. For half an hour we’ve asked questions, and not one 
answer were you able to provide, except the odd one with the 
municipal board that was being established, and even that is 
doubtful whether you were able to provide full and qualified 
answers. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2424 
 

And I think, in light of that, Mr. Minister, we need to give you 
some time to do some briefing with your officials, and so, Mr. 
Chairman, I would like to call it, being it’s way past 10 o’clock, 
11:04. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:05 p.m. 
 
 


