


















































May 10, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 10, 1988 
 

 
1211 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Public Accounts 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Van Mulligen, from the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts, presents the second report of 
the said committee which is hereby tabled as Sessional Paper 
No. 81. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, moved by myself and 
seconded by the member for Shellbrook-Torch River: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, some guests sitting in your gallery. They are their 
worship, Mayor Wilbert Schulze, from our fair town of 
Cudworth, and the administrator, Judy Trischuk. 
 
They tell me it’s the first time they visit this building, and it’s 
the first time they’re sitting in on the question period. I hope 
they find it enjoyable. I would like to ask everybody to help me 
welcome these people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden is unable to be with us, so it gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you and the members of the 
Assembly, 39 students — grade 4 students. They are sitting in 
the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they’re from White City 
Elementary School, from White City, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re also accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Marjorie Gross and Mrs. Brenda Edwards. I’ll be joining them 
afterwards for drinks and questions and pictures, and I ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming these 
here students and teachers here. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, some guests sitting in your gallery. They are Mr. 
And Mrs. Jack Mattimore from Port Charles, Florida, and they 
are being hosted in Weyburn, while they are here on holidays, 
by Mr. And Mrs. Harold Rodine from Weyburn. 
 
Our guests from Florida are originally Canadians, and in 

fact Mr. Mattimore served with the Canadian Armed Forces and 
as well with Ford Motor Company for some 38 years. His wife 
was born and raised in Moose Jaw. 
 
Harold Rodine, who is more affectionately known on the streets 
of Weyburn as Bud Rodine, and who are hosting the 
Mattimores, worked for the Saskatchewan Hospital — what 
was the Saskatchewan Hospital, more recently the Souris 
Valley extended care hospital — in Weyburn for some 32 years, 
Mr. Speaker, and he just retired this past spring. And I must 
say, Mr. Speaker, after 32 years of service to the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Weyburn and area, the kinds of 
words that come to mind when people think of Bud Rodine in 
Weyburn are words like these: dedicated, loyal, faithful, hard-
working, and he was loved and respected by all who knew him 
at work and those who knew him outside of work. 
 
So I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of the 
legislature to join with me in welcoming these guests here 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you 
to all members of the legislature, 36 grades 7 and 8 students 
who are sitting in your Speaker’s gallery. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Dawn Patola and Mr. Jim 
Longstaff. 
 
I will be meeting with the students and their teachers after 
question period at 3 o’clock for pictures and drinks, and I would 
ask all members of the legislature to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 17 students from the Regina Christian 
School, seated in the east gallery. These students are in grades 7 
and 8. They’re accompanied by their teacher, John Harris, 
Reverend Ed Visser and Mrs. Adele Barnes. 
 
It will by my pleasure to meet with this group shortly after 
question period. Please join me in welcoming them to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you, and the other members of this House, a couple of special 
guests sitting in the west gallery today. Pastor Walter Boldt and 
delegation from the Circle Drive Alliance Church in Saskatoon. 
We trust that you find the proceedings informative and 
interesting this afternoon. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to share with 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1212 
 

my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, in 
welcoming Pastor Boldt and his guests. It’s a very active, 
important church community in the province of Saskatchewan 
and in Saskatoon, and we hope that he enjoys question period as 
well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cross-Subsidization of Government Utilities 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Deputy Premier, the minister in charge 
of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and it has to do with 
yesterday’s confirmation of the splitting of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation and today’s newspaper report in the Leader-
Post where the Deputy Premier seeks to justify the splitting on 
the basis that the old PURC (public utilities review 
commission) spoke against cross-subsidization. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier and the minister in charge 
of SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) is as follows: are 
you telling the people of Saskatchewan, by this press statement, 
that no longer will the Saskatchewan Power Corporation follow 
the principle of cross-subsidization, and therefore in the 
consequence, our family farmers, our families who have 
residences or small business are going to be paying more 
because cross-subsidization has been eliminated; in other 
words, that it’s user pay all the way. Is that now the policy of 
your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what we are saying is that 
there will be a splitting of the utilities. The gas utility will have 
one administrative line, the electrical utility will have another 
administrative line. 
 
We are not saying that there will be increases beyond the rate of 
inflation in electricity or gas; in fact, the opposite is true. We 
have said that, projected out over the next 10 years, electrical 
increases will be at or below the rate of inflation. 
 
It’s true that PURC told us that cross-subsidization ought not to 
take place. We of course have taken that into account in our 
deliberations as it relates to the splitting of the utilities. And that 
is one, Mr. Speaker, of several reasons that we have come to the 
conclusion that it is appropriate at this time to separate the two 
utilities. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a supplementary 
question to the Deputy Premier. The Leader-Post story that I 
have in front of me, today’s date, under the headline, 
“SaskPower to be split,” quotes you quoting the public utilities 
review commission — which I need not remind you or the 
members of the House, was done away by your government, 
and presumably having no confidence in it — quotes you as 
saying as follows . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m afraid 
I must draw to the member’s attention — I’m sure he forgot — 
that we don’t have quotes in 

supplementaries. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will ask a new 
question of the Hon. Deputy Premier. And I suspect that that’s 
probably the best way to go — every question to be a new 
question in this question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, order. I was just 
reminding the hon. member that we have made a rule some time 
ago that we do not use quotations in supplementary questions. 
It’s a rule, as I indicated, that I’m sure the member probably 
didn’t think about as he rose to speak on a supplementary. I’m 
just drawing that rule to his attention. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that rule. As the 
rules are unfolding, I have a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. I say to the Deputy Premier that in today’s Leader-
Post you quote approvingly the public utilities review 
commission in these terms: 
 

. . . cross-subsidization between competing forms of 
utilities is a sin, that we ought to separate the two utilities 
and administer them separately . . . 

 
That’s what you say. According to the last PURC report in 
1987, January, there was a benefit of $53 million to the 
residences and the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan as a 
result of cross-subsidization. You have stated today that’s the 
reason why you’re splitting SPC. Why don’t you admit it? The 
result is going to be user pay and higher rates for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member ought 
not to use the Leader-Post as his sole source for research 
material. The words, Mr. Speaker . . . and by the way, I haven’t 
read the Leader-Post, and nor have I for a couple of years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if what you have attributed to me was 
attributed to me by the Leader-Post, it is simply not accurate. 
What I said when I was interviewed in the scrum right out by 
this pillar in the concourse out here, was the PURC had 
suggested — and I was paraphrasing and perhaps taking some 
literary licence with PURC’s ruling — but PURC had said that 
gas and electricity are competing forms of energy and that 
cross-subsidization, one to the other, ought to be eliminated 
because gas customers who opt for gas, for whatever reason, 
ought not to have to subsidize the electrical customer. I think 
that there’s some good and valid reasons why they came to that 
particular conclusion. 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Speaker — having said that, Mr. 
Speaker — those same farmers in rural Saskatchewan that the 
minister purports to stand behind four-square, I will remind him 
that it was this government that put in thousands of miles of 
rural gas distribution to thousands and thousands of farm 
customers so that they can get the benefit of what is today a 
cheaper form of energy for farmers that those people denied 
them for many, many years — refused even to develop the gas 
resource we had in this province. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1213 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Deputy Premier. I want to tell the Deputy Premier that all of 
those words do not cover up the fact that you and your own 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, in a study that you have of 
1987, shows that electrical rates ought to go up by five times for 
residential owners, up to three times for farm people; that they 
haven’t done so because of cross-subsidization, and I again 
refer to the Leader-Post article which quotes you as saying that 
the arguments of PURC that cross-subsidization should be 
eliminated have merit. 
 
How can you, Mr. Deputy Premier, in the face of those facts — 
not my statements but your documents — how can you get up 
here and tell the people of Saskatchewan that it does not mean 
anything more, other than higher rates right across the piece 
because of this silly attempt to split SPC? How do you deny 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he may call it silly and he 
may call it an attempt, but the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that there 
will be a split in the utilities — power and electricity and gas. I 
understand that from time to time there are studies done by 
various people in various places, and from time to time, Mr. 
Speaker, they are agreed with by management, and from time to 
time they’re not. 
 
I take you back, Mr. Speaker, to the seven years preceding 
1982, when power rates under that administration increased a 
total of 100 per cent — 98 point-something per cent. A 
comparable period since 1982, Mr. Speaker, they have 
increased, and I’m going from memory, but let’s say less than 
half of that — less than half of that. And, Mr. Speaker, that was 
at time when they were arguing that SaskPower, the electrical 
utility, was in the black, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well this year, this year the electrical utility is in the black. 
There is no cross-subsidization this year, Mr. Speaker, and we 
tabled an annual report that reflected a $46 million turn-around, 
a $36 million profit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. The Deputy Premier points out in his last answer that 
the electrical portion of SPC ran in the black this year for the 
first time in a long time. Since that time it’s been cross-
subsidized because power corporation has been working as a 
whole unit, natural gas subsidizing electrical rates. 
 
I refer you, sir, to this PURC report that I have in front of me 
here, dated January 29, 1987, where your own agency at that 
time said that, because of cross-subsidization, $53 million less 
in rates were being paid by farmers and home owners. It says 
also that you’ve got an internal study advocating a five times 
increase and a three times increase. Do you deny the existence 
of that internal SPC study? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t deny, I don’t deny 
the existence of the study, although I want everybody to be 
clear that I haven’t seen it, and I don’t know that it does exist. 
But when you’re talking about what is recommended in this 
study that he alleges exists and what has happened, Mr. 
Speaker, compare what he is suggesting should happen and 
what has happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went to PURC and we said, rather than have a 
rate shock that just goes right up like that to pay for Coronach 
and Nipawin and Shand and things that weren’t on the balance 
sheet when we got there, Mr. Speaker, but in the case of 
Coronach, and to a large extent in the case of Nipawin, were 
committed to by a previous government — and we’re not 
critical of them for that because demands had been increasing, 
we had to have the capacity, and so we built them and now 
we’re paying for them — but rather than have a rate shock that 
just went straight up, we said, Mr. PURC, please tell us that we 
can go out there and have a three-year financial recovery 
program at 7.5 per cent over each of those three years. Last 
January was the last 7.5 per cent increase. 
 
It worked, Mr. Speaker, because we have now an electrical 
utility in the black, a power utility that showed a $35 million 
profit in the last annual report, and one that all of Saskatchewan 
can be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier. I might say that about the only thing with 
respect to PURCs and SPC that this government knows about 
are the perks that George Hill, your buddy in SPC is getting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And it’s little wonder that we’re in such a 
mess, by the way, with SPC when you have political people 
running a corporation of this value. 
 
I want to put the question to the Deputy Premier if he’d care to 
listen for the moment. My question to him is this: you repudiate 
the bald words printed down here in black and white by the 
Leader-Post as to one reason why you’re splitting the 
corporation. You repudiated them. If it isn’t because you want 
to do a cross-subsidization, what then is the reason for splitting 
up and weakening Saskatchewan Power Corporation? What is 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of things I 
should respond to: number one, I think that George Hill and his 
perks are no more than those of Bob Moncur, who was your 
friend. The difference, of course, is George Hill has turned the 
company around and has . . . and coupled, Mr. Speaker, with 
the policies of this government that have allowed the natural 
gas industry to grow and expand and find new gas and develop 
the resources, we’re to a position now, Mr. Speaker, where 
about 20 per cent . . . about, yes, I’m guessing, about 20 per 
cent of gas that’s delivered by SaskPower is not delivered to 
SaskPower 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1214 
 

customers, but it’s direct-sourcing contracts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the nature of the business is changing. About a hundred 
billion cubic feet of natural gas, Mr. Speaker, will be going into 
the export market and that’s today — that’s today. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s estimated that in the very near future that will double to 
maybe 170 or 180 billion cubic feet going into the export 
market. 
 
So the system has changed, Mr. Speaker, the nature of the 
business has changed. In addition, I have never ever said, never 
said that I disagreed with PURC’s suggestion that there ought 
not to be cross-subsidization, nor have I read the article in the 
Leader-Post — that one or any other for the last couple of years 
— so I don’t know what the Leader-Post said that I said, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I’d just like to draw to the member’s 
attention that it seems that we’re entering debate here between 
the members. Perhaps we should keep that in mind. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — With the greatest of respect to you, sir, I 
intend to ask this question until I get, and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan get, an answer. This minister has 
been quoted — in a new question — directly by the Leader-
Post, so you can’t slough it off as a misquote, as they do in all 
other statements. He has said, that it’s been . . . that cross-
subsidization is the reasons for splitting SPC. He denies it 
today. 
 
If it isn’t cross-subsidization, then answer this question: what 
will be the reason for splitting off the power corporation? Why 
did you do it then, if you didn’t do it for that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this has been the subject 
of some discussion yesterday and today. And I’m a little 
disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that it became the discussion here in 
question period because I had planned, Mr. Speaker, to make an 
announcement at the end of this month. And unfortunately, 
since it is now public, I intend to make an announcement later 
today by way of ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker. So if the 
hon. member will be patient, I’d be happy to deal with it during 
the course of a ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, for the life of me I don’t know 
how an opposition could try and get some answers from this 
government. You can ask them specifically any question that 
you want . . . I’m going to ask the Deputy Premier this question. 
You have given this legislature . . . 
 
This is a new question, Mr. Speaker. You have denied that 
cross-subsidization is a factor. You’re quoting something about 
deregulation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you denied 
the story. In the Leader-Post story you referred to deregulation 
which you did not refer to today. You are talking no reason for 
splitting except some generalized concept of efficiency. 
 
How in the world does the Deputy Premier expect the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan to believe that splitting one 
working, running corporation even under 

George Hill and your government — how is that being efficient 
by now splitting it up into two? Give us the explanation for that 
— two bureaucracies and two costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Maybe, Mr. Speaker, when I’m 
finished explaining this, that member will explain why he split 
the potash corporation into the mining company, into the 
transportation company, into international and so on. I know 
why he did it, but perhaps other people would want to know 
that it was . . . yes, I’m going to answer the question, Mr. 
Speaker, but I know that he-s going to tell the world that it was 
to bring efficiencies to the organization. 
 
The nature of the business has changed, Mr. Speaker, with 
deregulation, with new policies of this government, with yes, 
indeed . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Free trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No. not free trade, not free trade. 
Although, Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity for 
Saskatchewan gas to get into the export market finally, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He spent a lot of time, Mr. Speaker, 
trying to convince everybody here that I said that I disagreed 
with PURC-s idea as it relates to the concept of cross-
subsidization. This is the fourth time that I’ve stood up and said 
that I didn’t disagree with PURC in their arguments as it relates 
to cross-subsidization between competing forms of energy that 
makes eminent good sense to thinking people, Mr. Speaker. 
And so let me just put on the record that I don’t support the 
concepts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have one last question of the 
Deputy Premier. I have this new question to the Premier. 
Obviously your questions . . . the answers to these questions are 
becoming more muddled and more confused as this question 
period goes along, without a doubt. One time you accept the 
statement, then you reject the statement in the Leader-Post. You 
give us all kinds of confusing statements. 
 
Look, I want to ask you a specific, simple question: will you tell 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan in clear, no 
uncertain terms, that the splitting of power corporation into the 
two utilities will not mean any further privatization from here 
on in of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, either on natural gas 
or on electrical side? Will you give us that clear-cut assurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What will be the next bogyman? The 
first one was cross-subsidization; the next one was free trade; 
now it’s privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1215 
 

What we have done, Mr. Speaker, is we have taken an 
undeveloped resource for $325 million . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Given it away. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He says, gave it away. Three hundred 
and twenty-five million dollars — that means $30 million on 
the bottom line for Sask Power. That’s not insignificant. That’s 
not insignificant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s . . . Number one, the sale of that resource, Mr. Speaker, 
is not a privatization of a utility, nor is the splitting, 
administratively, of the electrical from the gas, or vice versa, to 
make the gas a wholly owned subsidiary of the electrical utility 
or privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are talking about separating utilities, separating utilities, 
because of the nature of the business of natural gas changing 
radically over the last several years, and, Mr. Speaker, for all of 
the reasons that I’ve talked about — cross-subsidization, the 
changing nature of gas, exports, direct sourcing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the farmers will be very, very happy to 
continue to get natural gas through the rural gas distribution 
program that was brought in by this government, that was 
denied to them by that government for 11 long years for two 
reasons: they didn’t have the foresight to either put in the 
system or develop the resource. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Production of Telephone Directory 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in the absence of the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan telephones, I’ll direct my question to the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, we’re given to understand that, along with 
your plans for piratization of telephone books, that you’re 
giving serious thought to producing one huge book for the 
entire province of Saskatchewan. Quite frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, that would mean that we would be saddled with one 
great big sucker of a phone book. 
 
And I ask you, I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier: have you given 
any thought to the logistics involved, or is this yet another half-
baked PC idea that has become so characteristic of your 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be completely 
candid. I haven’t given it any thought. I think, further, that it’s 
the dumbest idea that I’ve ever heard of. And I don’t believe 
that my colleague, the minister responsible for telephones, 
would think that it was a brilliant idea either. And if he does, 
I’m going to have a chat with him about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting and 
concur . . . and the minister of telephones who floated that 

idea in this Assembly some days ago will be interested to know 
that your consider his to be one of the dumbest ideas you’ve 
ever heard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Quite frankly, you’re in line with the majority 
this time, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, you folks were unable to do something as 
simple as to publish the Saskatoon phone book. And quite 
frankly, if you proceed with this dumb idea, as you call it, the 
supplement to encompass the corrections will be as large as our 
entire phone book for the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, instead of botching one great big 
phone book, will you set aside your piratization ideas and 
concentrate next time on doing the little phone books right? 
Will you do that next time, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, to the extent that I can 
give those kinds of assurances, the phone books will be done 
right, Mr. Speaker. I give you that commitment. I don’t know 
why we would want them done any other way. I guess I just 
don’t understand why. The question’s almost as dumb as the 
concept, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, you say it’s a dumb idea. The 
minister responsible for SaskTel says it’s an idea that he’s 
considering. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier: who over there is in charge of 
SaskTel, and who will be in charge of implementing the dumb 
ideas for the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The minister and my friend and 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, is responsible for the 
SaskTel corporation, and I might add, Mr. Speaker, does an 
excellent job and enjoys the confidence of his colleagues. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t do this, but I wonder if I could ask the 
member if that story came out of the Leader-Post or the Star-
Phoenix? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Designation of Saskatchewan’s Provincial Tree 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, May 6, during 
National Forestry Week, I announced the government’s 
intentions to proceed with designation of the white birch as 
Saskatchewan’s provincial tree. As members of the Assembly 
will be aware, there was extensive public consultation earlier 
this spring to determine which species of tree the people of 
Saskatchewan would like to see representing Saskatchewan. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1216 
 

I may say, Mr. Speaker, that there were some entries received 
out with the normal guide-lines, probably the most unique of 
which was the one I received from my good friend and 
colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North. And I assure 
him it was received with the same good humour with which it 
was sent to me. 
 
Fifty-nine per cent of all the respondents chose white birch. The 
white birch, Mr. Speaker, is native to our province. It is widely 
distributed, commercially valuable, historically significant, and 
above all, beautiful and stately. 
 
I am pleased today to present each member of the Assembly 
with a white birch to commemorate this historic occasion, the 
designation of Saskatchewan’s provincial tree. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
myself and my colleagues I want to join with the minister with 
his announcement today, and I assure you that we agree with 
that. And I want to thank you for the small sapling that you 
have given to each one of us. We appreciate that. 
 
I also want to add that when you talk about the white birch 
being a stately and a beautiful tree, that is correct. I think 
anyone who has flown over northern Saskatchewan in the early 
weeks of September will notice that the birch is the first tree in 
the forest to ripen and they stand out so dominant in the 
beautiful forests that we have. I think, Mr. Speaker, in joining 
with the minister, it is a wise choice by the 59 per cent of the 
population, and I might add that I’m among the 59 per cent. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Motion under rule 
16. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the point of order is this: 
in rules under rule 16 in the Saskatchewan . . . in proceedings of 
the Legislative Assembly, I think it says that the notice has to 
be filed no later than 11 o’clock on the preceding Friday. And I 
think the record will show that this rule 16 was not filed prior to 
the 11 o’clock on Friday, Mr. Speaker, and it is therefore, in my 
view, out of order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of 
order, rule 16 allows private members to put on the order paper, 
on every second Tuesday, a motion for debate. It has been the 
tradition, and in fact I think it is in the rule that those days 
alternate between government and opposition sides of the 
House. I point out to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that on last Friday, for today, this private members’ 
day, it was the turn of the government to put on the motion. 
They forgot to do so, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, we didn’t want to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Or for whatever the reason, I will say 
that. So therefore the members on this side, Mr. Speaker, put on 
a motion for rule 16 for debate. I think it was quite appropriate 
to do so. What I would like, therefore, because there is now a 
motion speaking to the point of order, because there is a motion 
on the order paper, I think it would be quite appropriate of the 
House to provide leave in order for that motion to be debated. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the point of order and to the 
response from the member from Regina North East. Rule 16(3) 
reads as follows: 
 

Notice of motion may be given orally in the Legislative 
Assembly under Routine Proceedings on the preceding 
Friday and the written notice shall be Tabled no later that 
11:00 a.m. on the preceding Friday. 

 
I have been informed that these conditions were not met, 
therefore the point of order is well taken and the motion may 
not proceed. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to incorporate the Stephen and 
Michelene Worobetz Foundation 

 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, on second reading of Bill 01, I 
want to take just a moment of the House’s time to commend 
this Bill to all hon. members. I trust it will receive speedy and 
unanimous approval. 
 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, who are seeking this legislation 
are of course very well-known friends of the Saskatchewan 
legislature. Dr. Worobetz served this institution and the people 
of Saskatchewan as our distinguished lieutenant governor from 
1970 until 1976. He and his wife Michelene, are proud residents 
of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, typical of them, typical of their compassion, their 
humanity, and their concern for their society and the people 
around them, Dr. and Mrs. Worobetz are seeking, by this Bill 
01, the authority to establish a foundation to support and assist 
charitable and non-profit activities in relation to religion, health, 
education, and culture in Saskatchewan. By this means they 
wish to continue to contribute to the fabric of Saskatchewan 
life, enhancing the quality of that life for the benefit of us all. 
 
I trust all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, will find Bill 01 to be in 
order from a technical point of view. But more than that, I trust 
all members will wish to support the Bill because of the fine 
humanitarian objectives which it embodies and because of the 
noble and worthy citizens of our province, Stephen and 
Michelene Worobetz, who are the Bill’s sponsors. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1217 
 

And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to move that Bill 
No. 01, An Act to incorporate the Stephen and Michelene 
Worobetz Foundation be now read a second time and be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few 
brief comments on this Act to incorporate the Stephen and 
Michelene Worobetz Foundation. I want to concur with the 
remarks made by the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and 
add some of my own about the great and distinguished 
contribution made by Dr. Worobetz to Saskatchewan 
throughout the years that he has worked in this province and 
lived here, and particularly through the years that he served as 
the lieutenant governor in Saskatchewan, which is the time 
when I learned to know him and his family well. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Dr. Worobetz at that time made 
a contribution in many ways, but the one that stands out in my 
mind, because I was very much involved in that area as well, 
was the contribution that Dr. Worobetz made to the 
development, the promotion, and the growth of the 
multicultural nature of Saskatchewan. 
 
Dr. Worobetz had a very great and strong interest in the 
composition of this province, how it originated, the nature of 
the people here, and one many occasions, went out of his want 
to assist the development of the multicultural heritage and 
richness that we know and appreciate so very much in this 
province. 
 
I think to establish this foundation under the names of the 
Worobetzes, I think is a very appropriate thing to do. Certainly 
members of this side of the House find the objectives of the 
foundation to be worthwhile, and we are certainly most happy 
to have it referred to the committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Full 

Gospel Bible Institute 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02, An act to 
amend An Act to incorporate Full Gospel Bible Institute, be 
now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that we 
will also be agreeing to forward the Bill to the Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills. The implication of this Bill is to extend 
tax exemption status to particular holdings of the Full Gospel 
Bible Institute located in Eston. 
 
I want to point out to the House that members in the opposition, 
we have made a point of contacting the town council of Eston 
to see whether they were aware of the Bill and what their 
position was, and that we are informed that the town council of 
Eston has by resolution approved of this Bill. And we will 
consider the Bill more fully in the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills, and 

therefore at this time concur that it ought to be forwarded to the 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to incorporate the Circle Drive 
Alliance Church 

 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure at this time to rise in my place and to make the 
motion for the Circle Drive Alliance Church incorporation. 
 
I think all members during the introductions this afternoon 
recognized, as did the Minister of Science and Technology, and 
indeed the Leader of the Opposition, the important role that this 
church is playing in Saskatoon and surrounding community 
under the stewardship of Pastor Walter Boldt. And recognizing 
that, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure at this 
time to move that Bill No. 03, An Act to incorporate the Circle 
Drive Alliance Church, be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A brief comment, as usual, Mr. Speaker. 
This Bill would incorporate the Circle Drive Alliance Church, 
as the member has indicated opposite. Members of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members’ Bills, I’m sure will be 
examining carefully the various powers that are conferred by 
this corporation, as the committee always does, and what 
implications are involved. 
 
I might point out that we have yet not received — have not been 
able to get the information because we have not followed it up 
adequately — the implications as seen by the city of Saskatoon. 
Our members on the committee will want to do that, and I’m 
sure that we don’t anticipate any difficulty. But I think it’s only 
fair that the city fathers of the city of Saskatoon and officials 
have an opportunity to state what their views are on the Bill, 
and we shall be looking forward to that as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — To facilitate the business of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to stand all of the motions until 
motion no. 11, item 7 in the blues, the motion by Ms. Atkinson 
to move the resolution (No. 11). 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Resolution No. 11 — Privatization as it Affects Government 

Services 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this 
resolution come before the House today. It’s important because 
we have not yet had the opportunity to debate in this legislature 
the government’s latest economic fad, and that’s the fad of 
privatization. 
 
I will be interested to see whether the minister for 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1218 
 

privatization decides to enter the debate because I think it’s 
important that the people of this province hear from the minister 
as to why his government is going ahead with all of these 
privatizations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister of privatization released in 
March of 1988 a paper that set out the goals and objectives for 
the Department of Public Participation — we call it the 
department of privatization — an in this document, Mr. 
Speaker, he said that the department would evaluate all the 
privatizations with the objective of ensuring that the people of 
Saskatchewan would receive the following. One, full benefit 
from the use of public assets to increase employment and create 
economic and investment opportunity; two, increased 
opportunities for personal and employee ownership; and three, 
more effective and efficient public services at good value for 
money. 
 
Well I think it’s important that we do a little evaluation of 
whether or not the minister of privatization, and the PC 
government opposite, have met those objectives in terms of the 
privatizations that have already occurred. Now the minister of 
privatization says he intends to ensure that Saskatchewan 
people get full benefit from the use of public assets to increase 
employment and create economic and investment opportunity. 
Well let’s take a look. 
 
When the government chose to sell off the Highways equipment 
and send the Highways workers to the private sector, did this 
increase employment? Did this create economic and investment 
opportunities for the people of this province? It did not. More 
than 155 employees of the Department of Highways lost their 
jobs. 
 
And did that business go to Saskatchewan contractors? We 
understand that much of the road work that has occurred in this 
province in the last several years has been done by out-of-
province contractors. So in this case, Mr. Speaker, this 
privatization of the Department of Highways and the lay-off of 
all of these workers has not meant increased employment 
opportunities for the people of this province. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the dental plan. You will recall that the 
Minister of Health fired 411 dental workers last June. Did the 
firing of these dental workers, did that lead to more increased 
opportunities in this province for people? Did that lead to more 
economic and investment opportunities for the people of this 
province? No, it did not. In fact, many, many, many of those 
workers have not received any kind of employment 
opportunities in this province. We understand that some 30 
people have got jobs; the rest do not. 
 
Now let’s talk about the drag-line, the sell-off of the drag-line 
to Manalta Coal. Here was a cosy little business deal. We sell a 
drag-line to Manalta Coal for $45 million. We guarantee the 
note on the Toronto Stock Exchange, from Manalta Coal. Did 
this create more economic and investment opportunities for the 
people in Saskatchewan? Remember, Mr. Speaker, we’ve sold 
it to an Alberta company. Did this increase employment for the 
people of Saskatchewan? No, it did not. 

And then we have Saskatchewan Minerals. Here’s a fine 
example of increasing employment and increasing economic 
and investment opportunities. Here we had a company, made 
millions and millions and millions of dollars for the people of 
this province over the years, created a lot of jobs in the 
communities in which Saskatchewan Minerals was located. Did 
this sell-off to two out-of-province companies, one in Ontario 
and one in Quebec, did this create more economic and 
investment opportunities for the people of this province? No, it 
did not. 
 
And the same goes for SED Systems in Saskatoon. We sell our 
12 per cent shares in SED System to a company in Ontario. The 
Minister who sold the shares said that this company coming in 
would ensure that employees kept their jobs and would ensure 
that this company would be capitalized. What happened? 
Seventy employees lost their jobs in the city of Saskatoon this 
past winter. Now clearly the minister and his government have 
failed to meet their first objective of privatization, the objective 
being employment opportunities and economic and investment 
opportunities. 
 
Then the Minister says he wants to ensure that Saskatchewan 
receives increased opportunities for personal and employee 
ownership. Well once again, let’s examine the record. 
 
Did the people who work at Weyerhaeuser, did they get to 
participate in the sell-off of Weyerhaeuser? Did the people who 
work at SED Systems, did they get to participate in the sell-off 
of SED Systems? Did the people that work at the mine, Poplar 
River mine, did they get to participate? No. Did the people at 
Saskatchewan Minerals, did they get to participate in a 
Saskatchewan sell-off, this government sell-off of this natural 
resource company? No! 
 
And what about the dental workers? Did they get to participate 
in the sell-off of the equipment and the privatization of the best 
school-based dental program in all of North America? No. The 
only way they got to participate was going on to unemployment 
insurance. That’s how they got to participate. 
 
Clearly, once again, Mr. Speaker, this government has failed to 
meet its second objective of privatization. In every one of these 
examples that I’ve spoken of, not one share was publicly 
available to Saskatchewan people — not one share. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, this government says that they want to 
ensure that public services are effective and efficient and that 
they provide a good value for our money. Well let’s look at 
that. 
 
Highways — the annual amount of money that we spend on 
highways in this province has not decreased significantly at all. 
And everybody knows what privatization has meant for 
highways. It has meant the worst roads in the history of this 
province. It is almost unbearable to try and drive between 
Saskatoon to Regina in terms of that highway and how that 
highway has deteriorated. We’ve got worse highways, and 
we’ve got a worse service. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to 
note that 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1219 
 

the truckers are complaining about that stretch of road, and that 
road is indicative of the kinds of highways that can be found all 
over Saskatchewan. 
 
And then we have the dental plan. Did this privatization of the 
dental plan mean more efficient and effective use of the public 
money? No, it did not. The privatization of the school-based 
children’s dental plan has meant worse service for the parents of 
the children in this province, particularly those in rural 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member 
from Weyburn says, bull. Well I’d like to suggest to the 
member of Weyburn that we will soon have you back as a 
veterinarian in the constituency of Weyburn, and you can take 
care of all the bulls that you want. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the 
hon. member referred to myself as the MLA for Weyburn and I 
think she said that I said . . . I used the word in the Assembly 
“bull,” and I would . . . I want you to know and all members of 
the legislature, Mr. Speaker, to know that I used no such word, 
although I will say I do know that term when I see it, from my 
past experience, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member has not really made a point of 
order. It’s a dispute between two members. The debate will 
continue. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
ask the member from Weyburn that if he’s interested in entering 
this debate that he can get up on his feet after I have sat down 
and taken my seat and be involved and participate in this latest 
economic fad and justify this latest economic fad of 
privatization. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I have simply gone through here is that 
it’s clear to all that the government has failed in its attempt to 
meet its privatization objectives. It has set three objectives, and 
in every case they have failed to meet any one of these three 
objectives. 
 
Now let me turn for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to another aspect 
of the PC government’s privatization plan — another aspect 
that is determined and driven by their privatization ideology. 
Now they talk about privatization, and I can see why they use 
that word, because it describes exactly the way they go about it, 
in private, secretly, behind closed doors, privately with the PC 
friends, and privately with their big-business friends. 
 
But Saskatchewan people have begun to ask, Mr. Speaker, what 
does the PC government have to hide? Why won’t they make 
these deals public? Why are they hiding? Let’s consider, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the private information that they’re hiding. 
Some of the privatization deals that this government has gone 
ahead with have not been released to the public. 

Now last year, as every family knows, and as every community 
knows in this province, they privatized the children’s school-
based dental program. Did they release the secret deal? Did they 
release the secret deal to the people of this province? No, they 
did not. Did the government release to the public the secret 
privatization deal negotiated with the dentists? No, they did not. 
 
(1500) 
 
What are you hiding? Why are you continuing to hide these 
privatization deals? And what about the privatization deal and 
the privatization of SaskCOMP, Secore, and parts of SaskTel? 
These publicly-owned companies, these publicly-owned 
services became part of WESTBRIDGE. And have they 
released any part of the deal to the public? No. Have they 
released any one of the secretly private deals that they 
negotiated with Mercury printers and others? The answer is no, 
they have not. 
 
By now, even the PC back-benchers must be wondering just 
what sort of privatization deals are your front benches, your 
cabinet ministers, hiding. And if these deals are such a good 
deal, why are you afraid to show them to the public of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
I want to talk about the privatization deal that’s occurred 
between Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation and 
Eldorado Nuclear. This is another one of their little 
privatization schemes or scam. And have they released that 
signed privatization deal to the people of this province? No! 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it begs the question again: why do they have 
to keep this kind of information in private; why can’t they 
release this information to the people; and what do they have to 
hide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I apologize for interrupting the hon. 
member in the midst of the debate, Mr. Speaker, but I wonder if 
I could have leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, some guests sitting in your 
gallery, the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker. These are some 
business people from Ontario who are looking at a business 
investment here in Saskatchewan, indeed in Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan. They are Doug MacDonald, his wife Heather, 
and Sonny Anderson as well, who is seated with them. And I 
would ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 11 — Privatization as it Affects Government 
Services (continued) 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now this 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1220 
 

privatization deal that I was referring to, the privatization deal 
of Sask Minerals — this privatization has occurred in two 
companies, one in Quebec and one in Ontario. 
 
Once again the members opposite have failed to release to the 
people of Saskatchewan the signed agreements, and I’d like to 
know why. Why are you people so afraid of letting the people 
of this province know what’s in those deals? You people are the 
servants of the public. You have been elected to look after the 
public purse, and if you were doing a good job of looking after 
the public purse, then you won’t be afraid to release to the 
people of this province those business deals that you’ve 
negotiated. 
 
You are selling off the publicly owned assets of this province, 
and we have a right to know what’s involved in those sell-offs, 
members opposite. These have been cosy little private deals. 
The investors in Quebec know what the deal is — they know 
what the deal is before the people of Saskatchewan know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago this government announced 
the sale of Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s natural gas 
reserves — some 510 billion cubic feet. This is another 
privatization, a PC privatization of our future, Mr. Speaker. But 
has the government released the contents of this deal to the 
people of Saskatchewan? Have they released one signed 
document between the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation and 
another privatized Crown corporation, Saskoil? They have not. 
And it begs the question: what are you hiding and why are you 
trying to hide? 
 
And the list goes on and on and on. All of the PC privatizations, 
with the exception of one, have been kept in the dark — the 
people of this province have been kept in the dark. They are 
private deals; they are secret deals. And no wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan people have come to realize that 
these secret deals are benefitting only the PC Party members 
and only the PC corporate friends. 
 
And I will be listening with some interest today, Mr. Speaker, 
to see who enters the debate on the government side of the 
House. I will want to know, just as the people of Saskatchewan 
want to know, how do the PC members opposite justify the 
secret deals that have occurred? How do they justify and 
explain the PC privatization? 
 
The PC privatization means private deals, secret deals. That’s 
what it means — kept in secret, never released to the public. 
And I will be particularly interested in seeing whether many of 
the PC members will even try to answer this question: what are 
you ashamed of? Why are you trying to hide? Why are you 
trying to hide all of the privatization deals that have occurred in 
this province in the last year and a half? 
 
Now I just want to talk about some of the privatizations that 
have occurred. Now we will all remember that the PC members 
opposite sold off the Poplar River mine to Manalta Coal of 
Alberta. Here we have it: the Poplar River coal mine is sold off 
to Manalta Coal from Alberta, and the Saskatchewan Potash 
Corporation buys the coal back. Some business deal — we sell 
off something we already own and then we buy the coal back. 

And then we have the SPC drag-line, once again sold to 
Manalta Coal. The interesting thing about this privatization is 
that we were to receive $45 million for the drag-line. Now you 
would think that Fred Mannix — who’s the construction 
magnate in Alberta who owns Manalta Coal — you would think 
that he would be able to go to the bank himself and get the loan 
to pay the people of Saskatchewan for this public asset, the 
drag-line. But that doesn’t occur, for some wonderful reason. 
 
Instead what happens is the Government of Saskatchewan, 
through Saskatchewan Power Corporation, guarantees a $45 
million loan to the Government of Saskatchewan. So here we 
are: we have Manalta Coal, that’s got quite a bit of money, I 
understand — they’ve been very successful in Alberta. They, 
for some reason, can’t go to the bank and get their own loan. 
They have to have the Government of Saskatchewan guarantee 
the note. 
 
And then we have Saskoil. This privatization took place in late 
1985. We received $75 million for this company, but what 
happens? They fire 25 per cent of the workers; they buy a $66 
million Alberta oil company; 75 per cent of the privately held 
shares are held by people and institutions outside of 
Saskatchewan. So we’ve gone from a wholly owned 
Saskatchewan company, owned by all of us, all 1 million 
people, to a company that is owned by people, for the most part, 
who reside outside of our province. Now that really is public 
participation, members opposite. We used to publicly 
participate in Saskoil by each and every one of us having a 
share of that company through the public . . . or through the 
Crown corporation, and now that no longer occurs. 
 
And we also have a situation where not one dividend’s been 
paid to the Government of Saskatchewan, although dividends 
have been paid to the private shareholders in each of the first 
two years of operation. And I will be interested to have the 
members opposite explain why it is that Saskoil has not yet paid 
any dividend to the people of this province or the government 
of this province. 
 
And then we have the sell-off of one of our assets. That’s when 
the government sold $40 million worth of equipment for some 
$6 million and privatized 157 Highways workers. 
 
And then we have WESTBRIDGE — that’s the privatization of 
SaskCOMP and Secore and part of SaskTel. Now no details of 
that deal have been released; no documents or agreements have 
been released, even though I have written to the minister of 
privatization requesting that information. But there is some 
interesting things that we’re able to glean out of the annual 
report, and the interesting thing to note is that here we have a 
company that apparently has been sold for $16.75 million. This 
consists of a $5.2 million note which is payable on July 1, 1988. 
It looks as though this note is going to come out of general 
revenue of WESTBRIDGE. 
 
And then we also have . . . the people of this province have got 
class B common shares in WESTBRIDGE, valued at $11.55 
million. But we have no guarantees that those shares, three of 
four months down the road, will be worth 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1221 
 

$11.5 million. We have no guarantees that we will have any 
dividends on those shares. 
 
We look at what’s happened in Saskoil. Saskoil hasn’t paid one 
cent in dividends to the people of this province, because we 
own many of those shares — not one cent. So we have no 
guarantees. And it will be interesting to ask the minister 
responsible for SaskCOMP and the minister of privatization 
about this little sweetheart deal that’s taken place over at 
SaskCOMP. 
 
Because here we have a company, a very, very important 
company in terms of the future of our province, in terms of high 
technology, that returned, in the last 10 years, over $21 million 
in dividends to the people of this province. 
 
We have just sold off this company for $16.75 million. We get 
a promissory note for $5.2 million and some class B shares in 
this new WESTBRIDGE — no guarantees that we’ll ever get 1 
cent in dividends, even though we have had dividend after 
dividend after dividend paid by this Saskatchewan computer 
corporation to the people of this province. 
 
And let’s look at Sask Minerals. Saskatchewan Minerals was an 
important little company in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
had facilities in Carrot River and Chaplin and Fox Valley. This 
was a company that returned to the people of this province over 
$60 million. It was sold for less than $16 million to two eastern 
companies. Once again we have no details of the deal. We have 
no documents. The documents have never been released. 
 
And then we have the privatization of parks. There’s only one 
lease agreement that I’ve had the opportunity to see, and that’s 
the Blackstrap lease agreement. And if the people opposite are 
so sure about their privatization, then they will not be afraid to 
release to the people of this province all of the documents that 
go along with the deals that have been struck between the 
public and the private sector. 
 
Now I can understand if this was a private enterprise operation 
that we were running here, we would have no right to see those 
business deals. But we do, because you, sir — you, sir are 
responsible to the people of this province for their tax dollars 
and for the public assets that have been accumulated on their 
behalf. You are responsible and you ultimately will be 
accountable. We deserve, we deserve to see the details of that 
deal. And if you have nothing to hide, if you have absolutely 
nothing to hide, then you will make those deals available to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And finally I want to talk about two other privatizations. You 
will recall that the government of Saskatchewan sold the 12 per 
cent shares to Fleet Aerospace of Ontario. In fact we never 
received any money. We exchanged our shares for some shares 
in Fleet Aerospace. The minister from Kindersley told the 
people of this province that those jobs would be guaranteed and 
that that company, SED Systems, would be capitalized by this 
Ontario company, and that has not occurred. 
 
Seventy working people in the city of Saskatoon lost their 

job, and Fleet Aerospace told the people of this province that 
unless the government bought a $10 million building, that they 
were going to pull out of this province; they were going to take 
the technology, developed and paid for by the people of this 
province, back to Ontario. Once again, some business deal. 
 
We have no guarantees that those jobs in Saskatoon will be 
safe. We have no guarantees that Fleet Aerospace won’t pull the 
technology out of this province, and we have no guarantees that 
we’ll be left with anything other than a $10 million building in 
Innovation centre in Saskatoon, the bricks and mortar. 
 
Now I want to talk about the PC privatization ideology. By 
now, Mr. Speaker, it’s become quite clear, even to some of the 
PC back-benchers, that these privatization deals have not been 
good business deals. They’ve not been undertaken for sound 
business purposes. And instead, these PC privatization plans 
appear to be pure right-wing ideology — not common sense, 
not practical, not good business deals, but privatization 
ideology only. 
 
And it’s an old ideology, Mr. Speaker, one we have all seen 
before — big business and right-wing politicians have tried it 
before. They have tried it elsewhere, It’s failed in the past, and 
it will fail again, and it’s failing today. But these right-wing PC 
politicians, these ideologues, keep on trying. They are at least 
consistent on that score, both feet planted in the past, facing 
backwards. 
 
(1515) 
 
They seem to base their privatization ideology on a few basic 
principles, Mr. Speaker, and they won’t dare admit it, but I 
suspect that the basic principles are the following: private 
benefit, not public good; corporate power, not community 
power; balance sheet profits, but not services to people; money, 
the ultimate goal, and greed is their ultimate motivation; 
competition, not co-operation; and capitalism, Mr. Speaker, not 
compassion. Those are the fundamentals principles of this PC 
privatization ideology. That is what guides them. 
 
Taken together, Mr. Speaker, these principles define their 
backward, narrow, and selfish ideology that they are determined 
to pursue blindly and at any cost. But this right-wing ideology 
stands condemned before human history and before human 
experience here in Saskatchewan and in the rest of the world. It 
is based on their philosophy of greed, selfishness, mean-
spiritedness, and on that old Tory maxim, “beggar thy 
neighbour.” 
 
Now these shallow and narrow-minded Saskatchewan Tories 
have had their right-wing privatization ideology reinforced by 
their inspiration from outside, people like Margaret Thatcher 
from Britain, Vander Zalm from British Columbia, and of 
course their favourite ideological theorist at the Fraser Institute. 
 
Now they have developed not only their privatize ideology but 
their secret plan for developing it as well. And we know who’s 
in this province advising you people. We know who’s here. We 
know you’ve had Oliver Letwin here. We know that you’ve had 
Mr. Walker from 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1222 
 

the Fraser Institute. We know that public dollars are paying for 
these consultant fees so you can sell off the public assets of the 
people of this province. We know that, but you’ve never 
publicly explained it. You’ve never publicly admitted it. It’s 
been cooked up in secret, planned in private — closed doors — 
that’s what your privatization plan is all about. 
 
Now they think that their privatization plan is simple, and it is 
also transparent — a few easy PC steps to the privatization of 
Saskatchewan, to the transformation of Saskatchewan to the PC 
goal of the late . . . or of the great leap backwards. 
 
Their strategy and their plan entails a few simple steps, they 
believe. Gradually weaken workers, workers’ rights and 
workers’ unions. Divide the working people. Gradually drive a 
wedge between urban people and rural people. Gradually divide 
Saskatchewan people from one another — farmers and working 
people. Gradually break down community solidarity and 
community co-operation. Transform Saskatchewan from a 
community of co-operators to individual capitalists. Stimulate 
interest in greed and selfishness and speculative investment. 
Use soothing, mellow, reassuring Tory doublespeak, the slow 
PC seduction into selfishness. PC power bonds, Saskoil bonds, 
and one small step further, Saskoil shares. And finally, ladies 
and gentlemen of the government opposite, the outright sell-off 
of all of Saskatchewan assets commonly owned by all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s clear that we have here not only a 
secret privatization ideology, but also a secret PC privatization 
plan. And I will be listening with some care later today, and the 
people of this province will be listening with some care when 
the PC members opposite enter this debate. 
 
Will the minister of privatization speak on this motion now 
before us? After all, it’s his issue, privatization, it’s his 
portfolio. Or will only the PC back-benchers enter the debate? 
And will even one of them stand here in this Assembly and 
confirm what Saskatchewan people know, that PC privatization 
is based on the right-wing ideology of greed and the PC 
privatization strategy to destroy the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it has become clear, Mr. Speaker, that what we are seeing 
is this hard right-wing PC privatization ideology of the PC 
government members opposite. That’s their ideology and that’s 
their approach. 
 
But there is another way, there’s a Saskatchewan way, Mr. 
Speaker. And I submit to you that it is a better way, it is a better 
approach, and it is a more sound approach for the future of our 
province, for the future of our people. Not the hard right-wing 
PC ideology — narrow, selfish, and backward — but the 
Saskatchewan tradition of a mixed economy addressing 
Saskatchewan issues with made-in-Saskatchewan solutions. It’s 
practical, it’s pragmatic and it’s positive — a mixed economy. 
 
The full scope and opportunity for Saskatchewan business and 
Saskatchewan co-operatives and the Saskatchewan public sector 
working together to develop 

this province, to develop Saskatchewan’s opportunities, to 
develop Saskatchewan’s future. That’s the history of this 
province — not their history. The history of this province is 
people working together — small-business people, co-
operatives, and the public sector. That is our tradition. Those 
are the values of our people, not the right-wing, selfish ideology 
of the members opposite. 
 
A mixed economy that respects and supports our unique 
Saskatchewan experience with community and co-operatives — 
the co-operative approach adopted by our pioneers and that 
remains strong and vibrant today, the co-operative tradition that 
built the wheat pool, the credit union, and the other producer 
co-ops, and the many, many successful consumer co-ops across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
A mixed economy that recognizes and supports the contribution 
of Saskatchewan business, that allows small Saskatchewan 
business to thrive and to flourish and to innovate and to grow. 
And a mixed economy that is not afraid to use, when and where 
necessary, the common public instruments of the public sector 
or the Crown corporations. 
 
And in Saskatchewan we have been bold enough, we have been 
far-sighted enough, we have, Mr. Speaker, been self-confident 
enough to use the public sector and Crown corporations to serve 
the needs of Saskatchewan people and to develop the future of 
our province. Over the years this has happened in a number of 
different ways, for different reasons, and in a number of 
different times, but always in the firm belief — by working 
together, Saskatchewan people can develop our future. 
 
Now there’s the case of the natural monopolies; for example, 
the provision of basic power and telephone services to a vast     
for foreign capitalists to develop these utilities for their profit. 
We did it ourselves, for our own common benefit. And together 
the people of Saskatchewan built up a strong SaskTel and 
strong Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And thank goodness 
for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, however, these natural monopolies . . . even though 
Saskatchewan public utilities are being attacked and 
undermined by the PC privatization ideology. In other cases, 
Mr. Speaker, there were important public services which were 
needed by Saskatchewan communities and needed by 
Saskatchewan families. These could have been developed by 
private commercial interests, but they were not. Of if they were, 
they were out-of-province corporations exploiting 
Saskatchewan people. And I cite, for example, SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. 
 
Saskatchewan people know that the provision of affordable and 
comprehensive insurance services, as well as affordable and 
practical bus services were not developed in this province by 
the big business corporations, but they were developed here in 
Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people and for Saskatchewan 
people. These are further good examples, Mr. Speaker, of a 
positive, pragmatic and successful 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1223 
 

approach to the mixed economy of Saskatchewan. And it’s 
something, Mr. Speaker, that these members opposite know 
nothing about because they don’t know our history. 
 
In other cases, Mr. Speaker, a major issue was the provision of 
a public good, or a public service in a natural monopoly 
environment. The Saskatchewan water supply board, now the 
water corporation, is such an example, another example of the 
mixed economy of public enterprise established to serve the 
needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now let me turn for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the area’s 
resources. For decades Saskatchewan people have felt blessed 
by our abundant natural resources, resources that belong to all 
of us, for the benefits of all of us, for the future of all of us — 
not just a few, but for the future of all of us. 
 
Outside corporate interests from Toronto and New York and 
Dallas or South Africa, or wherever, have often looked on 
Saskatchewan as a place where they could exploit these 
resources and make private corporate profits for themselves. 
While their willingness to invest was sometimes welcomed, 
their refusal to establish Saskatchewan-based corporations was 
resented and rejected, and rightly so. 
 
We had sodium sulphate, but not one single private corporation 
was willing to establish a major Saskatchewan-based company. 
And so Saskatchewan people established their own 
Saskatchewan Minerals, owned and controlled in 
Saskatchewan. But today, Mr. Speaker, the PC government’s 
privatization ideology has just sold off Saskatchewan Minerals, 
and it’s now 100 per cent owned and controlled by corporations 
in Ontario and Quebec. 
 
And we’ve had hard rock mining, we’ve had potash, and we’ve 
had oil. But not one single private corporation was prepared to 
establish a Saskatchewan-based company in any one of these 
resource areas — not one. And so Saskatchewan people put up 
our money, and they established it for all of us now — 
Saskatchewan potash company, Saskatchewan oil company and 
Saskatchewan hard rock mining companies — to help develop 
Saskatchewan’s resources for Saskatchewan people for 
Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
But the PC members opposite, Mr. Speaker, don’t want to 
recognize and acknowledge the Saskatchewan tradition. Instead 
their privatization play involves their welcome to big business. 
They say open for big business. And they turn their backs on 
Saskatchewan working people and Saskatchewan small 
businesses and Saskatchewan’s future. That’s what you’ve just 
done. 
 
They’ve sold off Saskatchewan oil and now 75 per cent of the 
shares are owned by people outside of our province. That’s your 
policy. That’s your PC policy. That’s PC privatization. 
 
For Saskatchewan people it means lost jobs, lost services and 
lost control over our future. But I remind the members opposite 
that there is indeed another way, there’s indeed another 
approach. The made-in-Saskatchewan approach, our tradition of 
a mixed economy, full 

opportunities for the three sectors working together — 
Saskatchewan business, Saskatchewan co-operatives, and where 
it makes sense, public enterprise. 
 
We have had a history of a practical common sense approach in 
contrast to the right-wing PC privatization ideology. 
 
Now in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will wait with some 
anticipation. I want to see the members opposite stand in their 
place — I want them to stand in their place and explain to the 
people of this province why you’re selling us out. Explain to the 
people of the province why it is that you’re tampering and 
you’re playing with our future. Those companies, those public 
assets belong to all of us — all of us. 
 
You won’t release any of the details of those private deals, not 
one. None one detail, with the exception of Weyerhaeuser. 
Release the SaskCOMP deal. Release the SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) deal. 
Release the dental deal, the Highways deal. Release SED 
Systems deal, release them all. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The deal, the deal, the deal, the deal . . . 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Release the deals. 
 
But you’re afraid to do that. If you’re such good business 
people, if you can enter into such hot business deals, release it. 
Show the people of this province that you are in fact looking 
after the resources and the assets of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
South, the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its present course of privatizing 
government assets and services such as the school-based 
children’s dental plan and elements of the Department of 
Highways, when it is clear that these measures will 
produce neither cost savings to the public nor an 
improvement in the services provided. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I say I’m 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today to second and to speak in 
support of the motion just made by the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana, a motion that calls upon this Assembly to condemn the 
government opposite for its present course of privatization, or 
perhaps better said, the selling off of Saskatchewan — selling 
off of the assets of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you today that this government 
has no mandate and no right to be engaged in this sell-off of 
Saskatchewan. We heard hints of privatization before 1986. But 
in the campaign of 1986, Mr. Speaker, we did not hear this 
government, this party opposite, indicate that if returned to 
office they would 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1224 
 

begin this plunge into privatization. They have no mandate, and 
I say no right to be selling off the assets of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this motion deserves the support of 
members in this House. I believe this present course of 
privatization deserves to be condemned. But whether this 
motion passes or fails in this House, this government already 
stands condemned, already stands condemned by the people of 
Saskatchewan for the sell-off of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to focus my remarks this afternoon around two very 
specific examples that we’ve seen of privatization. Two 
example that clearly indicate the folly of this course and the 
tragic results of what this government is undertaking. 
 
First I wish to focus on, Mr. Speaker, is the privatization, the 
sell-off, the sell-out of Saskatchewan Minerals. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, because Saskatchewan Minerals has been a relatively 
small corporation in our province, because Saskatchewan 
Minerals is involved in only a limited number of Saskatchewan 
communities and has employed a limited number of 
Saskatchewan people, the sell-off, the sell-out, the give-away of 
Sask Minerals has not really generated a lot of public attention, 
which is of course what this government hoped would happen, 
Mr. Speaker. And yet in many ways the sell-off of Sask 
Minerals in Chaplin and Fox Valley and Carrot River, in many 
ways this sell-off tells the whole tale of privatization, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Sask Minerals was founded in this province in the last 1940s. 
The would make it one of, if not the oldest of the corporations 
owned by the people of Saskatchewan — by the people of 
Saskatchewan including the minister opposite, including 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, myself, our families, our neighbours, our 
parents. Sask Minerals was owned by we, the people, of this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with the exception of one of those 40 years 
of operation in this province, our company, Sask Minerals, 
demonstrated and showed a profit in every one of its 40 years 
with the exception of one. Year after year after year, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan Minerals showed a profit and returned 
that profit to its owners, returned that profit in dividends to the 
people of Saskatchewan, year after year after year. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you and I and our families and all of 
the people of this province shared in those dividends. We saw 
those dividends in better hospitals and better schools and better 
roads. We saw those dividends in balanced provincial budgets. 
We saw those dividends in lower taxes in this province. 
 
For 40 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Minerals, 
year after year after year, showed a profit, and we, the people of 
Saskatchewan, benefitted. We received the dividends. 
 
And not incidentally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over that course of 
time this small corporation paid its fair share of royalties to the 
provincial treasury. Not incidentally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
corporation provided long-term, stable employment in those 
communities where it’s 

located. Not incidentally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over those 40 
years this small corporation was the life-blood of the 
community of Chaplin and Fox Valley, and contributed to those 
local economies and those local treasuries with grants in lieu of 
taxes. And in addition to all of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
corporation provided millions and millions and millions of 
dollars of dividends to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me just say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this success story in Sask 
Minerals is due in large part to the men and women who have 
served on those boards of Sask Minerals, due in part to the men 
and women who have served in management of Sask Minerals, 
and due in large part to the men and women who have given of 
their labour in years and years of work for Sask Minerals. 
 
Then along came this government — along came this 
government with its friends from the Fraser Institute and its 
advisers from Margaret Thatcher in Great Britain. Along came 
this government with its ideology of privatization, and they 
turned their gaze on Sask Minerals. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that was a sad day for Sask Minerals and a sad 
day for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government promised, promised there 
would be consultation before privatization, This government 
says there’s going to be public participation. And this 
government says these moves will be in the public interest. 
 
Well it’s obvious now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, looking at the 
privatization, the sell-off of Sask Minerals, that their 
commitment to consultation is simply bogus. It’s obvious now 
after we see the sell-off of Sask Minerals that their euphemism 
of public participation is nothing but a sad joke. And it’s 
obvious now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the sell-off of Sask 
Minerals that those who are benefitting are not the people of 
Saskatchewan but their corporate friends from eastern Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to privatization, this 
government promised us consultation. Well I’ll tell you, they 
have no more interest in consultation with the people of 
Saskatchewan than fly through the air. 
 
And that sell-off of Saskatchewan Minerals is the perfect 
example. On March 19, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on March 19 the 
minister responsible for privatization over there says to the 
province, we want to consult. He wants to consult. He’s quoted 
in the press of this province as saying that the sale of Sask 
Minerals is being considered but that no final decision has been 
made. He wants to consult with the people of Saskatchewan. 
He’s quoted as having said, “We want to see an adequate 
opportunity for consultation and discussion with the people 
affected.” That was on March 19. 
 
March 24 this same minister flies out to Chaplin, spends about 
two hours with the workers and the townspeople of Chaplin. 
Was he there to consult? No. He was there to announce that the 
sale, the sell-off of Sask Minerals was imminent. 
 
Did he invite the workers at Sask Minerals to participate? 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1225 
 

What do you think, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Did he invite them? 
He said he would. No. No invitation to participate. Did he ask 
the workers in Sask Minerals and the townspeople gathered that 
day, did he ask them if they thought this was a good idea? No, 
just flew in and announced, the sale is imminent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s this government’s definition of 
consultation. Four days later, the sale of Sask Minerals is 
announced. While this government was busy promising 
consultation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ink was drying on the 
deal. 
 
This government doesn’t consult with the people of 
Saskatchewan; it insults the people of Saskatchewan; it insults 
the communities of Saskatchewan; it insults the workers of 
Saskatchewan; it insults the wishes of the people of 
Saskatchewan; it insults the creativity and the ability of 
Saskatchewan people. Without a mandate, without the right, it 
signs a secret deal with its corporate friends from eastern 
Canada to sell off assets that belong to all of us — that belong 
to all us. 
 
And what did they . . . Why? Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why 
would they do this? They do it for a quick bit of cash. This 
cash-starved government will sell off anything for a quick bit of 
cash. I’ll tell you, this is PC privatization, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
This is PC privatization: the privileged, they prosper, and the 
people, they pay. They pay, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You might be interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on just how 
much we got for Sask Minerals, just how much we received, 
just how much their corporate friends from eastern Canada were 
willing to put up for our corporation. Well I’ll tell you how 
much we got, Mr. Speaker. For the sale of Sask Minerals, we 
received just enough money to pay the interest on the public 
debt this government created; just enough money to pay the 
interest payments alone on the public debt for about two and a 
half weeks. For about two and a half weeks. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we took the money that — and I hope 
we received the money; I’m not sure of that — but if we took 
that money and started on March 28, the day the sale was 
announced, if we took that money on March 28 and started 
applying it to the interest payments and the public debt, that 
money was all gone about the middle of April. Forty years of 
building, 40 years of contributing dividends to the economy and 
the people of Saskatchewan gone in about two and a half 
weeks. 
 
And where are those dividends going now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Where are they going now? Well they’re no longer 
coming to the treasury of the province of Saskatchewan. 
They’re going straight out of the pocket-books of Saskatchewan 
people and into the corporate bank accounts in Montreal and 
Toronto. They’re going right out of the hospital budgets and the 
school budgets and the road budgets and grants to towns and 
villages, right into the bank accounts of the corporate 
shareholders, and this government calls that public 
participation. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I call it the sell-off of 
Saskatchewan, the sell-off of our children’s heritage for a quick 
bit of cash to feed a cash-starved government. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And that’s PC privatization in a nutshell, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s PC privatization in a nutshell. You see, the 
rich get richer and the poor get poorer, and the prosperous, they 
prosper more, and the people, the people of this province, get 
the tab. The people are asked to pay. 
 
And so is it any wonder I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it any 
wonder that the people of Saskatchewan want rid of Margaret 
Thatcher’s advisers, and they want rid of the Fraser Institute in 
this province, but most of all, they want rid of this government 
with their priority in privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area that I would like to address today 
affects a much larger number of people in our province, 
thousands of Saskatchewan residents, if not hundreds of 
thousands of Saskatchewan people, and Saskatchewan families 
are being affected by this government’s decision to privatize 
our parks, the privatization of our parks. And this one for me, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, comes very close to home and very close 
to the community that I’m privileged to represent in this House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in this province have believed, and 
many of us still do believe, that our park lands and our public 
parks are a heritage. We have believed, and many of us still 
believe, that our parks are a heritage, in many cases a heritage 
which we have received from those who have gone before us, 
from the pioneers of this land; and in every case, a heritage that 
we hold in trust for our children and grandchildren and 
generations yet unborn. 
 
We have believed that our parks are a heritage to both preserve 
and to show-case the natural beauty of this province, to both 
preserve and to show-case the natural resources of this 
province, including its wildlife and its water-fowl. 
 
We’ve believed that the parks in our province should be an 
oasis, an oasis of recreation and re-creation and relaxation; a 
place for individuals and families to go and to holiday and to 
enjoy and to experience the natural beauty of our province, and 
to come away refreshed. 
 
We have believed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that parks are for 
people, first of all . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And then along came this government — 
along came this government, Mr. Speaker, this government for 
whom the almighty dollar is king, for whom the almighty dollar 
is supreme, this government for whom profit matters above all 
— and so they bring that philosophy to our parks, they bring the 
philosophy that the parks must pay. 
 
And I guess we shouldn’t have been surprised to see their 
privatization philosophy turned onto our parks. It’s been a little 
bit insidious, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1226 
 

privatization of our parks. There’s been a little bit here and a 
little bit there, a little bit here and a little bit there, but it’s 
beginning to pile up. It’s beginning to pile up, and we’re 
beginning to see the results, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So what has the privatization of our parks meant? What has the 
privatization of our parks meant? Well first of all, it’s meant 
whether we, the people of Saskatchewan, desire it or not, our 
parks are becoming more and more and more commercialized, 
more in the line of amusement parks than natural parks. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s meant very clearly that 
environmental concerns and environmental protection within 
our parks now plays second fiddle to the desire for profit to the 
private developers. It has meant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that some 
of the profitable operations contained in our parks — and here I 
refer to the things like golf courses and rental accommodation 
— we’ve seen almost all of those now turned over to the private 
sector. And what that has meant, in every case, are increased 
fees — increased green fees, increased fees for rental 
accommodation, increased ski slope fees — they’ve all taken 
dramatic jumps, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The privatization of our parks has meant the firing, the 
termination, or in other cases the demotion of skilled and 
experienced park workers, and they’re being replaced by the 
friends of the private developers. And what it’s meant, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that we’ve seen literally millions and 
millions of dollars of public assets placed into the hands of a 
few for the profit of the few. That’s what the privatization of 
our parks has meant. 
 
And while this privatization has been going on, we know what’s 
happened to gate fees in our provincial parks — up 30 per cent 
last year. We’ve seen the camping fees in our provincial parks 
go up 80 per cent in the last year. We’ve seen the fees for 
swimming lessons go up 150 per cent in the last year, and 
we’ve seen entry fees to the swimming pools go up 300 per cent 
in the last year. 
 
That’s PC privatization, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the privileged, 
you see, they prosper, and the people they pay. And we’re 
seeing the parks, the natural and beautiful parks of 
Saskatchewan, turned into parks for profit. 
 
You know, I’m just a little bit reminded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
of the Joni Mitchell, the Saskatchewan artist, and her song “Big 
Yellow Taxi.” Do you remember that? Do you remember that 
song? You don’t remember it? Maybe you’re too young, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well let me quote Joni Mitchell. I think this quote ought to be 
heard in Saskatchewan these days when we look at what’s 
happening to our parks. She sang: 
 

Don’t it always seem to go, that you don’t know 
what you’ve got till it’s gone; 
They paved paradise and put up a parking lot . . . 

 
And that’s what we’re seeing done to the parks of 
Saskatchewan. This past week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
privatization of the our provincial parks came very close to 
home for me with the turning over of the Moose Jaw Wild 
Animal Park to private interests. 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I observe with a certain 
amount of sadness the fact that that proud wheat sheaf symbol 
that until a week ago was on the entry gate to the Moose Jaw 
Wild Animal Park, that symbol of our province, it saddens me 
to say that symbol has been painted over — obliterated. That 
symbol for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, represented the years and 
the years of building that has gone into that park. It represented 
for me the family who initially donated the land for the Moose 
Jaw Wild Animal Park. It symbolized for me the hours and 
hours of volunteer, individual labour put into that park by 
individuals I could name, who did it not for profit, but who did 
it for the love of the park, for the love of the animals, and for 
the love of the community I represent, and the love of this 
province. 
 
That wheat sheaf symbol represented for me all the years of 
volunteer labour put into that park by service club members, 
primarily the Lions club. It represented for me the contribution 
made to that park by the people of Moose Jaw through the city 
of Moose Jaw. It represented for me the contribution we made 
to that park as a people of Saskatchewan throughout the 1970s, 
when substantial amounts of public moneys were expended 
there to make that park first class, a first-class park of its kind, a 
first-class attraction for Moose Jaw and for this province. 
 
And now all of that, all of that labour and all of that love has 
been put into the hands of a few so that they might make a 
profit. You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now the dollar is king in 
this province. And I know the people in my community, and 
I’m sure people across the province, are asking themselves, 
well, now what might be sacrificed in search of that almighty 
dollar? What might be sacrificed in search of a profit? 
 
Well we know already that workers have been sacrificed. We 
know already that workers who have given years and years of 
their lives to that park have been terminated and offered vague 
promises of other jobs elsewhere. 
 
We wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about accessibility. And the 
headline that I read in the local newspaper says that wildlife 
park is opening but prices are going to be higher. The first thing 
that’s happened are higher gate fees. Are we creating here, and 
in other parks in our province, playgrounds for the middle class 
and the rich? 
 
In the search for profit, in the search for that almighty dollar, 
are we going to turn our provincial parks, and this park in 
Moose Jaw, from an oasis of natural beauty into some kind of 
an amusement park? And what about the animals? Will this 
park remain a refuge for the injured bird, the injured animal? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government didn’t even consider the 
options when it came to the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. It 
turned up its nose at public opinion in the city of Moose Jaw. It 
didn’t look seriously, in my judgement, at the offer that was put 
forward by the city of Moose Jaw. And now, for whatever 
reason, it doesn’t want to release the details of the lease that it 
has signed. It’s PC privatization, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
dollar reigns supreme. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1227 
 

 
And so just to come to a conclusion, I would like to read to the 
House a few sentences from a letter that was sent to the minister 
responsible for Parks, with a copy to me, a letter sent actually 
by a good friend of mine who happens to be a medical doctor of 
long standing in the city of Moose Jaw, and I may say to you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the few members of my 
constituency who had a Progressive Conservative sign on his 
lawn in the last election. 
 
He wrote this letter to the Minister of Parks, some quotes. He 
said: 
 

However, I have been concerned about recent trends to 
privatize the provincial parks and tourist camps and, in 
particular, the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. I personally 
feel that the park system in this province is second to 
none. I’ve had the opportunity over the years to visit 
several of our parks and campgrounds, as well as in our 
neighbouring provinces and states, and found that ours do 
not need to take a back set to any. 
 
When referring to privatization, parks and campgrounds 
come in a similar category as art centres, auditoriums, 
areas, football and baseball parks, requiring municipal and 
government financial backing. They do not operate 
without this kind of support. I realize that the economic 
situation in our province is tight, like everywhere else. 
However, to promote tourism on one hand, and to suggest 
privatizing our parks on the other, is not logical thinking. 
(And he says) There is more to living than making the 
almighty dollar. 

 
There’s more to living, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than making the 
almighty dollar. And yet for that almighty dollar, this 
government will do almost anything; they will sell off almost 
anything — perhaps everything, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They’ve bankrupted this province in their six-to-seven years. 
They refuse to listen to the will of Saskatchewan people, and 
they’re selling off our future. They’re selling off the assets that 
rightfully belong to our children and grandchildren and 
generations yet unborn. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion deserves to be 
passed in this House because it reflects the will of 
Saskatchewan people. But I say again, even if it is not, even if 
this motion which would condemn this government for its 
moves in privatization is not passed today, I tell you, this 
government already does stand condemned in the public eye. 
 
And some day, some day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
this province will have their opportunity to express that 
condemnation as did the people of Elphinstone and Eastview 
short days ago. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will begin 
the process of rebuilding this province and re-creating a society 
where people, and not profit, comes first. 
 
So I’m pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to second the motion 
made by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I enter this 
debate with a great deal of interest. I find it rather ironic that the 
NDP opposition in this Assembly would oppose public 
participation. In Australia, the Labour government has brought 
about some very successful privatization, or public participation 
ventures. France, where they’ve just re-elected their Socialist 
president, Mitterrand, in that nation they, too, have success with 
public participation. 
 
The NDP opposition has failed to realize that public 
participation cuts across all political boundaries. Liberal, 
Socialist, Communist, and Conservative governments in all 
parts of the world are engaged in public participation. Yet here 
in Saskatchewan, the NDP opposition remains out of touch with 
reality, and we’ll get into that a little later in my comments. 
That is proven by the negative resolution opposing public 
participation that has been introduced by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. Obviously the opposition is against 
economic diversification and prosperity for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Progressive Conservative 
government has the foresight and leadership to bring about 
public participation in our province. 
 
I wish to commend the government for establishing a 
Department of Public Participation, the first of its kind in North 
America. I believe that public participation has many potential 
economic benefits for the people of our province. The public 
participation program will offer all Saskatchewan people the 
opportunity to share in the growth of the province and the 
economy by investing directly in Saskatchewan. 
 
The sale of SaskPower bonds if a good example of the positive 
benefits of public participation. SaskPower bonds provided a 
new innovative way of raising capital. For the record, I would 
like to point out that these bonds raised a total of $297.5 million 
for the corporation to fund and expand their operations. And I’ll 
just stop there for a minute. 
 
When the former government built power dams or expanded 
their family of Crown corporations, where did they go for their 
money? They went to New York and borrowed the money and 
sent the interest over there. Why not borrow the money here at 
home from our people right here and pay the interest back, pay 
the interest back to the people of Saskatchewan, and they pay 
tax on that interest. It’s an income for them. So we might as 
well borrow the money in Saskatchewan rather than New York. 
I mean, they’ve borrowed money from major banks for years. 
And I’m going to comment a little further on that and give the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana a little lesson in finance. And 
she certainly needs it. 
 
Yet the opposition wants to criticize and oppose public 
participation. Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the people of 
Saskatchewan the SaskPower bonds provided a new avenue of 
investment. The same can be said of the public share offering of 
Saskoil which raised $110 million. I would like to note that at 
the time of issuing, 89 per cent of 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1228 
 

the common shares and 87 per cent of the preferred shares were 
held by Saskatchewan residents. Yes, public participation is 
working and it’s working for the benefit of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Take a look at the example of WESTBRIDGE, and SaskCOMP 
union favoured the merger. All the jobs are secure, It is now the 
largest computer service company in western Canada. It’s based 
right here in Regina. That merger is expected to create 250 
more jobs, mostly in Saskatchewan. Yet the NDP opposition is 
against this. They, the NDP, do no want to see any public 
participation initiatives in this province. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that the public participation 
is more than privatization. Public participation is the 
Saskatchewan way of building, protecting, and diversifying our 
economy. It’s based on a broad public consultation that will 
provide greater opportunity and financial flexibility for the 
public and our Crown corporations. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re digging a hole, boy. 
 
Mr. Muller: — I’ll talk to the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
about the hole she dug about profits in our Crown corporations, 
in just a few moments. 
 
It will renew accountability in the public sector, which in turn 
will motivate a more productive delivery of public services. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is a known fact that Saskatchewan has the 
highest personal savings rate per capita in Canada, a total 
personal savings in excess of $2.6 billion. Public participation 
will allow Saskatchewan men and women to invest their 
savings here in Saskatchewan, as they did in the Power bonds, 
rather than borrowing the money from New York. 
 
This will work toward the growth of the Saskatchewan 
economy. Greater financial flexibility for the Crown 
corporations will means that they no longer will only have 
taxpayers and the banks to draw upon to raise capital. In other 
words, public participation will place less of a burden on the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all remember the way the NDP 
worshipped at the temple of the family of Crown corporations. 
The family of Crown corporations — state control, state 
ownership, was the order of the day during the NDP years. 
 
And I have to stop there for a moment and talk about mandates. 
The member from Moose Jaw talked about, we had no mandate 
for public participation. Prior to the purchase, or the forced 
purchase of the Saskatchewan potash mines, what kind of a 
mandate did the former Blakeney government have? 
 
They went to the people, they got elected, and then they told 
them that they were going to buy . . . forced purchase of the 
potash mines. That’s the kind of way . . . They never released 
any information. They talk about holding back information. 
Well they waited till right after the election, never said anything 
about the forced purchase of the 

potash mines and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I know a 
little bit about history, too. And my family background, some of 
my history . . . I come from a CCF background, but when the 
NDP . . . when they changed to the NDP, our family walked 
away from them because . . . actually the NDP walked away 
from us, we didn’t walk away from them. They just tried to ram 
everything down our throats. Everything that looked good, they 
wanted to make it into a public Crown corporation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you give up your card? 
 
Mr. Muller: — No, I was fortunate enough that I was young 
enough that I never really did buy an NDP card. My folks 
smartened up long before I was old enough to vote. But 
anyway, I guess I’m getting off of the motion a bit, but . . . and I 
see the Deputy Speaker kind of looking at me. 
 
The family of Crown corporations — state control, state 
ownership was the order of the day during the NDP years. Land 
bank was a classic, for example, the state controlled by the NDP 
— land bank. It reached the pointed in Saskatchewan under the 
NDP where we could not even go to a movie theatre without 
seeing the propaganda of the family of Crown corporations. 
 
The NDP still cling to that concept, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That 
is why they are so opposed to public participation. The NDP 
wants the Saskatchewan public to believe that public 
participation is an ideology, is ideological. This is not the case. 
 
As I stated in my opening remarks, throughout the world 
governments of all political stripes have developed new 
approaches towards the delivery of public services and the 
ownership of Crown assets. Over a hundred countries as diverse 
as China and Australia, Great Britain, France, Sweden, New 
Zealand, have all moved to public participation of one sort or 
another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canadian provinces such as Quebec, Manitoba, 
British Columbia, Newfoundland, Alberta, as well as he federal 
government, are examining public policy options in this area. I 
will be a leader again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to date, Saskatchewan’s public participation 
program has brought substantial new investment and economic 
activity into our province. I’ve talked about the WESTBRIDGE 
Computer Corporation. Let’s take a look at another successful 
example of public participation. Let’s look at Weyerhaeuser. 
Weyerhaeuser — this is where I want to give the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana and the member from Moose Jaw a little 
lesson in finances. 
 
They talked about the 1981 profit that PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company) made. PAPCO put $24 million — $24 million 
— into general fund in 1981. I mean, that sounds like a pretty 
substantial profit, you know. But they talk about not telling the 
people everything, or not opening up the books for the people to 
look at. So anyway, when they bought 70 per cent of PAPCO 
from Parsons & Whittemore, they did what they called bridge 
financing. Have you ever heard of bridge financing? They 
borrowed the money from two banks, from two banks, at 17 per 
cent interest — 17 per cent interest. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1229 
 

An Hon. Member: — Unprotected. 
 
Mr. Muller: –Unprotected — totally unprotected. The interest 
payments in 19 . . . if they would have made them — they never 
made any interest or principal payments on the pulp mill — but 
the interest payments for 1981 alone would have been $36 
million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you didn’t pay 
them. You never paid any interest or principal . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well when we finally got elected we had to pay 
it. You people hadn’t. 
 
But this is a $12 million loss. They called it a $24 million profit. 
And, you know, my banker won’t accept that kind of balance 
sheet when I go to borrow money for my farm. It’s funny that 
they can call it $24 million profit when there’s a $36 million 
interest payment due, and they feel that that’s a profit. How can 
a $24 million return on a $36 million debt be a — it’s a $12 
million loss in my books. And they never told the people about 
it, never told anybody about where they borrowed the money to 
buy the pulp mill. They borrowed it from the Bank of Montreal 
and the Bank of Commerce. They borrowed it from those two 
banks. 
 
So the member from Saskatoon Nutana was saying that we’re 
selling off profitable Crown corporations. And there’s a $12 
million loss in one year alone, and they’re trying to say that that 
was a $24 million profit. I mean, that’s real NDP bookkeeping. 
My banker won’t accept it, but those people over there accept it. 
 
Now, here’s another lesson that I’d like to . . . Since the sale of 
the Prince Albert Pulp Company to Weyerhaeuser Canada, the 
people of Saskatchewan have earned $63 million, compared to 
a loss in previous years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana who has an opportunity to 
speak on this subject to not have a constant, running 
commentary. I do not mind dialogue on an occasional basis, but 
not a constant commentary please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 
remind this Assembly that recently Weyerhaeuser Canada 
presented a cheque for $30.5 million to the Government of 
Saskatchewan as the first instalment resulting from the sale of 
70 per cent or . . . no, we sold 100 per cent of the mill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are two very important points I wish 
to emphasize with respect to this. One, the 30-point million is 
new money for Saskatchewan that will be used to build schools 
and hospitals and roads. This money . . . like the member from 
Moose Jaw was saying that we’re selling off things and we 
won’t be able to supply schools and hospitals and roads. Well 
when you’re losing money on something, you’re not going to 
spend much money in schools and hospitals and roads. But this 
is money that’s new money paid to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And two, a government corporation that was once a drain on the 
public treasury is now reaping benefits for our province. And 
once again I want to remind the Assembly, 

the NDP opposes public participation. 
 
And the other thing about this pulp mill — and I’m very 
familiar with the pulp and paper mill because it’s located in the 
seat of Shellbrook-Torch River. I tell you, when you go by there 
now and see that new paper mill coming up and all the new 
activity and the new jobs and the way Prince Albert is going 
ahead, it’s really a great thing to see. 
 
If the government had a $12 million loss every year or $90,000 
a day — it was different losses every year — it certainly would 
have had a lot of trouble building a paper mill and refining our 
products here, and that’s what this paper is going to do . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, we’re shipping the paper right 
out of Prince Albert . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The profits, 
well the profits are going to the people that are working there. 
We’ve created — the jobs are there. People of Saskatchewan 
are working there. 
 
We’ve certainly got a reforestation program that Weyerhaeuser 
is looking after, and we’re going to have some of the best 
reforestation that we’ve had for years and years — better than 
the NDP ever had over on the east side of our province when 
they overbuilt that with saw mills and plywood mills and 
everything else and never did any reforestation over there. And 
now we’re getting into a reforestation program with 
Weyerhaeuser that will certainly build our forests, not tear them 
down. 
 
They opposed the sale of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser. The NDP is 
against building Saskatchewan’s economy. They opposed the 
new investment and new jobs. The public of Saskatchewan has 
a right to know that the NDP does not want them to have these 
economic benefits. 
 
The two members from Prince Albert — one from P.A. and one 
from P.A.-Duck Lake — said that paper mill will never be built. 
They were against it. They were opposed to it, and the rumour 
that they had in the 1986 election campaign — the paper mill 
won’t be built; it’s all a sham; fear mongering amongst the 
people — but now they have been proven wrong, and the paper 
mill is there. It’s going to open, I understand, in June or July, 
and I wonder if they will attend the opening. I’ll probably given 
them an invitation, I may even given them a ride. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said earlier, public participation is the 
Saskatchewan way of building our economy. I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, I didn’t realize you were back. I was so involved in 
my speech and the interesting part of the financial aspects of 
Weyerhaeuser that I never noticed the switch in the chair. 
 
By designing programs to meet the individual needs of our 
province, public participation is our own unique way of 
building, protecting and diversifying our economy. Mr. 
Speaker, the role of the Department of Public Participation is to 
administer the program to ensure that all initiatives respect and 
protect the interest of the public, government employees, and 
the economy of the province. Third party, private sector, 
volunteer, and employee interests, and the ideas, can all 
contribute toward improved public service and are welcome in 
the new program. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1230 
 

Mr. Speaker, what we have heard in this Assembly today from 
the NDP opposition is the rhetoric of doom and gloom. The 
NDP is locked in a time warp, sadly clinging to the ideas of 
state control and state ownership. That is why they’re so 
opposed to public participation. I want the public to know that 
the opposition has no credible alternative to public participation 
— none whatsoever. It is one thing for them to oppose public 
participation; it is another for them to have no alternative. It 
shows the NDP is bankrupt of ideas and policies for building 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation is a legitimate and a positive 
way to build our province’s economy. The government sector in 
Saskatchewan owns billions of dollars in wealth in the form of 
Crown corporations and other assets. Public participation will 
utilize these assets more effectively to diversify the economy 
and to build for the future. 
 
(1615) 
 
I can say with confidence that public participation will provide 
new investment and ownership opportunities to all 
Saskatchewan people through widespread bond and share 
offers, and that’s certainly been proven. Every bond issue we’ve 
had from SaskPower, we’ve had to cut them off. People are so 
interested in investing, they’re all over subscribed. They were 
only open for a few weeks and we had to shut them down. This 
proves that the people are interested in investing in their own 
province. They don’t want to invest out-of-province. They don’t 
want us to borrow money from New York. They want . . . 
they’ve got an interest here. Their roots are here and they want 
to invest here and that’s what they’re doing. 
 
We will see new forms of public service delivery involving 
third-party delivery, contracting out of services on employee 
companies will all provide new opportunities for growth. The 
sale of some public assets will create new jobs and new 
investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in continuing our fine tradition of co-operation 
and co-operative ownership, public participation will place 
ownership and control of our public services back in the hands 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to support a government that has the 
leadership and vision to embark on a program of public 
participation. I commend the government for establishing a 
Department of Public Participation. I have every confidence 
that public participation will build a stronger economy the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge the member for Saskatoon Nutana to 
withdraw her motion. I invite the NDP to put aside political 
considerations and support public participation for the future 
good of Saskatchewan. Join with us in working to secure a 
prosperous future for all of Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
I say to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that public participation is 
a new turning point for the history of Saskatchewan. Public 
participation is the new wave of the future. This government, 
Saskatchewan’s Progressive 

Conservative government is proud of our commitment to public 
participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I remind you, for the public record, that 
the NDP motion is opposed to public participation and its many 
benefits for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The record will show that it’s the PC government that is 
strongly leading the way in the field of public participation. 
And we’re proving this by having the first department in 
Canada. Other provinces, will follow our lead. We’re showing 
them the way, and this isn’t the only area we’re showing them 
the way in. They followed our lead in other things, and they’ll 
follow our lead now. 
 
As we all know, we have the strongest Premier in Canada 
sitting in our front benches right here, and other premiers look 
toward him for guidance, and this is a very important thing for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have no choice but to reject the motion before us. We must 
reject the motion because it is against economic growth and 
progress for our province. It’s totally negative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I once again wish to congratulate and 
commend the Government of Saskatchewan for all that it’s 
doing to enhance our province through public participation. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wait for the comments 
from members opposite, and hopefully they’ve changed their 
minds, and they may decide that they’re not going to support 
this motion by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: –Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was going to give 
the members opposite a chance to speak before I just stood, but 
. . . Being the member’s new in the Assembly, I thought I’d 
give him the opportunity to bring some of those new ideas that 
he thought he carried with him. He at least indicated that the 
other day in the House. But I do congratulate him for being here 
and I do look forward to those new ideas. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’m kind of not surprised that we’re 
speaking on this particular motion here this afternoon, the 
motion of what they so say is, and refer to as, a privatization 
and a minister of privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that I find no joke 
whatsoever of the fact that this government has moved to, and 
created, an office of Public Participation. I absolutely find no 
joke or sense of ha-ha, if you will, to the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana in the way they . . . her or even the Leader of 
the NDP, member from Riversdale, or any of those members 
over there indicate as to the minister of privatization or the 
department of privatization. For the public out there, it is public 
participation, and I think that is exactly the focus of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have listened to a couple of the members 
opposite, and they indicated that we did not have the mandate 
or the right to get into the public participation in 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1231 
 

this province. Well I have not ever heard anything so ludicrous 
in my life. Mr. Speaker, I think it was high time in the 
indication and the trail that we’ve been cutting in this province 
has been just exactly that; allowing people in this province to 
finally be able to participate and help mould this province — 
help mould it on their initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think when we look at the public participation, 
and look at our youth, and look at the future in this province, I 
think, Mr. Speaker, you and I can agree that the province of 
Saskatchewan is unique, is unique and is fruitful with not only 
human resource but the natural resource — the abundance of 
human resource and natural resource. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, if we take a look at what we’ve got 
around us, and appreciate what we’ve got around us, we can 
draw from the personal, that youthfulness, the intellectual being 
out there that is just waiting and wanting to get into the private 
sector and work and be successful at it. 
 
What I say to you, Mr. Speaker, is basically when we look at 
the youth in this province, we only have one alternative, and 
that is to open this province to everyone. 
 
And as the children come through the school system, those job 
opportunities have to be there. It is not to set up a wall, a 
concrete wall, on each side of the east or the west borders or the 
north or the south borders, Mr. Speaker. We must welcome 
Canadians to come into the province of Saskatchewan to invest. 
We must also allow Saskatchewan people to go outside the 
province of Saskatchewan to invest if that’s so their desire. I 
don’t believe in saying, well no, you can’t go there, you can’t 
come here, you can’t go there, and you can’t come here. That’s 
not life, that’s not freedom, that’s not right at all. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the members opposite say 
they don’t have a chance to debate public participation in this 
province, I call them wrong. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, they 
have all the right in the world to debate this in the public. And I 
invite those people out in my riding, in Cut Knife-Lloydminster, 
and I would challenge them to any public debate, Mr. Speaker, 
in regard to public participation. I would also love to challenge 
them . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you want to debate, Mike? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
asks: do I want to debate? I say to the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana that, yes, I will have a debate any time, any place, any 
where, with you on the particular subject. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to carry on. I would like 
to say that, Mr. Speaker, we have a trail that we want to design 
for the people in this province, a trail that will encourage people 
to invest here, a trail to encourage people to expand in their 
businesses, not only large corporate businesses, some kind of 
swear word or something that the NDP seem to insinuate 
towards large corporation of some sort. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this province is made up of 

small business. Mr. Speaker, as far as I’m concerned in this 
province, in the province of Saskatchewan big business is small 
business. It’s made up of a horrendous amount of small 
business. And by us being able to maybe invite one or two 
larger corporations into this province, well so be it, because 
maybe some of these smaller businesses cannot cope with the 
investment that is needed to get into some of this. Like for 
instance, could a business such as myself as Hopfner Holdings 
Ltd., be able to invest in an oil field and develop oil? No, I can’t 
afford it and neither can a lot of my businesses down the street 
from myself. 
 
And I go to North Battleford or anywhere else. Who else in 
North Battleford would have put in a hog processing plant, 
bacon processing plan? Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know of 
anybody who wanted to. The opportunity was there for anybody 
to do it, but Mr. Pocklington from Gainers came in and invested 
in Saskatchewan. He has some faith in Saskatchewan. He 
developed there. He’s created 400-plus jobs, and then look at 
the spin-offs from those jobs. 
 
Public participation: it means the employees can have jobs; 
employees can participate; employees can feel assured that they 
have a long-term security in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just indicate to you that when I see 
across all economies, right across the world, when jobs choose 
people, that’s when there is problems — when jobs choose 
people. You know when I was a young fellow, Mr. Speaker, I 
can remember that we could choose the job. We could. It wasn’t 
too hard for me to choose a job when I was a young fella. 
 
But things got more automated and there was a lot more farm 
help. There was maybe two or three of us would work on the 
farm, where now with the machinery that the farmers have and 
stuff like that, they don’t need those two, three people; they 
may need one. So you see that makes people want to move off 
and move towards the cities or the larger centres and expect to 
get a job. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
mentioned about, oh, that mean, terrible, ugly government that 
did away with highways and we have poor roads and all this 
kind of thing. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that 
her rhetoric is totally wrong. In this province, in the province of 
Saskatchewan . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana is mumbling from her chair again. I sat and 
listened to you, ma-am, and I would hope and appreciate you 
would sit and listen to me. 
 
She says that we lost 155 jobs in the public sector. Well maybe 
155 jobs that a government didn’t have to write a cheque on, 
but now those people are participating, are competing in the 
public sector. They’re happy, they’re content. I’d wish they-d 
leave them alone, because they are building our roads, Mr. 
Speaker, they are happy out there. They’re happy to be able to 
know that they’re being appreciated. 
 
(1630) 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1232 
 

And she says that the roads are in terrible shape. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I must admit there are some roads in terrible shape out 
there. I’m not going to say every road out there is okay. But I 
want to tell you why, I want to tell you why. And the member 
. . . and the NDP member at that time, the guy that I happened 
to beat in the last two elections, was their minister of Highways 
— was their minister of Highways. And I want to indicate to 
you that he built a piece of highway, he built a piece of highway 
the year before an election call — and the members can check 
this out, the NDP members can check it out — they went down 
Highway 40, built this highway. And I’ll tell you, after the 
election was over I was called to a meeting, a Highway 40 
meeting, and they were asking me to rebuild that portion of the 
highway again because it was a quick built piece of road that 
didn’t stand up to nothing. 
 
When we build a highway, Mr. Speaker, we’re building quality 
road. It doesn’t have to mean miles and miles and miles, but 
quality, quality, quality, that it’ll last and last and last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, I want to say without a doubt that 
when I look and listen at the members opposite, they wish not, 
they wish not to be reasonable and I don’t know why. They 
wish not to bring into this Assembly some decorum and some 
ideas. If they say, well, participation if not the . . . public 
participation is not the way, then why don’t they tell us what is 
the way. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker, do you know what, Mr. Speaker, 
I would suggest to you they don’t have nay ideas and they’re 
upset because they never thought of the idea of public 
participation because it’s so well accepted out there you see. So 
I think if they-d have realized that it was going to be that well 
accepted that they would have, if they were government at that 
particular time and they would have come up with the idea, they 
would have found out how popular it was. But may we all be 
helped that they won’t get there, at least too fast. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana mentioned the dental plan. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, she can mention the dental plan and the 
public participation regarding dental plan. I want to indicate to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that in my particular riding, health care has 
been an ongoing concern from whether it’s NDP people or 
whether it’s Liberal people or whether it’s Progressive 
Conservative people. And I think we all agree in health care, 
and I think we all agree that there’s never enough can be done. I 
think that’s right across the board. I don’t believe for one 
moment that one person out there is trying to overdo the other 
person and whatever. But, Mr. Speaker, when I hear these 
people coming in and saying well, we did away with dental 
care, we did not do away with dental care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to indicate to you that in my own riding, in the 
community of Cut Knife, for instance, if the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana would just like to travel to Cut Knife, she 
would see a dentist office in Cut Knife, Saskatchewan now. 
There’s never been a dentist in Cut Knife, Saskatchewan before. 
Or I should back that up a little bit, I think back about the ’20s 
or the ’30s I think one tried to set up there, something like that, 
but it didn’t last. But anyway, beside that, now this guy is here. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to indicate that there’s so much that 
can be said. And I’ve got much more to say on this topic and 
would ask to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Resolution No. 12 — Plans Needed for Youth Employment 

and Job Creation 
 
Mr. Goulet: –Mr. Speaker, I will be moving the following 
motion, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Eastview, at 
the end of my statement. This is the following motion that I will 
be moving: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the failure of the Government 
of Saskatchewan to adequately address the tragic problem 
of youth unemployment; and further, that this Assembly 
condemn the provincial government for spending precious 
money on needless programs like advertising, that should 
be diverted to job creation and stimulating the economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will be making a short statement on of course the 
impact of unemployment to the general public and also the 
youth. I will also then be outlining the factual basis of the 
statement and also look at not only the facts of unemployment 
but the facts of job creation, you know, by the PC government 
in this province. I will then make a summary statement in 
regards to the motion. 
 
First of all, I would like to start out by looking at the general 
message that I hear from the PC government every time we 
stand up for youth or every time we stand up for seniors or we 
stand up for other people in this province. Every time we stand 
up beside the people in fighting for jobs or for many other 
issues, the PC government always says, oh, they’re preaching 
doom and gloom. 
 
I must say at the outset that I’m extremely proud to stand beside 
the youth. I do not treat it as something negative. I treat it as 
something extremely positive. When I stand up here and look at 
the negative policies of this government, it’s in a positive way 
that I stand beside the youth of this province. 
 
I guess the first thing in relation to unemployment is the degree 
of its effect. Most of the seniors in this province, as they watch 
their grandchildren growing up, know the meaning of 
unemployment. They know what it means in regards to the fact 
that they’ve experienced it in their own families. They know 
that unemployment creates tremendous hardships, and it also 
presents a lot of stress on families. When we hear the PC 
government talk about families, we know that it is just rhetoric, 
because as the unemployment rises it has a tremendous impact, 
a negative impact on families. It leads in many cases to 
instability at the family level and break-ups. And when we look 
at that impact, it impacts on the youth and it impacts on the 
children. 
 
We also know that unemployment from the 1920s 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1233 
 

period, from the 1915s period — the period during the war, the 
First World War — getting on to just prior to the Second World 
War in the great Depression, people knew what unemployment 
was about. When we look at the modern day phase of 
unemployment, we know that it not only puts stress on the 
family, puts stress on the community level, puts stress on the 
province and the country, but it also puts tremendous stress on 
the individual. 
 
On a government that talks about individual rights and 
individual living, it puts tremendous stress; that you know that 
all the research points that for every 1 per cent rise in 
unemployment, there’s a 4 per cent rise in suicides. There’s a 4 
per cent rise in suicides for every 1 per cent rise in 
unemployment. And that’s what the research shows. That’s 
what the seniors of this province know. That’s what a lot of the 
people already know in regards to unemployment. 
 
So not only does it wreck families, it also contributes to the 
issues that face a lot of our youth today. When there is no hope 
for the future and there is no motivation for getting a job, a lot 
of people will take their lives. And that suicide question is 
linked to the question of unemployment. 
 
As I look to this issue, I know that unemployment with the 
youth is generally a large scale problem in this province. But I 
want to emphasize a point here, Mr. Speaker. I come from 
northern Saskatchewan where the unemployment rate is 60 to 
80 per cent in a lot of the communities. 
 
And I look at the youth unemployment there, and it goes about 
80, 90 per cent. And it’s a tremendous stress, not only on the 
actual youth who can’t find a job, but it puts a lot of stress 
between them and their parents who are at least able to go back 
to traditional livelihood and be able to find temporary jobs that 
went from time to time. But there is no jobs for the youth, and it 
is a very disturbing and devastating experience for a lot of 
them. 
 
They try and work with their grandparents so that they could 
have some insight on how to deal with this issue. But the facts 
of the matter are these: the policies of this government seem to 
be such that it doesn’t have impact on them. It appears that this 
government does not have the compassion and the caring to be 
able to listen, to listen to the seniors who know about what 
unemployment is, and to be able to listen to the youth now that 
have to face it on a daily basis, those youth that trying to find 
jobs right now so that they can pay for their education. 
 
Their parents and their grandparents know that education is an 
important toe-hold to get a job, but they know that only a few of 
them will get it. There’s so many students going looking for 
jobs, and so few jobs that are out there. 
 
What were the facts of Saskatchewan unemployment? I look at 
it . . . In 1976, when the NDP was in power, we had a 3.9 per 
cent unemployment rate in Saskatchewan. Today, 10 years 
later, it was 7.7. Today it is now 9 per cent. Over 45,000 people 
are out of work in Saskatchewan. We look at a city like 
Saskatoon — it’s 10 to 12 per cent. 

When we look at the youth of which this motion points to, we 
now look that the March figures show that 16 per cent of the 
youth were unemployed — 16,000. When I look at the long-
term period of the past six of . . . since 1982 when the PCs got 
in, 10,000 less jobs for the youth in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that’s the fact. When I mentioned . . . when 
you look at this in relation to the North — and I talk about the 
89 per cent of the unemployment rate — you know the great 
destruction and the hurt that it causes to our youth. And you 
know that when they are told to be motivated and to be positive 
and to be excited about the future, that they know the reality — 
the reality is that there are not enough jobs for them. The reality 
is this, that there has been 10,000 less jobs in this province for 
the youth since the PC government has come in. 
 
(1645) 
 
The question arises, when I talk to the youth, but they say, 
where is the money going? I say, well it goes to the oil 
companies, $1.7 billion. But also, I said, it’s spent foolishly, 
lavishly; it’s spent on advertising. 
 
When we look at the advertising budget we know that even in 
1984 we already had over a $15 million budget. Today we are 
looking at a budget around $20 million on advertising. 
 
And not only is there a tremendous amount spent on 
advertising, there is also the point that I made a few weeks ago. 
There is questionable advertising. Four hundred thousand has 
been spent on creating a situation in regards to the Sitting Bull 
ad that I have raised in the legislature before. 
 
When I raised it I recall the minister said, well we made money 
off it, we made 200,000 off that ad; there is 200,000 more 
money, advertising dollars coming in. And the point that I 
related back to the minister was this: well if you look at the ad, 
there was Al Capone in the ad and there was the issue of 
another bank robber and so on, and I mentioned to the minister 
at that point. I said, making money is extremely important. Our 
Youth are looking for money for these jobs throughout this 
province, but there are ways of making money that are good for 
the province and the youth and ways that are not. And I raised 
the point: I said, Al Capone made a lot of money; he made it out 
of prostitution; he made it out of robbing banks. But the point 
that I made, it doesn’t make it right. 
 
The advertising dollars that are related into this motion have to 
be relayed in a positive way, and that was the point that I made. 
The point that I made is that these advertising dollars could be 
used elsewhere. We could use it for jobs, for northern youth, 
jobs for the youth all over Saskatchewan. We could create 
hundreds and hundreds of jobs. We could create hospitals, jobs 
in the hospitals, money that could be used to pay for the drug 
costs that a lot of our youth and our seniors cannot pay for. We 
could have jobs, you know, to build different sections of the 
university. We could buy more seats at the university and 
technical institute levels. We could have money for to build our 
roads, and so on. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1234 
 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, in summation I would say I would like to 
condemn the government for its lack of action in the area of job 
creation for our youth. I would like to say that we stand here 
positively in support of the youth in their fight for jobs, and I 
would like the province to start their fight for jobs, and I would 
like the province to start diverting some of this money for the 
creation of jobs for our youth, and I will now pass it on to the 
seconder of the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to rise in this Assembly today to second and support the 
motion of my colleague, the member from Cumberland. I would 
like to compliment him for his comments on this motion. 
 
I am particularly proud, Mr. Speaker, that my first address in 
this Assembly should be an issue of such great important to my 
constituents, the people of Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
I would like to take a moment, if I might, to thank the people of 
Eastview for the confidence and trust that they have shown in 
me, and I will do my best to serve them. And I would also like 
to compliment the other candidates for their hard work and 
commitment to their ideals. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: –Mr. Speaker, along with heath care . . . cuts to 
health care and education, increased taxes, and government 
waste and mismanagement, the lack of meaningful job creation 
came up the most in this by-election. As all members well 
know, Mr. Speaker, over the past several months I’ve had the 
opportunity to note with particular interest and detail the views 
and concerns of constituents of Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
My constituents have spoken very clearly. Prior to the election 
campaign and during that campaign, the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview told me over and over again that they were concerned 
about the inadequate job opportunities for Saskatchewan young 
people. For example, there were 6,000 fewer summer jobs in 
1987 than there were in 1986. There are 10,000 fewer jobs for 
youth since 1982 — that is, from 110,000 down to 100,000 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is cause for concern, Mr. Speaker — deep concern. 
Wherever I went in the constituency, whomever I talked to, 
whether they were single people, families, students, young 
people, and even seniors, they were all concerned, Mr. Speaker, 
about the PC government’s failure to provide jobs and 
opportunities for our young people. The member for 
Cumberland very ably documented and presented the impact of 
unemployment on individuals and families. 
 
Small business is concerned about the lack of leadership and 
predictability from this government. They are telling me, Mr. 
Speaker, they are telling the PC government opposite, that they 
feel more than just concern; they feel betrayed. This was 
confirmed on May 4 loud and clear, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: –Betrayed, Mr. Speaker, by a government that 
will not even acknowledge the problem, as evidenced by the 
Minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment 
yesterday. Betrayed by the PC government that may be open for 
big business, but that has closed the door on Saskatchewan 
young people. 
 
I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to hearing the remarks of PC 
members opposite when they enter this debate on the motion 
before us today. I would hope that their remarks would spare us 
the rhetoric and stick to the facts, for the facts are clear and 
plain to see, and they are alarming. 
 
Statistics Canada reports that over the past 12 months, April to 
April, the number of jobs for Saskatchewan young people has 
gone down by 1,000. The number of Saskatchewan young 
people unemployed has increased by 1,000. I hope the members 
opposite will address that fact. 
 
Statistics Canada also reports that the unemployment rate for 
Saskatchewan young people now stands at 14.8 per cent, and 
we know it’s 80 or 90 per cent in northern Saskatchewan. 
Youth unemployment in Saskatchewan, 14.8 per cent; that 
means that one out of every seven young people in 
Saskatchewan is unemployed and looking for work. The 
members opposite may not wish to recognize that, but those are 
the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is particularly troubling when we see the PC government’s 
own published statistics showing how Saskatchewan young 
people are being forced to leave the province. Over the first four 
months of the last year, the number of young people age 20 to 
24 leaving Saskatchewan was more than twice the number of 
those coming into the province. 
 
In summary, the net out-migration in that 20 to 24 age group of 
961 people — 961 young people forced to leave the province, 
forced to see job opportunities elsewhere, Mr. Speaker, forced 
out by the failure of the PC policies and the failure of the PC 
government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, the figures I have used here 
today, these statistics are troubling and alarming. But far more 
alarming, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that these are not just cold 
statistics. These are people’s lives. For the young people of 
Saskatchewan it is a question of their lives, their dreams and 
hopes, their chance to make their contribution to this great 
province. 
 
But the PC government opposite has offered them neither hope 
nor help. And I find it particularly distressing, Mr. Speaker, that 
the provincial government should choose such a time a this, 
with youth unemployment already tragically high, to actually 
cut job program funding from the budget. A budget cut last 
year, a further budget cut this year, altogether a 60 per cent cut 
in funding for summer jobs in the past two years — another in a 
string of broken promises, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
May 10, 1988 

1235 
 

The members opposite may try and tell us, Mr. Speaker, that 
these are rough times and they call for tough decisions, tough 
choices. Well the government has certainly made its choices — 
the wrong ones, in our view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — It is clear to the residents of Saskatoon 
Eastview, Mr. Speaker, that this government is insensitive, it’s 
arrogant, and it’s out of touch with the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — This government has made a choice to spend 
millions of dollars on PC government advertising and the 
choice to cut back on summer jobs programs. They have made 
the choice to spend $34,000 a day on empty vacant office space, 
and a choice to deny hope and opportunity for our young 
people. 
 
Members opposite call that being negative. I’m not negative, 
Mr. Speaker, but this government’s record does make me angry, 
believe me — angry about their record on jobs, on health care, 
on education cuts, on starving children and youth 
unemployment. Any caring and compassionate person has got 
to be upset at seeing starving children and youth losing hope, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I say this is a government that has 
made the wrong choices. In the recent election in Saskatoon 
Eastview, the voters took the opportunity to send the PC 
government a message. They sent me here to deliver that 
message, and I intend to do that. We’ve been waiting for 10 
months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Another record by this government, Mr. 
Speaker. Voters said that they are disappointed with the 
government’s record. The promise of jobs and prosperity for all 
has been badly broken. Saskatchewan residents feel betrayed by 
their government’s economic performance, betrayed by its 
failure to provide jobs and job opportunities for our young 
people. That message was loud and clear and unequivocal in a 
Saskatoon Eastview by-election, and in Regina Elphinstone as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — New Democrats have heard that message; I 
have heard that message. I have been elected to convey that 
message from the people of Saskatchewan to the PC 
government. My question remains, Mr. Speaker: will this 
government listen? 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the motion 
put forward by my colleague from Cumberland, and I would 
urge all members to support it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I have more to say, Mr. Speaker, but I’d like to 
adjourn the debate. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 


