


















































April 21, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 21, 1988 
 

755 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to 
introduce some Cubs from the 83rd group and the various folks 
that are with them. 
 
I had the pleasure the other night of introducing members. I’d 
like again tonight to introduce to the House, to you and to the 
members of the House, and to all assembled here this evening, 
the 83rd Regina Cub Pack. We have 40 of them and a number 
of counsellors, I suppose, and Cub leaders and parents with 
them. The Cub leader is Doug Conway. We have Mrs. Bowd, 
Mrs. Antoniuk, Mr. Desjardine, Mr. Forrest, Mrs. Sotski, Mr. 
Edwards, Mr. Belan, Mr. Haynee, Mr. Currie, Mr. Calder, and 
Mrs. Calder as well as Mrs. Salomons who are with us with the 
Cub group tonight. And you know, as I mentioned the other 
night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of us in this House had the 
privilege of being Cubs at one time or other and will recall the 
Cub prayer. And I hope that I have it right and if I’m wrong I 
hope the Cubs will straighten me out on it: 
 

I promise to do my best, to do my duty to God and the 
Queen, to obey the rules of the Wolf Cub Pack, and to do a 
good turn every day. 

 
And I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, and enjoy it, 
indeed. So I ask all assembled here this evening — all the 
members and all those with us — to please welcome the 83rd 
Cub Pack and all those with them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to join 
with the member and other members in extending my greetings 
to the Cub pack and their leaders. I recognize some people in 
the gallery, both younger and older, who are neighbours in the 
neighbourhood where I live. It’s good to have them here, and I 
hope that they have an enjoyable and educational evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, my 
question to the minister relates to the very serious situation that 
we have in some parts of Saskatchewan with the shortage of 
water in many of the rural areas. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you may or may have not known that the 
Alberta government just announced a $20 million package to 
aid farmers to develop alternate water sources. 
 

My question to you is: in light of the very serious problem that 
has developed because of two consecutive winters of very little 
snowfall and not too much rain in the summer, are you prepared 
to follow some of the directions? 
 
For example, as an example, I’d like to quote the PFRA (Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration) fall water supply report, 
released Wednesday. This was a report of November 19, ’87. It 
shows soil moisture ranges from inadequate to poor in southern 
Saskatchewan — worst conditions in the west, south-west and 
central grain belt area. And one farmer sums it up by saying, 
you get a pretty sick feeling in your stomach when your well 
goes dry. And that was in November — and as you know there 
was no snow, virtually no snow all winter. 
 
I’d like to know what representation you have made to the 
problem, to address the problem of lack of water in some parts 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just for the member’s information, we did 
address this yesterday from some of your colleagues. It is a 
serious, serious problem out there. Today I met with an R.M. 
from Lawtonia, which is right in sort of the heart of the area 
where it’s extremely dry. They are concerned about their water 
source even for their towns and for their farmers, especially the 
dug-outs. 
 
Sask Water . . . I believe in question period the other day, the 
minister responsible for Sask Water Corporation said that they 
have got all the seismograph information now from the oil 
companies, the new up-to-date one that they have on sort of a 
long-range graph. They have put on all the known water bodies 
on there. They have taken it that far. 
 
If it doesn’t rain — and who knows if it will or it won’t — you 
know, we may have to do some more things. And certainly 
we’re putting together a contingency plan in case it doesn’t 
rain; but hopefully the weather will bear with us and give us 
some moisture which will certainly relieve some of the 
problems out there. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I would like to know, in light of 
the problem: have you allocated any special funding or initiated 
any specific projects in relationship to any special funding to 
alleviate the problem of water shortage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, of course it’s early 
yet in the spring, and no, we haven’t allocated any funds or any 
special programs. Existing ones are all there: PFRA; we do 
assistance on deep wells. If you’re doing deep well drilling, we 
do assistance below — what is it, 250 feet? PFRA helps you to 
that point. 
 
There’s assistance for dug-outs. If you’re pumping into 
dug-outs, we have, I believe there’s two pumps or maybe even 
four pumps — I forget the number — that Sask Water has that 
bring water from known locations to dug-outs. 
 
But until, I guess, a little while longer passes and we just see if 
we don’t get any moisture, I’m sure we won’t bring any new 
programs into place. 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

756 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may or may not know 
that in some parts of this province farmers are having to sell 
their livestock because they have no water in their dug-outs and 
the pasture conditions are such that unless there is rain that 
there will be no feed. 
 
So I would like to say to you that the problem is now. And you 
can read it in the papers if you’d care to pick up the papers and 
to read the problem. So I don’t think . . . How long do farmers 
have to wait? Do they have to sell off all their livestock before 
you get around to getting a program in place so that they can 
have water? 
 
Are we going to have to do like every other program in this 
government, is wait till after the fact and have people beating 
down your doors before you come forth with the program? 
 
Mr. Minister, I know we all hope and pray for rain, but the fact 
of the matter is, the problem is today. The problem has been 
building over the last two years in some parts of the province. 
And so how much longer are you going to wait? When are you 
going to let farmers know when you are going to have some . . . 
whether you’re going to have some funds or whether there’s 
going to be some special programs? 
 
All the programs you talked about are existing programs that 
are fine, but the problem remains. Those farmers who don’t 
have any . . . who have to sell off their cattle, you won’t help 
them. Those farmers who don’t have any money to drill a well, 
except the first 250 feet or whatever it is, that’s not going to 
help them much. This is a special problem. And we need you to 
take some leadership in this problem and let farmers know that 
they’re going to be able to have a water supply. When will you 
do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, we can 
speculate a lot and we certainly can hope for a lot of things as 
well. In regards to the cattle — and I’m not so familiar with the 
South but I am with the North — we do feed . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ve got water in the North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That’s right, we do know where a lot of 
water is in the North. 
 
We do feed our cattle and still feeding them on last year’s feed 
and will until early into May. I would assume that most 
cattlemen would have sufficient feed to take them through till 
the spring, till the grass comes up in the spring, and certainly it 
will come up. So therefore I would think they would have 
sufficient feed till then. 
 
After that, if there’s no moisture, certainly we may have to take 
a look at programs. We’ve done it before. We’ve had assistance 
for transporting cattle into the North where there’s lots of feed. 
We’ve had assistance for, certainly for dug-outs. We’ve got 
assistance for wells. We’ve always been there. When there was 
drought in the South, we were there. And when there was flood 
in the North, we’ve been there as a government. So I guess if 
there is drought in the South again, or whatever is needed, we’ll 
probably be there again. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know very well, as I was 
in Tisdale yesterday myself and I saw the water conditions, and 
I guess if I lived up in that neck of the woods and never looked 
around the province’s other areas, I might think things aren’t 
that bad either. But the problem in the southern part of this 
province is water. And if you don’t know, I will tell you again, 
there’s people who are being forced to sell some of their cattle 
because they have no water, because the dug-outs are dry. And 
those same people have no money to drill the first 
200-and-some feet of that well before they get your assistance. 
And there’s no water within miles to pump under your pumping 
program. What do we have to do to make representation to you 
to tell you there is a definite problem? 
 
And in light of that, I’ll as you this, Mr. Minister: what are your 
contingency plans for dealing with this problem of water 
shortage in the southern and central part of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly these two 
questions, one relates directly to the Department of Agriculture 
and the other to the water corporation, but they all reflect on 
rural Saskatchewan. I suppose that’s the point he’s making. 
 
He mentioned something about not knowing about rural 
Saskatchewan, only coming from the north-east. Well I’ll tell 
you . . . I’d like to draw the member’s attention that I have been 
almost totally around this province the last two years. I’ve met 
with every R.M. around this province in the last three, four 
months. I have been in every corner of this province in the last 
year — from the south-west to the north-east to the north-west. 
And I’ve been out there in rural Saskatchewan, and I drive, I 
don’t fly, so I’ve been on the roads. I can tell you what the 
fields are like. I’m a farmer. I understand it. So I understand 
very much. 
 
We met with an R.M. from the South, I mentioned a few 
minutes ago, Lawtonia. We talked about the water problems. 
They told us some of the areas that we could maybe work with 
and work on. This morning I met with Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool. We talked about the water problems, we talked about 
farm problems, and some of the areas where we could work 
together to maybe, in fact, bring together some solutions if the 
water problem continues. We looked at other things such as 
farm debt financing, but certainly the water area we have been 
looking at. 
 
You heard earlier from the Minister of Environment, 
responsible for Saskatchewan Water Corporation, said they’ve 
put together a contingency plan and they certainly wouldn’t 
bring it out until such time as it’s needed, and if it’s not needed 
we’ll never have to use it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just hope it doesn’t take 
as long as it took you to get your equity financing program off 
the ground — like some matter of 12 or more months — 
because by that time it’ll be far too late. 
 
Now I asked you . . . Mr. Minister, if you said you’d been 
around this province and seen the situation, then my simple 
question is: why don’t you have a plan in place, because I know 
and you know the need is there is many  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

757 
 

areas of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve told him two or 
three times. Maybe he doesn’t listen; maybe he doesn’t want to 
hear; maybe growing up in the North there was too much water 
— I don’t know what the catch is — but we told him that 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation has a contingency plan in 
place. They’ve been working on it for about three or four 
months, an continue to work on it. 
 
We can’t make it rain if that’s what the members would like to 
see us do. We’d all like to think we have that power, but I don’t 
know anybody in this world that has that power. So therefore 
we have a plan in place. If it doesn’t rain, if the moisture 
problem continues, we will have in place, we will put in place, a 
contingency plan. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, you will know that in the 
R.M. of Lakeland the conditions, the living conditions, are 
considerably different than any place else in the province, and 
the grant conditions apply to them considerably differently 
because in the R.M. of Lakeland I believe there’s absolutely no 
farm land as such. 
 
Now because of the unique conditions there, the councillors in 
Lakeland feel that the grant structure doesn’t really fit their 
situation very well at all. I want to know, Mr. Minister, if you 
are intending to address this unique situation in any special 
way. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As the member may know or may not 
know, we met with the R.M. of Lakeland during the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention, discussed some of the problems with them, and we 
have been addressing their problems — maybe not as much as 
they would like, but certainly I think to agreement with them. 
 
Over the last few years we’ve given them about $50,000 to help 
them do their planning and development of their area. We’ve 
also agreed to assist them on some of their resort village roads, 
which normally isn’t done under an R.M., but we know it’s a 
unique situation. We’ve also helped fund the Anglin Lake road 
up there, and I believe one other road — it’s a resource road — 
that hadn’t been done before. 
 
So in the last two or three years, we’ve done substantial in the 
area, and we’ve told them that we’re prepared to sit down and 
work with them in regard to some of their village roads and 
streets that we’re helping fund. And some of that could run up 
as much as 70 per cent of provincial cost share in some of those 
areas. So we have done quite a bit for the R.M. of Lakeland, in 
regards . . . that we probably wouldn’t do for any other R.M., 
because they are unique. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Is there anything that you’re putting in on a 
permanent basis, or considering putting on a permanent basis? 
Because I don’t expect that conditions there are going to change 
soon that there may be farm land broken or anything like that. I 
expect it’s probably going to remain an area that will not have 
farm land. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We looked at that, making them a resort 
R.M., and SARM was not very much in favour of it. They 
suggested to us that we treat them just unique, as a unique 
R.M., and so we have done that. And we would continue to . . . 
like where they were paving the streets in the resort village, 
we’ll assist them on upkeep maintenance after that. I guess 
we’ll work it on a one project at a time basis because SARM 
didn’t want it set aside as a resort R.M. 
 
And I think the R.M. of Lakeland realizes that, and we’re 
prepared to work with them on a unique basis saying, you’re 
different than anybody else and we’ll work on your project by 
project basis, so that they get their share of the same amount of 
allocation in proportion as any other R.M. would get. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 13 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 43 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditures 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Vote 66 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
take this opportunity to thank my officials for the information 
they have supplied to us here this afternoon and also to what 
they are doing for the people of Saskatchewan, rural 
Saskatchewan. I think they’re doing an excellent job. They care, 
and they’re working hard to make rural Saskatchewan a little 
better. So I appreciate very much the work they’ve done, the 
information they’ve given us here, and I’d like to also thank the 
opposition for their questions. I think that yesterday certainly 
was a good day. There was lots of really fair questions asked, 
and I tried to answer them fairly. And I’d like to thank them for 
their time they spent and the questions they asked, and again, 
thank the officials. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to 
join with others in thanking the officials and the minister for 
appearing before estimates. 
 
I feel that the people within the department do an adequate job 
in terms of what the mandate of the department is. I would 
challenge, though, the minister and the officials to look forward 
to the Department of Rural Development with some vision and 
challenge because the face of rural Saskatchewan certainly is 
changing and I think that you have a very important role to play 
in that. With that, I would like to again close by thanking the 
minister and his officials for appearing here before the 
Committee of Finance. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

  



 
April 21, 1988 

758 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 46 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The next item of business before the 
committee is estimates for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation. Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left, 
here, I have Henry Zilm, President of Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance. Directly behind him I have John Persson, manager of 
human resources, and behind me I have Jim Walters, 
vice-president of administration. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d 
just like to start off by asking a few straightforward questions. 
First of all I would like to ask you about the salary increases for 
your ministerial assistants — when the last salary increase was, 
and/or bonus, and how much; and also increases to management 
staff at the corporation, when the increase was and how much 
that consisted of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We’ve had no management increase since 
July of 1986. At that time it was 3 per cent. There is only one 
ministerial assistant, and he’s had no increase. So that’s all. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I see that the 
funding for Sask. Crop Insurance has gone down by about 
$100,000 this year. My question is: in light of conditions in 
Saskatchewan and over the last few years, I would like to ask 
you what makes you think that there will be less of a need for 
money in the corporation this year than there was last year? 
What did you base your reduction on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well as you know crop insurance is from 
the Consolidated Fund, and it’s an area we think we can have 
some efficiencies in, I guess everybody’s guess — one is as 
good as the other. But it’s just a guess by the people of crop 
insurance who feel that they can save $100,000 in expenditures. 
 
And some of the areas that we’re looking at is doing some 
rationalization out in the field offices where we’ll let . . . instead 
of maybe bring in an adjuster from 2 or 300 miles away, we’re 
going to let the clerk in that area make the decision, and maybe 
get somebody closer so you don’t pay mileage. That’s the way 
they think they can save a $100,000, just by doing some 
efficient things like that. 
 
But it’s just a guess; if there’s not enough there, as you know, 
the Consolidated Fund makes up the difference. So it’s the best 
guess that our department . . . or that crop insurance can give. 
And they feel they can have kind of a saving of $100,000 by 
just being efficient, that’s all. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, with regard to the drought 
conditions in the province right now, crop insurance had some 
measures to include drought in previous years. My question to 
you is: what provisions have you made this year — any 
changes, any new provisions in crop insurance — to deal with 
the pending drought situation? 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well as you know the crop insurance . . . 
after our last drought in 1985 there, we, with the federal 
government, have put in a multi-year disaster mechanism. And 
what it is, if you’ve had two years of drought like last year and 
this year, you get an extra 10 per cent pay-out on it. Now I 
know that’s not a lot, but it can be a lot on a large contract. 
 
So that’s one plan that’s in place and has been in place for a 
couple of years now. So to have had two successive years of 
drought, last year and this year, you’d trigger the 10 per cent 
extra higher fund within crop insurance. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I just asked you about that 
program. I’d like to know your opinion on whether that 
program was working or has worked in the past. How many 
people have had need to take advantage of that increase? And 
do you feel the need will be there this year, and if so, will your 
funds be able to cover if this drought situation continues? Do 
you feel that will be sufficient and adequate to cover the 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just to bring you up to what has been 
going on, that program that went into place in 1986 triggered 
$8.23 million for about 8,000 farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year, 1987, there was little or no pay-outs, but if it happens 
that there is a drought in the South and south-west this year, like 
last year, it will trigger again. And, you know, the number 
would be unknown, but it could well be that much or more. It 
could trigger that many dollars. 
 
In 1986 it triggered $8.23 million for 8,063 farmers. In ’87 
there was only a few, not very much, if any. But in ’88 there is 
a whole group across the west side and down somewheres into 
the South. It could trigger them because it could be their second 
year in a row with poor crop due to drought. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to turn now 
to crop insurance as it relates to cheques that are being paid out. 
 
As you know, there are many farmers that are in financial 
difficulty and they’re in arrears with banks and other financial 
institutions. I would like to know how many cheques have been 
paid out to lending institutions, such as a bank who holds a 
mortgage on a farm that is in arrears. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Last year in 1987 there was just about 
3,000 assignments of contracts to banks or credit unions or 
other . . . well those two financial institutions, which totalled 
about 6 per cent of the total number of contracts 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, my next question is: as it relates 
to the Act — I believe in the Act that the payment is to be made 
to the farmer — does paying out the money to the lending 
institutions, is that in accordance with the way the Act is 
worded? 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

759 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well my understanding is that it’s an 
agreement between the farmer and the bank. So it’s the farmer’s 
decision, and we only act under the farmer’s direction. So if he 
sends his assignment in, asks it to be assigned to any financial 
institution for his guarantee or whatever it may be, then we do 
it. 
 
So it’ll be a farmer’s decision, and a farmer would have to 
request it. It would have to come from the farmer with his 
application. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, does the bank come to your door 
and ask you for information on farmers who they’re holding 
mortgages with and who are possibly in arrears? Do they come 
to you and ask you in what state a farmer is in relation to crop 
insurance, and if they’ll be getting any money paid out? And 
what information do you give to the institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — They may well come and ask, as the 
member knows, but they’ll get no information from crop 
insurance unless we have written permission from the insured, 
in other words the farmer. So he’s got to give us written 
permission before we’d release that information. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Okay. I’ll just move on now to the head office 
move to Melville that’s long been completed. Can you tell me 
what were the total costs associated with the move to Melville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — For the actual moving of the equipment 
from down in the office here in Regina to Melville and putting 
it in, the actual moving, boxing and moving and unpacking, was 
about $55,000. 
 
The relocation of personnel where you moved your . . . they got 
a transportation allowance and whatever else is in the package 
— it’s normally under Public Service Commission the way they 
do it — it come to about $80,000. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So that was the total cost, roughly $135,000 of 
relocating the head office of Sask. Crop Insurance from Regina 
to Melville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My officials tell me yes, that’s the total 
cost of moving, of the staff relocation that moved, in moving 
their furniture and whatever else into the . . . that’s a normal 
procedure, and moving all the files and stuff from the office 
here in Regina to the office at Melville. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I guess there’s a little matter of a 
building and the cost of acquiring that. It just seems to me that 
their equipment and personnel is find, but surely there were 
some other costs involved in the move to Melville. Could you 
explain if there were or if there were not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We’re just taking a moment there. I 
apologize for taking a little extra. I wanted to be sure that I give 
you the right information. 
 
When we moved from Regina to Melville, we increased our 
space by about 50 per cent. We’re in now at . . . we went from 
about 14,000 square feet to 22,000 square feet. Within that 
square footage, we now have storage for  

our grain samples that we didn’t have before and . . . (inaudible) 
. . . keep them all. And we put in a grading facility room there 
where we can grade the samples there. We have graders now 
that will do it right on site; it wasn’t done that way before. 
Certainly better for the farmer, because we can get back much 
quicker his sample testing. 
 
The cost went from about 300-and-a-few-odd thousand dollars 
to 400-and-a-few-odd thousand dollars. So it’s sort of 
proportionately to the same price we’re paying here in Regina 
as we’re paying in Melville. 
 
In regards to space, we are now on a ground floor. We have a 
large parking area, and also very accessible for the farmers. It’s 
right next to the highway and no traffic for them to get to it. We 
think it’s a really good location. It’s a really nice building, and I 
understand it’s on a . . . We pay a rental to property 
management anyway. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes. Could you tell me what the rental is per 
year to the property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — For the Melville office, it’s about 
$445,000 rent for the year. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me who the building 
is rented from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — All the buildings are either treasury board 
Crowns or departments and are all rented from property 
management Crown. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So you’re not going to tell me who owns the 
building. You wouldn’t know that? You indicate that you do not 
know. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many personnel moved? How many 
personnel moved from Regina to Melville? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Again, I’m just making sure. It’s 15 that 
moved. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So for 15 people it cost you $80,000 to move 
them from here to Melville. Could you indicate what that was 
used for? Was it just strictly moving expenses, or were there 
any bonuses paid for staff to move from here to Melville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That would be for some real estate fees 
for some of the ones that had to sell their homes, for moving, 
and in some cases lodging before they sold their home and they 
had their family here, so we paid their lodging in Melville. So 
it’s sort of a combination of those three things. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — But there were no bonuses paid or any extra 
moneys paid to management staff who relocated from Regina to 
Melville? No other moneys like a bonus or any incentive to 
move from here to Melville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, there was. The unionized people that 
were moving over there and staff were allowed one month’s 
wages for sort of relocation  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

760 
 

expenses to go over there. It was sort of a bonus that would 
allow them to move and pick up some of their losses that would 
occur and certain . . . besides the $80,000 that we’re talking 
about. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That was for unionized people who moved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — For management and unionized both. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to go back to 
the payment to property management for a minute. Out of that 
$445,000 paid to property management, could you send me 
over a breakdown or tell me a breakdown of — maybe you 
don’t want to read it off to me, but I’d like to have it now — the 
breakdown of all the properties that crop insurance have that 
they pay property management for, and what the value of each 
one of those properties is. This is not the value but the dollars 
paid for each one of those properties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We don’t have it here. We give you, you 
know, the main office is the main . . . We have 32 other offices 
around the province that has been rented there for . . . I don’t 
know how long. Whatever the rent is, I guess, that’s what it, 
you know, what it’s been. I don’t have the breakdown with me 
but we certainly could get it for you; but we don’t have it with 
us, that’s for sure. 
 
The main expense is certainly the head office. I think it’s shown 
in the Estimates the total amount, so you could guess that it 
would be pretty well equal scattered around the province of the 
other 32 offices. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, well I appreciate the fact that you’re 
going to send that over to me as soon as possible. 
 
Out of the in-scope staff at the corporation in Regina, how 
many of those in-scope staff moved to Melville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — There was four of the original unionized 
employees that moved, but we had hired other ones here 
because as we placed ones that didn’t want to move into other 
positions within government, then we hired somebody else to 
replace them. And some were hired here, and some were hired 
. . . Although they were here, they were to go to work in 
Melville. So I don’t know if you’d call that “moving” them — 
although they’re working here, they’d worked here for two or 
three months — but there was . . . Like, it was almost about 40 
. . . I think about 75 per cent of the employees that were, that’s 
out there now, actually had started here or were working here 
that went out there. But many of them are hired with the 
understanding they would go to work there; they were sort of on 
a training basis here. 
 
So four of the original ones moved; quite a few we’d hired here 
as they left. Some left in November, as you know, because they 
knew we were moving it, and we placed them in other jobs, and 
we replaced them here. So there was a bunch that moved. Some 
were sort of here, and yet they were supposed to be in Melville, 
and I don’t know how you’d classify that move. But about 75 
per cent of the total number of unionized employees worked 
here and then ended up out in Melville. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — In the Leader-Post you had 48 positions 
advertised. Were all those positions for . . . Were they all 
permanent positions and were they all filled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To the best of my knowledge, they’ve all 
been filled. They were filled shortly thereafter. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And I understand that there was 12 positions, 
part-time positions, advertised in Melville. Were those 12 
part-time positions filled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I understand that when it was here in 
Regina, we had part-time people on call when we needed them. 
When we went out to Melville, we staffed all the permanent 
positions and we just called in the part-time people for the busy 
part of the season, and then we, of course, lay them off when 
it’s not busy. I don’t know how many part-time people are on 
. . . if anybody is on staff right now, and I doubt it because this 
is a slack time right now. But as we need them, we’ll bring 
them on, and I’m not sure about . . . Mr. Persson wasn’t with us 
when that . . . If it was advertised last year, I was unaware of it, 
but whatever part time is needed, we’ll bring them on. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, there was an attempt to decertify 
the union. A fellow by the name of Randy Swan was going 
around apparently trying to get people to sign a decertification 
petition. Did he have the blessing of the minister and the 
manager of the corporation to do this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well it could be that some employee may 
be doing something on his own, but certainly I don’t know who 
this person is. But certainly if there is something like that, it 
wouldn’t be sanctioned by us and, certainly, not by myself or by 
the management out at crop insurance. So if it was going on, I 
am unaware of it. It’s never been brought to my attention, 
certainly, and we don’t sanction it, and I can’t see any reason 
why we would want to. 
 
To the best of my knowledge, the crop insurance people have 
done a good job out there. The only area that we have that is not 
within the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union) is our management which is appropriate, and we have to 
some degree downsized management, but we haven’t had 
nothing to do with, or do we want anything to do with 
decertification. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, now I’d like to turn to the 
regional office clerks. As I understand it, there has been some 
changes to the job descriptions, or the titles, that the regional 
office clerks have and they’re doing some different duties. 
Could you enlighten me as to the jobs being performed by the 
regional and area office clerks now, and has it differed from the 
job description that they were doing, let’s say, six months ago 
or last year at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure glad that the 
member raised that because I think it’s a real positive thing we 
can do out there with the crop insurance offices in rural 
Saskatchewan. We have looked at these positions out there, and 
we spent a lot of time thinking about how  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

761 
 

we could make it better for the farmers out there, and how we 
could make it more accessible for some of the benefits they may 
want to collect. 
 
Originally, and has been up till just recently, the function of the 
clerk, the office clerk as they were called out there in the 32 
offices, was that, clerical functions. They did the typing and 
they maybe called a crop insurance adjuster they needed 
because head office called them and told them to do it. But they 
really had nothing to do at a management level. We feel these 
people have worked there a great deal, a great length of time, 
and they should be, in fact, doing management, and we’ve 
asked them to do that. We’ve asked them now to do budgets for 
their office, to supervise the adjusters in the area, to approve the 
paying of the bills, to the management of the office, which is a 
different role totally than what they used to perform. 
 
(2000) 
 
I believe it can really let us go a long ways towards — I give 
you an example — reseeding benefits. If a farmer has a claim 
on reseeding, we believe that this office clerk — and there’ll 
now be an office manager — should have the power or the 
rights to be able to approve the payment so the farmer after the 
adjusters done the work, and so . . . he or she would get at the 
reseeding benefits paid immediately. We could look beyond 
that, but that’s the first step we’d like to look at. 
 
So we’re asking to play a much broader role which we believe 
will be beneficial to that farmer who has problems, who will, in 
fact, have authority — most places it’s she, I believe it’s a lady 
in all the cases — but whether it’s a man or a lady, they’ll have 
authority to make these decisions, and we believe they’re 
responsible people. I think they’re ready for the challenge. I 
understand that they like the idea, and I think it’s a very positive 
step forward to making it, our office, more accessible, and to — 
given better management controls out there, right at the grass 
roots — making sure the farmer has better access for payment. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Will these people be given salary increases to 
reflect the level of service that they’re giving and the job that 
they’re performing, and will these people be allowed to remain 
in scope? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I just want to answer it. I’m not going to 
try and evade the answer. And I know they’re doing a much 
larger function than they originally did, but because, as you 
know, it’s under contractual negotiations right now, we could 
be in breach of labour laws if we offered them any moneys of 
any kind. So what it is now, I guess it’s fair to say to you, 
would be to say it’s negotiations between the union and 
management in regards to not only the contractual arrangements 
but if there should be any increases in that area or any other 
ones. And I guess it would be fair to say that should they take 
on this position and be management, I would assume that 
whatever there is, there could be some, certainly, benefits to it. 
But that’s again, it’s under union negotiation and management, 
and that . . . (inaudible) . . . it would have to stay. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — But in the adjustment to the job description of 
these people, I just would like to know if there’s any intention 
for them to be taken out of scope with the union. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We have been negotiating. The 
management has been negotiating with the union in regards to 
whether they should be in scope or out of scope. To go out of 
scope, you have to go before the Labour Relations Board and it 
would have to be approved. I guess it would be decided either at 
the Labour Relations Board or between the union and 
management whether they should be in scope or out of scope. 
 
My concern as minister is that they have this type of function 
and that they can perform it and they can get better service out 
there. Whether they’re in or out of scope will be between 
management and the union to decide, and the end result will go 
before the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I would just like to conclude this section 
by saying that I think the service has to be maintained. And the 
feeling that I’m getting is that there’s some problem with those 
area and regional office clerks not knowing exactly where they 
stand, and I don’t think that really does anything to promote 
better relations between the corporation and the farmer. In fact, 
at times it could endanger that relationship. 
 
The other fear I have, Mr. Minister, is that with an arrangement 
like that, the government will be perceived to be at arm’s length 
from the actual problems that could arise out of the contract. 
And I think the management, the government and the 
management then would be in a position where they could 
control the office clerk having no security, and the will of the 
department could be imposed on them during any . . . for 
anything that may come up and put them in such a position 
where they would be unable to defend the farmer perhaps on a 
rational basis because all the while they’re very insecure that 
their job would be at stake. 
 
So I would just say to you that I’m not certain that that is a good 
move, because I think the role could be carried out as long as 
that security is there without having any intimidation from 
management to government on that person. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — You know, just to give you a bit of what 
we’ve been doing in the last year over there within crop 
insurance, and what we’re calling it is positive performance 
program. Any employee who feels that he or she doesn’t feel 
quite up to the standards that we like to see, we put them on a 
program to bring them up to that standard instead of saying 
you’re just not good enough. So we’ve been doing that. I think 
it’s really been well received out there. 
 
We’ve made many changes since 19 . . . well, in the last year. 
And just to give you an idea of some of the things we’re doing 
to involve the employees, which I don’t believe has ever been 
done before, we have more staff training programs now than 
ever before. We’re trying to work with the staff so that head 
office and the field staff and the clerks or the managers in the 
office in the field —  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

762 
 

they all sort of know what each other’s doing. 
 
We’ve had meetings. We had one in Regina here a week or so 
ago that was interrupted. But it’s just too bad because what 
we’re trying to do is put together so people know what each 
other’s doing and so they can deal with the farms. We’ve had 
lots of meetings. We have involved staff intensively into the 
discussions of how we can do it better out there, how they see 
they could do it better. I don’t think they ever had that 
opportunity before. 
 
We’ve provided management training to customer services 
offices for the managers, and that’s something that I don’t think 
has been done ever before. We’ve streamlined and simplified 
contract renewal process, and if you know, and if you have a 
contract, you know how much more simplified it is now. And 
such things as hail insurance, to give you an example, it used to 
be you had to double fill out two forms. Now you only fill out 
one in the field. Increased forage contracts, as you know, up to 
1,150 from 700. We have a 24 hour payment system on — no, 
that’s not a 24 hour, is it? — yes, 24 hour payment system on 
reseeding and hail claims, where we have stored grain reports 
and seeded acreage reports to be mailed directly out and then 
they just have the one report. We have a 30-day commitment on 
turn-arounds for your claims, your post-harvest and pre-harvest 
claims. Those are some of the things that we’re committing out 
there so the farmer has better access to the funds he may well 
need, because we all know that a lot of farmers could use it, not 
three months later or four months later. 
 
Just to give you an example of reseeding — talk about 
reseeding benefits be picked up within 24 hours, or at least 
within a few days. The policy has been ever since, I guess, crop 
insurance started that you never sent a reseeding claim out or a 
benefit out until after August 1. Now that doesn’t make much 
sense to me because in a lot of cases you’re almost to the point 
of harvesting. So we’re trying to look at it on a very practical 
way, of saying how can we get that money out to them in a 
very, very short time because that’s when you really need it. 
 
So those are the kinds of things we’re doing but we do need 
these managers out there in the field to be able to help facilitate 
that. Without their co-operation and their help, it won’t be a 
success. So we’ve really worked very closely with them to try 
and get them to put together, and how we can do it in a very, 
like I say, practical and honest and sincere and very quick way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I guess time will tell, Mr. Minister. I’d 
like to move on now to the free trade agreement. And I’d ask 
you if you and your officials have looked into the free trade 
agreement as how it might affect the crop insurance program 
that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes we have. We’ve been looking at a lot 
of different areas in regards to free trade. We’ve looked to 
Australia, New Zealand, western Europe, and United States. 
 
In United States they pay 25 per cent of the premium 
subsidized; in Canada it’s 50 per cent. But what they do,  

their rate subsidization, because the price is higher, just about 
comes out the same level as what’s done here in Canada. So it 
runs at about the same level in United States as it is in Canada 
under their program in dollar value. 
 
So we’re going to continue to monitor it as long as . . . and 
we’ll have all the information in from Australia, New Zealand, 
the Argentine as well as western Europe. So we’re putting it all 
into place. I guess only time will tell, but as long as the 
Americans are subsidizing it at as much or more than we are, 
we don’t feel in any ways that it’s in any jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, in the move for the elimination 
of all subsidies that distort agricultural trade — in that light, and 
the fact that within the agreement it says neither party shall 
introduce or maintain export subsidies, and although you say 
they’re the same, I question what’s going to happen with the 
things like the crop insurance program. 
 
And I say that because I have a real concern that the Americans 
aren’t playing by the rules. And I can give you many examples 
of that. Just the other day, five days ago or something, they 
announced a great big shipment to India. And the agreement 
itself says that we’re supposed to — a shipment of wheat to 
India — and the agreement itself says that we’re supposed to 
take into consideration each other’s markets as far as 
subsidizing exports to other countries. I mean that’s in complete 
violation with the spirit of this agreement, and they’ve done this 
three or four times over. 
 
(2015) 
 
You will also know that about a year that the Americans took 
the eastern fishermen to task by saying that they, because they 
had unemployment insurance in the winter-time, that that was 
an unfair trading practice, that they were getting some unfair 
advantage. And the list goes on and on. 
 
So despite the fact that you’re sure that subsidies are equal now, 
I’m not so convinced. And I’m worried about things like crop 
insurance under this agreement, because I think there’s a 
possibility that we could be looking at the elimination of crop 
insurance under this free trade agreement. Do you have the 
same feeling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well maybe the member opposite doesn’t 
trust the Americans, but I say to everybody in Saskatchewan 
that in Canada, we’re very fortunate to have the only free border 
without guards on for over 3,000 miles. And I’m pretty proud to 
think I live beside a neighbour I could trust that much. 
 
An Hon. Member: — — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I am, because that’s what he talked about. 
I am answering the question, and I think that is important to 
notice that. 
 
The other thing is, our Premier probably has spent more time 
talking internationally and nationally about the whole subsidy 
trade war that’s been going on out there which has literally 
ruined our agriculture here in  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

763 
 

Saskatchewan. If by the year 2000 that there’s no subsidies at 
all, that may be the best thing that ever happened to our 
Saskatchewan farmers, because the price of grain would 
probably be $10 a bushel, if that’s what’s going to happen. 
 
I wish we could be so lucky that we can be able to sell into the 
western European countries where they’re getting $17 a bushel, 
or Saudi Arabia where they’re getting $25 a bushel for their 
wheat. I don’t think that will ever become a reality, but such 
things . . . Certainly we’re dealing with it. We’re going to have 
our . . . We’ll certainly have all the information of it, if and 
when 10 years or 15 years from now it comes to pass, we have 
to deal with it, I believe us or whoever the next government 
here, we’ll certainly be on top of it, and maybe you’ll have to 
deal with it at the time. 
 
But time will change much, and as long as there’s any subsidies 
. . . And as you know, the American subsidies is so much 
greater than ours right now; that’s another area of concern. With 
crop insurance being about the same in dollar value, I guess all I 
can say is, it’s an insurance policy that’s in place and I hope it 
stays for a long time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I’ll tell you that the rhetoric about the 
trust of the Americans is all fine and dandy, and they’ve been 
good neighbours for many years, granted, but I’ll tell you, they 
sure suckered us on this agreement. And I just want to ask you: 
what assurances do you have that you can give the farmers of 
this province that crop insurance will not be tampered with, 
adjusted, or possibly eliminated in a matter of the five years that 
it takes to define the subsidies? What assurance can you give 
us? What can you tell us that will make us feel that this crop 
insurance program will not be tampered with because of the free 
trade agreement and because the Americans will say . . . Don’t 
ask me how they’re going to do it, but I mean just in light of 
what they’ve done to date it makes me wonder whether they’re 
bargaining in good faith or not. So could you just expand or 
elaborate a little bit as to what assurances that you could give 
us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I suppose when you deal with 
another country you have to assume and work on some 
goodwill. I think the goodwill of the Americans has been shown 
over the years. We export a great majority of our produced raw 
products in the United States; we also import a great number of 
our products we use from the United States. 
 
We have 1 million people here and we only use about 10 per 
cent of our production here in Saskatchewan. I would think it’s 
almost in reverse. Last year I was reading in the paper where 
the U>S> farmers are deeply concerned about the amount of 
wheat that’s going into their markets, from Saskatchewan 
particularly. And I believe last year alone we sold something 
like 400,000 tonnes into the American market. Our wheat is of 
top quality. They have some concerns about our shipping wheat 
into there. So I suppose it’s a mutual concern, but I think as 
neighbours, and I could day as friends, I don’t believe that there 
isn’t a way that anything that comes up can’t be resolved. 
 
And whether by the year 2000, if that is still an issue and crop 
insurance is not in either place or in both, you know,  

I suppose we’ll have to deal with that in time. But I’m sure that 
the American farmers have the same feeling as the Canadian 
farmers, that they too will want to have an insurance policy. I 
believe too the Americans don’t want a wall just around their 
country or we don’t want a wall around Saskatchewan. We’re 
bigger than that. You know, we’ve grown beyond those 
thoughts and those ideas. We need to work together, we need to 
be able to have the opportunity to sell and to market. Those 
opportunities exist not only in the United States, but with the 
western European communities and others, but certainly our 
major markets is towards the South. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, you missed the point. It’s not a 
matter of goodwill or neighbourliness or anything; it’s a matter 
of outmanoeuvring and it’s a matter of business. 
 
And the fact is that under this agreement, the Americans . . . 
And if you want to use the GATT (General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade) agreement as an example, who the 
Americans are supposed to be involved in and participate in the 
GATT agreement, and yet they’re playing outside the rules. 
And what makes you think that they’re going to do any 
different with the free trade agreement? 
 
And I would ask you again . . . If the member from Weyburn 
would quit chirping from his seat so I could talk, I would ask 
you again: what assurances — and I didn’t hear any — what 
assurances can you give the farmers of this province that they 
will be able to maintain this, have a crop insurance program in 
place, especially in light of the fact that you were talking about 
eliminating world-wide subsidies? And I’m sorry to say this, 
but you’re living in a dream world when you think that. But 
what assurances are you going to put forward tonight to tell the 
farmers of this province that their crop insurance programs, as 
one example of many of the programs that could be gone under 
its agreement, will still be there for them after five years when 
the negotiations about what constitutes a subsidy end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve met with many 
farm groups around the province. I’ve met with — I think I 
mentioned a while ago — just about every R.M. around the 
province. 
 
Most, if not all, are in favour of the agreement, the free trade 
agreement, realizing what it can do for us here in Saskatchewan. 
There is a few, maybe the NFU (National Farmers Union) that 
are against it. And that’s fair, I mean, that’s a position they take. 
And maybe the NDP are against it too. I can’t speak for them, 
but they give you the impression that they’re against it. 
 
But certainly the free trade agreement has a lot of benefits. I 
believe that most, as I said a minute ago, most organizations 
support it. The cattlemen do, the seed growers — I could go on 
and on. SARM supports it, canola growers. Like canola is a real 
example, the shipment of canola into United States headed up 
by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. They were the lead agency to 
get canola recognized in the United States . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s right, by Mr. Garf Stevenson, who said 
to us . . . President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

764 
 

They initiated the program of selling canola in the United States 
and it became the health food of the year in the United States — 
just tells us what we can do by just working with them. 
 
And what guarantee? I guess the guarantee that we’re just good 
business people, that if you look at some of the deals of the free 
trade and you listen to the American farmers, they don’t think 
that they got the better of the deal. They think at the best it was 
equal or neutral, and in some cases, the way they’re hollering, 
they think they got the worst of it. That’ll be the feeling on both 
sides. But overall over the years to come, it’ll be good for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I would dispute you your quote about the 
number of farmers who are not in favour of free trade because 
in my travels around this province a great large number . . . And 
I don’t know what political stripe or particular organization they 
may belong to but are definitely afraid of this agreement. 
 
And as far as good business sense as it relates to canola, this 
agreement which is supported by you just took 38 bucks a tonne 
out of the pocket of every canola grower in Saskatchewan. And 
what kind of agreement is that? 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would just like to say that I didn’t hear any 
of assurances other than the rhetoric that I’ve heard for months 
ever since this free trade agreement came about, just the 
garbage rhetoric that comes out of that Tory caucus and 
government over there, which gives no facts on how this 
agreement is going to save the farmers any money, no assurance 
that the crop insurance program won’t be affected. And that is 
why many farmers out there are questioning this agreement. 
 
And I’ll tell you, they have good cause to question it when you 
negotiate a deal that takes money out of their pockets by 
eliminating the transportation subsidy just at a time, as you said 
yourself, when the promotion of canola in the United States is 
moving ahead. But in order to keep that moving ahead, the 
farmers have to take less price for it because the transportation 
subsidy is gone. Now that’s the kind of logic that your 
government, this Tory government, puts forward, and I’ll tell 
you it doesn’t make very good sense. 
 
I’d just like to ask now a general question, Mr. Minister, about 
crop insurance — whether you, in the last year, have come 
across any problems with crop insurance in any of the areas that 
you’ve made any changes in to the corporation, as far as the 
delivery of service to farmers. Has there been any areas of 
concern brought forward to you and if so could you tell me 
about them and elaborate on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s always areas 
of concern whether it’s, you know, whether it’s a farmer who 
felt maybe he wasn’t adjusted just right — the municipal hail 
didn’t adjust it right or the crop insurance guy didn’t adjust it 
right — or whether it was such things as water-fowl damage or 
ungulate damage. You know, those kinds of things, they’re 
always concerns. There’s 49,000 policy holders out there and 
there’s bound to be some concerns. There’s bound to be 
concerns of such things as the acreage; whether I got it in on 
time, whether  

I’m a day late, whether I’m . . . should have been there. I was 
away and come back and I’m two days late; or such things as 
when they go before the board, they’re not satisfied that the 
board was just right, ruled it just right. 
 
Those kinds of things will go on. But we were just talking 
yesterday. We had a board meeting yesterday. An average that 
farmers appealed to the board, which they always have the 
opportunity to do, they averaged about 6 to 10 a meeting. Now 
when you consider that, that we have about 10 meetings a year, 
a maximum of between 60 and 100 farmers appeal to that board 
over the year. When you consider 49,000 out there, that 
percentage is pretty low. 
 
So the concern that the adjusters and the management are not 
doing it right, I believe speaks for itself. It’s very, very low and 
there are . . . Like I said, we’ll always have some that . . . In 
some cases the crop insurance will not be totally correct, but 
sometimes it’s policy, sometimes it’s federal regulations that we 
have to abide by, and sometimes it’s just, you know, the way it 
is. You can’t do anything about it. The farmer may not be 
correct. You know, there may be other areas but those are areas 
that are addressed. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m surprised that you 
didn’t mention the multiple contract holders, because that’s one 
area that’s been brought forward to me, time and time again. 
And I’d just like to know what the policy is as it relates to 
people or farmers who have multiple contracts; what the policy 
has been; how it’s being changed; and what is the corporation’s 
policy on implementing those changes. Is it a blanket change, or 
is it case by case, or just how is it being done? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I had meant to take an exact 
example of some of these cases. This is just sort of brought into 
a very unique situation in regards to multiple contracts. 
Multiple contracts out there, in some cases, is being abused and 
is being . . . It’s a way of using crop insurance as a sort of a 
fund, almost. And I just wish I had a couple of examples. I 
asked the department just to take the name off and read me a 
couple examples and go back to about 1974 and show why 
we’ve asked that person or persons to come in and talk about a 
contract. And one you brought me, the member from Humboldt 
brought me, we did pull the file. I don’t want to use it here and 
we both know the names. But from 1974 to 1986, like, it was 
just an endless amount of claims, and they were not on a single 
one. They’re on one, another, and a different one. And you 
could draw your own conclusions to that. I was going to just 
give it to you. 
 
But anyway, just to give an example what’s happening with 
multiple contracts, and this is taken from an actual case with no 
name and no area, so it doesn’t really . . . nobody will know 
who I’m talking about. But this is actually a case that went on 
in 1987. And this was a farming situation between two brothers. 
Each one has a contract. So there’s two contracts. And then 
together they had a partnership contract, which made three 
altogether. And the situation was involving hard spring red 
wheat and the production of it. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

765 
 

In the partnership, what they showed up on their yield was 9.4 
bushels and at 1,540 acres. On the brother, the first brother, he 
showed 5.6 bushels and 745 acres; and on the other brother, he 
showed 51 bushels and 85 acres. Now you can draw your own 
conclusion what they’re doing, and you’ve been out in farming, 
you know what’s happening. So that’s what we were trying to 
deal with. 
 
I could give you lots of situations like that. And what we’ve 
asked those people to do, whether they realize what they’re 
doing or not, but they’re actually pushing the premium up for 
everybody else. And we’ve asked them to come in, put them all 
together on one contract, because you’re really farming 
together, and it does away with some of the problems that I’ve 
identified there. 
 
It is not fair for the rest of the farmers to have situations where 
we believe that somebody is actually using the system to get 
moneys by allocating the losses in different areas and by 
building up in other areas. So we have a lot of concern about it, 
it is a problem. There’s 8,000 multiple contracts out there; we 
have only looked at 47, I believe the number is that we looked 
at. We’ve asked the area clerk to look at it first; then we’ve 
asked the field man to look at it; then it’s come to head office; 
and then we’ve went even further, we’ve asked the guys, the 
people involved — to come on in and sit down and show us. 
 
Now of the 47 that we talked about, I believe about 20 of them 
have really legitimate reasons for doing it. And we have said 
fine, you’re right; there’s no problem. The other ones were 
having some problems: some said forget it; some got upset; and 
the one you brought to me, there’s a bit of a problem there. 
We’ve asked that person or those two people, to come in and 
talk to the corporation and maybe it can be resolved. Maybe 
they can show us that, you know, it’s really legit and it should 
be done that way. And if it is, then certainly we’ll deal with 
them. 
 
But we just ask them to come into the appeal office, sit down, 
explain to us how, you know, why they’re doing it this way. 
And if it’s according to our policy, the policy of crop insurance 
and how all the other farmers work it, then they should have 
two or three contracts. If it isn’t then I believe that it should be 
one contract so it won’t be abused. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, do you plan on looking at all 
8,000 individual contracts? And what time period are you 
looking at? I’ve asked you how you determined the 47 that you 
came up with right now, and do any of those 47 include 
father-son contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, there is father-son contracts. Just to 
give you an example of what may happen in a contract like this, 
this is a farming situation that started off with a farmer and a 
son each holding a contract. And over time they’ve added six 
more contracts. Now here’s how they’ve added it. The first one 
is, they have each one individual. They have a father and a son, 
the son’s wife, a company counterpart, a second company 
counterpart, another son, and then the other son’s wife. Now 
that’s how they’ve added the contracts in, and yet they’re sort 
of all farming together. So they ended up with an accumulation 
of eight total contracts and yet all farming  

in one sort of farming operation. 
 
That’s the kind of thing that we’ve been trying to deal with and 
this is an example of one of the situations that’s out there. I 
don’t know which one and I don’t want to know, but that is an 
exact situation the department tells me is out there. So yes, 
there’s farmer-son, son-wife, sons-mother, you name it; there’s 
all the different types of contracts. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I understand that and I understand the need to 
correct that; however there are some cases where a son is 
starting to farm and they’re being hassled and questioned as to 
why they would want a contract, almost like why that son 
couldn’t go out on his own and get a new contract. 
 
And I have in my hand here, a contract application, part two it’s 
called. You’ll be familiar with this form. Are you familiar with 
this form? Can you tell me when this form was implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It was implemented for this season. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, that’s what I thought. Now there’s some 
problems with this form. I don’t know if you realize that or not. 
Some of the questions on here are, to be quite blunt, none of the 
corporation’s business. And I think from my experience many 
of the questions on here are leading people to, you know, 
question the crop insurance. For example, start some of the 
questioning, it says: 
 

If the land is leased by applicant, identify leaser. Indicate 
family relationship, if any, and whether the lease is verbal 
or written, cost of operation shared by landlord. 

 
Now that type of thing is not, I suppose, that unusual but it’s 
leading. And if you flip through it, there’s a number of those 
questions. I’ll give you another one: 
 

If the applicant is not solely employed as a farmer, identify 
critical farming operations which are performed by others. 

 
Leads me to wonder if that person, if you’re going to be . . . 
he’s going to be disallowed because he is farming . . . maybe 
sharing some machinery or farming with somebody else. 
 
Other things . . . questions on this form, under financial, number 
3: 
 

Will the operation of this farm provide you with your 
primary source of income? If not, provide details on 
additional source of income. Also indicate here if in 
attendance at an educational institution. 

 
I would like to just . . . you know, that specific question. Could 
you tell me why the corporation has to know if it’s your 
primary source of income? And if it’s not your primary source 
of income, will that have any effect on you getting a crop 
insurance contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well in answer to your question, first  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

766 
 

of all that form, the front part that you’re reading was originally 
part of the back part of the form when you filled out an original 
application even under the former administration. So it’s sort of 
inverted to the front. So when the NDP was in power, it hasn’t 
really changed much. 
 
There has been some things added, and what we’ve tried to do 
is identify a couple of things. If you don’t have a broad picture 
of what the person is doing and that, it’s pretty hard to make 
any kind of judgement call for the clerk out there — whether 
they’re farming; or whether they’re living in Alberta and have a 
quarter section of land here and never farm it; where they may 
have a multiple contract. And I just read you off a couple of 
cases where it could be abused, those kinds of things. We’re 
just trying to make a reasonable decision. 
 
It may not well be any of our business what kind of money they 
make off the farm — that probably is none of our business. But 
the point is, we want to know, are they actually farming it, or at 
least are they the farmer that’s responsible for it. You know, are 
they individual farming, or is somebody else farming it for them 
and they’re just using that as a way of using a multi-contract. 
 
Those are the kinds of things we’ve been concerned about, and 
I believe we have that responsibility. And yes, we just 
implemented it this year and it’s a new policy, and I hope that 
we’ll encourage those that have multiple contracts to take a 
look at it and see if we can put them together to make them 
what they should be. If they’re individual, they should be 
individuals; if they’re farming together, well then maybe the 
multi-contract should be pulled together. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’d just like to move 
down, over to page three, and it says operating capital. And 
you’re asking the farmers to fill out a form asking them to 
identify the financial institution or individuals which provides 
operating funds for the applicant’s farm. I mean, I don’t quite 
understand why you have to know what financial institution and 
how that’s going to affect him getting the contract. And what 
you’re going to make a judgement call, all right; but does that 
mean that if he’s got X number of dollars in loans out that he’s 
not going to qualify for crop insurance? 
 
Another one, it says, identify sources of dealer credit for seed, 
fertilizer, fuel, herbicides, and other major farm input. Again I 
find it very difficult to make any connection between how that 
should qualify or not qualify him to have a contract. 
 
So I just say to you, Mr. Minister, that a number of these 
questions in this application form are really not necessary 
because it shouldn’t have any indication or decision as to 
whether that person gets a contract or not. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I guess the question that I want to ask you is: if I’m a 
farmer applying for crop insurance and I refuse to fill out this 
form or parts of this form, would I still be entitled to crop 
insurance? 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, some of the reasons we ask . . . And 
I suppose you could take out or put in whatever is needed, or 
whatever you think would be necessary. But what we’ve tried to 
do is sort of find out what does it take to operate a farm. And 
then you could make a better decision if that person is truly 
doing the farm and is he doing it as the contract of the policy 
says, that he is a farmer by the definition of the policy. 
 
And the things that you have to know about is, does he have 
land or access to land or leased land — at least have to know 
that. Where he is, it doesn’t make any difference. Does he have 
machinery, or does he use somebody else’s machinery? At least 
we know he has access to it. Does he have the finances or 
operating capital? In most cases most people have operating 
capital. I suppose everybody doesn’t but most do. Does he have 
access to labour or does he do it himself? That way you can 
make a better judgement of whether the guy is just getting a 
policy for convenience sake because Dad is farming it and I’m 
going to get an extra policy so he can hold it, or am I really part 
of a farm. I only have a quarter and I’m really farming it. Then I 
qualify. 
 
But those kinds of things that we have to take a look at. We’re 
dealing with a very complex situation. We know it. If you’ve 
got a better way of filling out or telling us how to put together a 
form that would make it so we can identify those problems, so 
we can identify those areas, so we can look at resolving the 
problem where we have multiple contracts and abuse of it, you 
know, we’d be willing to listen to that. 
 
What we’ve tried to do is make a first stab at trying to regulate 
some of the problems we have out there. And it’s a tough area 
to deal with, we’ve got 8,000 multiple contracts, we’re trying to 
deal with 57 of them — maybe 7,000 of those are perfect, but 
I’m sure some of the other ones out there aren’t. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I won’t belabour this point 
much longer. I just want to say that questions like prying into a 
person’s finances is not necessary when applying for crop 
insurance. What you’re doing here is you’re making an 
assumption, because you have multiple contracts and some of 
those multiple contracts may be abusing the insurance 
corporation. I don’t deny that, and it’s commendable to look at 
that and to try to tighten up the administration of those. But 
what’s happening is you’re making the assumption that all 
farmers are crooks, and I don’t accept that. Because that’s what 
this form tells me when you’re going into finances and 
equipment. We’ll always have a situation in crop insurance 
because of the way it’s set up — father-sons or partnerships. 
We’ll always have the opportunity to abuse it. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, by assuming that all farmers are 
going to be dishonest, and you have to really keep on top of 
these slippery fellows out there, you’re not doing the 
corporation any good. And I’ve heard this time and time again 
from people, especially father-son operators who have called 
me and they say, what business do they have asking me this? 
There’s other ways. There are many other ways that you could 
do this. I mean, the field men know, or should know what the 
situation is and it can be relayed back to crop insurance. The 
farmer could sign an affidavit  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

767 
 

that says that he’s a bona fide farmer on his truth, something 
that he could be taken to task for at a later date if he’s not. 
 
But what’s happening here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and if 
the member from Weyburn would quit chirping, I’ll tell you. 
What’s happening here is farmers are being perceived as people 
who are trying to rip the system off at all turns. And I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Minister, that’s just not the case. And what you’re 
doing is putting Sask Crop Insurance in a bad light in the eyes 
of the farmers because of the heavy-handed questionnaires and 
responses that we’re receiving in the country. 
 
I just don’t think that’s the right way to go about it. I think that 
there’s going to be a certain percentage of abuse in this crop 
insurance corporation no matter what you do, but by tightening 
up on especially young farmers who are getting into the 
operation with their fathers and making them fill out this form 
. . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — It’s totally ridiculous is right. Because they are 
not going into farming to be crooks to try to rip off the crop 
insurance system. They’re trying to go into farming and apply 
for crop insurance in order that they, in times of bad crops, 
they’ll still be there. 
 
But you’re treating them as something lesser than honest. And 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, I don’t accept that and neither do the 
farmers, especially the young farmers of this province. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 46 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 46 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 46 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

Vote 161 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 161 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 
officials for I believe putting together the information we need 
here today; for running a corporation making many, many 
changes that I believe is of benefit to the farmers out there, that 
will be sensitive to the needs at a  

local level. It takes a lot of work. It takes a lot of work by the 
employees out there and by the groups that we talked about, the 
management clerks and those. 
 
I’d like to thank them all, including my officials here today, for 
a job I believe they are doing extremely well in providing our 
farmers out there in rural Saskatchewan with the insurance that 
they need for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I’d like to thank the 
minister and his officials for the response they have given me 
today, and I would hope that the minister would take into 
consideration some of the concerns that the farmers have on 
some of the changes in policy, and to ensure that this crop 
insurance corporation proceeds ahead and builds to a better 
corporation. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 15 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 
to introduce Mr. Richard Letilley, my acting deputy minister, 
beside me. Immediately behind me is Peter McNeil, who is the 
director of advanced technology programs; and beside him is 
Raman Visvanathan who is the administrative services 
co-ordinator; and the director of communications, Leanne 
Gerrard. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 
beginning this evening’s debate on the estimates for the 
Department of Science and Technology, I want to come straight 
to the major issues that are concerning us on this side of the 
House. 
 
The Premier has for several years gone about the province 
engaging in rhetorical boosterism of the high-tech industries. 
He’s been promising economic diversification; he’s been 
promising jobs; he’s been promising a place in the emerging 
information-based economy to lead us into the 21st century. 
And the city of Saskatoon has been particularly and constantly 
promoted as a major centre for the development of high tech. 
 
With an unemployment rate of over 12 per cent, the city badly 
needs industries, and it badly needs government policies and 
plans which will make a substantive difference to the lives of 
the people in this province. 
 
But what are we getting from the PC government? We’re 
getting a lot of hot air hype, a total lack of accountability for the 
taxpayers’ money, and a total lack of credibility as a 
government that knows what it’s doing and where it’s going. 
And your department, Mr. Minister, has been in the thick of this 
scam. You have been very busy handing out millions of dollars 
of money that belongs to the people of Saskatchewan, handing 
it out to certain firms and individuals willy-nilly, I say. 
 
There have been donations of large sums of money for nothing 
much in exchange. And it’s interesting that today should be the 
day that we look at the Science and  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

768 
 

Technology estimates because this morning we had these 
headlines in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: “Joytec rules out 
manufacturing.” Now it’s not realistic for Joytec Ltd. To 
manufacture these golf simulators in Saskatoon, and it’s going 
to offshore manufacturing for that company. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, last year, last year in the Estimates you 
said, and I quote: 
 

We have no reason to believe that they (meaning Joytec) 
will not be into production within the next short while, and 
the fact it will be a very successful company, and they will 
have generated a fair bit of revenue for this province, and 
will also provide a fair number of jobs for the people in 
the Saskatoon area. 

 
Mr. Minister, we have no production, we have no revenue, and 
we have no jobs from Joytec. But the taxpayers have lost over 
$1 million worth of tax credits, tax revenue from the tax credit 
venture capital scheme, plus nearly a half a million dollars more 
in grants and other public moneys have gone to Joytec. All this 
for a company that was manufacturing golf simulators, a 
company with PC Party connections on its board of directors. 
 
The second example that I wanted to refer to in bringing this 
concerns to your attention, Mr. Minister, is the one from 
Regina, the Supercart scandal. Now just this afternoon when the 
budget estimates were coming forward this evening, we 
received the annual report for the Department of Science and 
Technology for 1986-87 — just this afternoon. And it shows 
that Supercart International received $212,750 for industrial 
research. And according to Frontiers, the magazine published 
by your company, by your department, volume 4: 
 

Supercart estimated that by the end of 1986, including the 
employment creation grants, they had received about $2 
million from federal and provincial programs, plus another 
large number of tax credits to the venture capital program. 

 
That’s another scam and another scandal supported by your 
department. 
 
(2100) 
 

Premier Grant had described Supercart at his . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, Order, please. Order, please. I would 
ask the member to please be cautious of using members’ names, 
but rather by title only. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 

. . . (the Premier) had described Supercart, at the opening 
of its firm, as a perfect example of Saskatchewan’s 
open-for-business philosophy, helping to diversify the 
economy. 

 
It’s been a scam. It’s been a loss of taxpayers’ money . . . 
Obviously there’s more than just myself interested in speaking 
to these estimates, Mr. Minister, because there’s  

a number of us from Saskatoon, particularly, who are concerned 
about what’s happening with science and technology in the high 
tech firms. 
 
And we’ve been very upset this morning to see the headlines in 
the paper about Joytec. We’ve heard not so long ago in the 
news that Joytec was going to go into production, just wait a 
few more weeks, a little bit longer and Joytec would be in 
production, Joytec would be offering jobs. Instead Joytec has 
laid people off and has now decided that they’re not going to 
produce in Saskatchewan at all — no manufacturing after all 
that money that was set aside. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I think I would like to go right into the 
Joytec question and start asking you: will you explain what has 
happened to Joytec, from your perception? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it took the hon. 
Member a good long time to get to her question, and it seems to 
me that there was a lot of rhetoric there that we’ve heard once 
or twice before in this House. I think that it’s typical of the 
members opposite; they should always take a look at the 
negative without any effort at all to take a look at many of the 
positive stories that are happening in the high-tech industry in 
this province. 
 
You can talk an awful lot about Joytec, but I don’t hear you 
saying anything about Capa Software. You talk a little about 
Supercart, which is history quite some time ago, but I don’t hear 
you talking anything about or saying about SCI-TECH. 
 
It might interest you to know, you talk about how the advanced 
technology industry is doing so poorly in this province. Well let 
me just take a couple of minutes to point out some of the good 
things that are happening in this province as far as the advanced 
technology sector is concerned. 
 
And I would point out to the . . . I would refer you to the ABEX 
(Awards for Business Excellence) award winners and the 
competitions that were held in Saskatoon not that many months 
ago. And no fewer than six high-tech companies were 
nominated for those awards. 
 
I would also refer you to a study that was done not long ago by 
Saskatchewan Business, talking about Saskatchewan’s 25 
fastest-growing companies. And if you look down the list of 
those 25 fastest-growing companies, you’ll see no fewer than 
six of them that are high-tech companies. And if you flip over 
the page and look at some of the future stars, of which they 
have listed five, two of them are high-tech companies. Now I 
think that’s a pretty good ratio as far as companies that are 
really on the move in this province. 
 
You make mention then again of Joytec, and it’s true we have 
heard a fair bit about it in the last while, and certainly I too 
would like to have seen a little bit more activity there. 
 
But you refer to an article that appeared in the Saskatoon Star-
Phoenix this morning. And I’ve read this article over a few 
times, and I don’t see anything within that article that says that 
they’re not going to be manufacturing in  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

769 
 

Saskatoon. 
 
I mean, you’d like to take a good look at the big headline that 
says, “Joytec rules out manufacturing.” But if you go through 
the whole thing, I don’t see where it says that Joytec is not 
going to be manufacturing in Saskatoon. It says that they’re 
going to be manufacturing here for the Japanese market; it 
doesn’t say anything about the rest of it. And we’ve known that 
for a good long time. 
 
And if the former critic, Mr. Chairman, would like to ask 
questions, I’d be happy to answer them a little later, too. Let me 
also point out the history about Joytec. And you’re saying that 
it’s not providing any jobs and a lot of money has been spent 
there. 
 
Joytec was incorporated back in 1983, which is nearly five 
years ago. At the present time there are no fewer than 25 people 
employed by Joytec. Now if those aren’t jobs, what are they? 
They have had in the neighbourhood of 25, and you’ve 
indicated that there were some lay-offs, and yes there were, I 
think, seven people laid off in production last summer 
sometime, I believe. So then the fact remains that they have 
employed in the neighbourhood of at least 25 people ever since 
they’ve started, and at some times over 30. 
 
Now if you consider the wages that are being paid to those 
individuals, I think that their wage bill has been in excess of 
$60,000 per month, and if you run that over five years or nearly 
five years, it amounts to a fair bit of money. 
 
The people that are working at Joytec are still involved in doing 
research and development. I think you’re one who like to pull 
out articles from the paper. I think it was just yesterday, April 
20, that there was an article there with regard to SCI-TECH. 
And it clearly stated in that article, just to give you some idea 
that in the high-tech industry not everyone is successful and 
certainly not everyone is successful overnight — and there’s a 
paragraph there that indicates that with the increased sales that 
SCI-TECH is going to have for the coming year, that it’s going 
to mean the company doubling their total annual revenue, and 
that they’re going to be in the black for the first time after years 
of pumping up to 40 per cent of revenues into research and 
development. 
 
So we do have some that are immediate success stories. But 
certainly there are others which take a great deal of time before 
the products reach the market-place. 
 
Now you’ve been told in this House before that Joytec is 
involved with companies in Japan who are indeed going to be 
manufacturing the products there. Joytec is presently waiting 
for one of those products to be shipped to Saskatoon. And the 
word that I have is that that will be there in the near future. Now 
I don’t know whether that’s next week or next month, but there 
are some modifications that had to be made to that particular 
machine. Granted, they have not produced that many machines 
to date, I think probably in the neighbourhood of maybe 10 or 
12 or 15. These products of course are out on demonstration, 
and as soon as all of the bugs are taken out, then these machines 
obviously are going to be good sellers. There certainly seems to 
be a good deal of demand in Japan, and the ones that are going 
to be sold in  

that market will be produced there. But Joytec is going to 
benefit from that. Let’s keep in mind that the company that 
purchased Joytec, Technigen, has been carrying that company 
for a good long time now and will be investing — I think the 
article that you’re quoting again from indicates that they’re 
waiting now for another 2 to $4 million package that they’re 
going to be putting in there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re going to get it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I’m sure that they’re going to get it. I 
don’t think that there’s any indication that they’re not. I think 
with the amount of money that they’ve already put into it, 
which is in the neighbourhood of $4 million, that they 
obviously feel that there’s a product there that is going to have 
sales in the world market. 
 
So as far as Joytec in Saskatoon is concerned, they are going to 
be producing a certain number of machines there, but for the 
most part, the products or the parts of them are brought in and 
they are assembled there. And they are still going to be selling 
to the Canadian market and probably into the States. So I’ll 
leave it at that. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, we won’t leave it at that because I 
want to be clear what you’ve said in relation to this article. The 
acting chief operating officer for Joytec has said it is not 
realistic for Joytec Ltd. to manufacture golf simulators in 
Saskatoon for the whole world. He has also said that the 
manufacturing ability is completely unproven, and he’s quoted 
as saying that the reality in high tech today is offshore 
manufacturing. 
 
Now is the acting chief operating officer not correct, or are you 
saying that this does not say what it says, and that somehow 
production is going to go ahead in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — From the information that I have, 
there will be a certain amount of production being done in 
Saskatoon. I have no way of knowing at this point in time how 
much there’s going to be done in Saskatoon, and neither does 
anybody else. 
 
Certainly there are going to be many more sales in countries 
like Japan, and they will be produced in that particular country. 
It doesn’t make a heck of a lot of sense . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If you’d like to have the floor, I’ll sit down. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s been indicated several times that the 
products that are going to be sold in Japan will be manufactured 
in Japan, and that makes a whole lot of sense. The technology 
has been sold to Japan as far as that market is concerned, but 
there has been nothing else said as far as the market in Canada 
and in the United States is concerned, other than they will be 
produced in Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well what doesn’t make sense to us is that the 
taxpayers have put over $1.5 million into this firm on the 
understanding that you were promoting manufacturing in 
Saskatoon. There is now not going to be any manufacturing in 
Saskatoon. If this company is so healthy and so ready to 
expand, why is it between 60,000 and $80,000 in arrears on 
payments to local businesses, and what is going to happen to 
the debt that is owed to  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

770 
 

those local businesses as a result of Joytec not going forward 
with manufacturing there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, what I would say to 
the member opposite is simply that as far as Science and 
Technology is concerned, and as far as these estimates go, we 
have contributed $76,000 to research and development for 
Joytec. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I think that we have to look at the firms that 
you’re promoting, Mr. Minister. You’ve always been a 
spokesperson for the Joytec industry, and it has been $1.5 
million of taxpayers’ money invested in that firm. And it has 
been a firm that from the beginning we’ve had a lot of questions 
and concerns about. 
 
Now if you are putting money into research and development in 
Saskatoon in order to create manufacturing jobs in production 
in Japan and in other places in the world rather than in 
Saskatoon, I think the taxpayers should know that. We should 
know what we’re paying for. The Premier has boosted 
high-tech industries as a way of putting jobs in the province and 
a way of putting manufacturing in the province. And now we’re 
seeing that these firms that we’ve put our money into, like 
Joytec, are ruling out manufacturing. What is the position? 
What is going to be happening here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would hate to 
think that the high-tech industry in Saskatchewan is dependent 
on only one company being successful. The member opposite 
should realize that in the last five years that there have been a 
tremendous number of new high-tech firms started up in the 
province of Saskatchewan — 1982 there were 39 companies 
that were involved in the high-tech industry in Saskatchewan; 
today that number is somewhere in the neighbourhood of 170. 
Over the last five years, there’s no doubt about it that not all of 
them have been successful, but a good number of them have 
been. And in the high-tech industry certainly, there is no 
guarantee that all of them are going to be successful, but the 
majority of them have. 
 
And you talk a lot about the number of jobs that have been 
created. In the last five years the number of jobs has probably 
grown from in the neighbourhood of 1,500 to somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 3,000. So I don’t think that that’s all that bad. 
And at a time when our economy is suffering from low prices 
for many of our major commodities, whether it’s grain or oil or 
potash or uranium, there’s no doubt that the high-tech industry 
has contributed a fair deal to the revenues of this province. 
When one considers that the revenues in 1982 were in the 
neighbourhood of $81 million per year, and for this past year 
were between 4 and $500 million, this of course is going to 
enable the province to provide some of the many services that 
we have very much enjoyed and we continue to look forward 
to. So I think that the high-tech industry in this province has 
been very, very successful over the last number of years and 
will continue to be. 
 
I’ve already pointed out about some of the success stories that 
we have here, and we’ve got a good number of them that are 
still coming on. We’ve got some of these companies, obviously, 
that are still developing. They’re doing a lot of research and 
development. To this date,  

there are many of them that are still not to the stage where they 
are going to be putting products on the market. 
 
If you’re talking about advanced technology you’ve got to 
consider that you’ve got to go right from the idea, with the basic 
research, right through until that first product is ready for sale. 
And we have had a lot of good success stories. 
 
(2115) 
 
I’m still hopeful that Joytec is going to be successful. And for 
you to say that I have simply been . . . I’ve been a spokesman 
for that particular company, I have simply answered questions 
whenever you had asked them, and I operate on the information 
that I have, the same as anyone else would. 
 
You have been invited to go and visit Joytec, as was your 
predecessor, and as has also the Leader of the Opposition, in 
whose riding this particular business is located, and till this 
point in time not one of you have taken any time to go and visit 
that operation to see exactly what they are doing there. So 
maybe you ought to go and do that and talk to the people there 
and get some better idea as to what they are doing. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you owe the people of 
Saskatchewan an accounting as to how their funds are being 
spent on companies like Joytec. You have been hoping that this 
production at Joytec will come about magically somehow. And 
we note in your most recent report from the Department of 
Science and Technology that there’s another $35,000 that’s 
been given to this company for the most recent annual report 
that we have — yet more money to this company. And I’d like 
to ask you, was that money documented in the annual report 
given when you were minister of the Department of Science 
and Technology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point 
out to the hon. member that the same thing that I have in the 
past, and the same thing still applies. The total money that 
Joytec has received from Science and Technology is $76,000 
and not one nickel of that has been received since I was 
appointed minister for this department. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’ll ask you again, Mr. Minister, the figure in 
your most recent annual report — the grant given to Joytec — 
was that given while you were minister of the Department of 
Science and Technology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — In so far as the annual report is 
concerned, I would point to you that that is to cover the period 
from April 1, 1986 until March 31, 1987. Those funds that are 
listed there, and I believe it’s $32,263. It’s my recollection — 
and this was a question, I believe, that we discussed last year in 
estimates — this payment was made some time in the summer, 
possibly in August of 1986. So it was prior to the last election, 
and it was certainly prior to my being appointed minister for 
this department. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, the funds received by Joytec 
from the Government of Saskatchewan have come  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

771 
 

not only through your department, they’ve come in the form of 
1.125 million in venture capital tax credits. There was a $7,000 
Heritage Fund contracted financial assistance grant given 
directly to the company. There was an Aid to Trade program 
grant given by the Department of Economic Development and 
Trade for almost $4,000. There’s another Heritage Fund 
research division grant for software development of $38,000. 
There’s yet another Saskatchewan Heritage Fund contractual 
service industrial research grant — actually two grants — that 
total $45,000. In April of ’86 there was a $6,000 product 
development management program grant from the Department 
of Tourism and Small Business. In 1985-86 there was a $60,000 
grant for bridging capital to this same company. 
 
I don’t know whether this $32,000 figure in your most recent 
annual report is covered in those grants that I’ve just referred to. 
It certainly doesn’t seem to jive with my figures — I don’t 
know where it comes from. I’ll take you at your word for now, 
but my point is, Mr. Minister, that this company has been given 
every opportunity by your government. It’s seen financing from 
your department; it’s seen financing from other government 
departments and direct grants; it’s seen venture capital funds; 
it’s seen the Premier go to Japan to talk to Marubeni 
corporation on its behalf; it’s had space at Saskatchewan Expo 
pavilion. When are we going to see some jobs from this Joytec 
plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well it sounds to me, Mr. Chairman, 
like we may just have to go back and review the estimates from 
last year and also go back through Hansard and take a look at 
the fact that the hon. member has already asked these questions. 
I’ve indicated to him, and perhaps if he’d listen this time, we 
won’t have to waste more time on it. 
 
The amount of money that has been forwarded from Science 
and Technology is $76,000. You’re talking about $60,000 in 
bridging capital, which you should obviously know and I’ve 
told you this before, that that is a loan. And that money has all 
been paid back. There was a bridging capital of $60,000 from 
the provincial government and $60,000 from the federal. The 
fact of the matter is the money was a loan to them, and it has all 
been paid back. 
 
If you want to talk about the venture capital fund, maybe you 
better be talking to the minister who is in charge of the venture 
capital fund as to what those moneys are to be used for. And I 
think if you examine the record, that the money that was put 
forward here was probably put to good use by this particular 
company. 
 
And you keep talking about jobs, and I’ve indicated to you that 
there have been in the neighbourhood of anywhere from 25 to 
35 people employed at that company for the last five years. And 
that takes a fair bit of money. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, what you’re saying to the 
people of Saskatchewan is that we will pay the money for 
research and development work, no strings attached, and you 
will make excuses for companies who don’t get into production; 
that the Saskatchewan taxpayer will pay for the grants and you 
will make excuses for the companies  

when they don’t perform. No accountability whatsoever; no 
concern for the taxpayers’ investment in these companies. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to know why, on September 15th in 
our last estimates, you could say to me: 
 

. . . at this point in time, we have no reason to believe that 
they (meaning Joytec) will not be into production within 
the next short while, and the fact that it will be a very 
successful company and they will have generated a fair bit 
of revenue for this province, and will also provide a fair 
number of jobs for people in the Saskatoon area. 

 
These were your words. Why haven’t we seen the company 
being a success? Why haven’t we seen the company being a 
success? Why haven’t we seen it generate a fair bit of revenue 
for the people of Saskatchewan instead of sucking revenue off 
of the taxpayers? And when are we going to see jobs for people 
in the Saskatoon area once production gets started? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, as I have already 
pointed out to the hon. member, we do have 25 people at Joytec 
that are now employed in research and development. There has 
been a certain amount of work also created throughout the city 
of Saskatoon from the products that have been developed in that 
particular area and then moved to Joytec where they were 
manufactured into the machines that have been produced. I’ve 
already indicated, as well, that you never know how exactly 
long it is going to take for a company to be successful. 
 
We give money for research and development. We encourage 
companies to work with the funds that we give them and that 
they will remain in the province. We don’t have any idea, at this 
point, any further than what I’ve already indicated from the 
information that I have. 
 
As soon as the machine is received from Sony in Japan, they 
will be taking a look at it and the modifications that are going to 
be made on it, and then they will be producing more machines 
that will be distributed in Canada and the United States. Now 
that’s the only information that I have to operate on. I don’t 
have a crystal ball that I can look into and see when Joytec is 
going to be successful. 
 
When I answered your question on whatever date you pointed 
out there, I was operating on the information that was available 
at that particular time, and that’s what I am doing right now. 
And in talking to the Joytec representatives, that is where they 
are today in so far as producing . . . They’re producing the 
software for these machines, and that’s probably where they are 
going to have the greatest amount of success as time goes on, is 
in the production software. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, we’re no further ahead now 
with Joytec than we were a year ago when I was asking you 
questions about that company. I would like you to tell me: what 
more do we see from this Joytec company now than we saw last 
July and August when I was questioning you about their 
production. What more do you have to show for that public 
investment of $1.5  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

772 
 

million now, a year later, than was there a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, Joytec is continuing 
to make modifications to the products that have been developed 
there within the last few years. There isn’t much point in 
starting to get into production on products until all of the bugs 
have been taken out of them, and until such time as that 
happens, they are probably not going to produce any more of 
them. I can’t tell you exactly when Joytec is going to be into 
production as far as these particular machines are concerned, 
any more than I can many of the other companies that are in 
operation in this province. There are others that have been 
doing research and development for months, maybe a couple of 
years. It takes time to bring some of these products to the stage 
where they can be sold successfully on the market. 
 
So maybe what you need to do is pay a little visit to Joytec, see 
what they’re doing there and find out firsthand for you instead 
of trying to get information out of the newspapers and then 
determine . . . what you think from that is really what is going 
on in that particular operation. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, we’re trying to get information 
out of you, not out of the newspapers, and we’re trying to find 
out what is going on in that corporation. And I’d like to know, 
for example, if part of what is going on is whether that Joytec 
company is getting money because of its ties to the 
Conservative Party? 
 
We know full well that one Settimo Carlo Zanon, general 
manager of Joytec, formerly general manager, was also the 
constituency association president of your Progressive 
Conservative constituency association. There’s a nice 
connection. Maybe that’s why Joytec gets the kind of defence it 
gets from you. 
 
Mr. Minister, we also know that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I see the Minister of Education is a little bit touchy on this 
point. Maybe we’re hitting a raw nerve. 
 
Mr. Minister, we also know that three of the directors of Joytec 
equities have been active in the Progressive Conservative Party 
of Saskatchewan. One director, Rod Perkins, was a business 
manager for Bob Andrew in the 1980 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’d ask members to use other 
member’s positions rather than names. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you. One director, Mr. Rod Perkins, 
was business manager for the Conservative member from 
Kindersley in both the ’78 and ’86 provincial elections. Another 
director, Mr. David Matchett, was listed as the business 
manager for the Conservative candidate in the riding of Estevan 
in the 1978 election. A third director, Ray Frehlick, has been 
active with the Conservative association in the Estevan 
constituency. 
 
Is this perhaps, Mr. Minister, why this company gets the kind of 
defence that it does from you? 
 
(2130) 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, quite frankly 
I’ve never seen such a shameful display in this House. If you 
feel so strongly about your accusations, maybe you should 
make them outside this place. 
 
I’ve heard this same question from you before, and I pointed 
out to you at that time that there has been no money given to 
Joytec since I became minister and, in fact, since that individual 
became the president of my constituency. 
 
And I might also point out to you, as I did in the past, that when 
my officials are approached by companies for funding for 
research and development, they are the ones then that look at 
the possibilities as to the type of operation that they’re going to 
be putting together and the technology that they’re trying to 
develop, and then it comes to me for approval. 
 
And let me assure you that it is not our policy when a company 
comes to Science and Technology to seek some assistance, that 
we go through and take a look at their board of directors and see 
whether they’re NDP or Liberal or PC. The main criteria that 
we look at is that if the technology that they’re trying to 
develop is sound and that, if it’s going to be good for the 
province of Saskatchewan, why wouldn’t we support it? 
 
So for you to make the type of accusations that you’re making 
today are just totally out of line. I’ve already indicated that to 
you, and if you want to go back and look at the record as to 
what I said before, you’ll see that it was exactly the same thing 
and there is absolutely no foundation in your comments 
whatsoever, that this company is receiving any special attention 
because the general manager happens to be the president of my 
constituency. Because the record speaks for itself as to when 
that assistance was given, and that goes back long before I 
became the minister for this department. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, the question still remains 
whether this company has not received preferential treatment, 
prior to your becoming minister, by virtue of its ties to the 
Progressive Conservative Association of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I might also add that at a time when Saskatchewan people 
are seeing their highway system deteriorate and hospital waiting 
lists expand, cut-backs to the drug program, cut-backs to the 
dental program, it behoves us as legislators to scrutinize public 
expenditures and to question the propriety of a public 
investment of $1.5 million in a company that is going nowhere 
. . . and a company that’s going nowhere, particularly when it 
has ties to the Progressive Conservative Association of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to know how you can defend the kind of money this 
company has received in light of its connections in the past, 
prior to your becoming minister, at a time when Saskatchewan 
people are experiencing cut-backs. Would you not agree that 
this is symptomatic of the mismanagement and the bungled 
priorities that we see from this government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the member  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

773 
 

opposite is really rambling on and on here and not making a 
whole heck of a lot of sense. We’re talking about a company 
that has been in operation for nearly five years. They have 
provided employment, not only directly at Joytec for that period 
of time but they have also provided jobs for individuals outside 
the company. Now for you to say that this is a waste of 
taxpayers’ money and that the company never, ever will amount 
to anything, you don’t know that. You have absolutely nothing 
to base that on whatsoever. 
 
If you were to take a look at all of the other high-tech 
companies throughout the province of Saskatchewan — and I 
could probably name off a few of them that have spent many, 
many hundreds of thousands of dollars on research and 
development and been in operation longer than Joytec, but to 
this day, Mr. Chairman, have not been able to produce a 
product that is bringing any revenue in to the company or to the 
province. So let’s not get carried away in looking at one 
particular company, which is still working on research and 
development, and base the success of the industry on any one 
particular company. 
 
Let’s talk about some of the companies that are going ahead and 
doing great things and are bringing in a fair bit of revenue for 
the province, and certainly they all have risks to them, but 
there’s never any guarantee as to the fact that they’re all going 
to be successful or when they’re going to be successful. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can see how it would be 
very convenient for you to avoid any kind of scrutiny or 
answering any kind of questions about Joytec. But that’s one 
company that we have a particular interest in tonight because 
the Saskatchewan taxpayer is owed an accounting from you as 
to where $1.5 million has gone and what there is to show for it. 
This company, as you say, has been in existence for some five 
years and cannot even meet its own production schedules. 
 
As you said yourself, they have a number of machines out on 
demonstration for the last year. Well certainly those machines 
haven’t gone anywhere. They’ve gone all over North America, 
perhaps, but there hasn’t resulted in one sale. 
 
There were distribution agreements that were talked about a 
year ago, a year and a half ago, for over $100 million, but those 
weren’t sales; those were only distribution agreements that 
people would try to market the machine. And obviously it isn’t 
selling, and the taxpayer is being bilked by this extravaganza. 
And I want to know how you can justify this kind of investment 
in one particular company that has ties to the Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we have the member 
opposite running on here at great length, saying that we’ve got a 
company that’s wasting taxpayers’ money and going nowhere. 
We have had no fewer than 25 people employed by this 
company for nearly five years. And if you consider that the 
payroll probably is in the neighbourhood of 60 to $70,000 a 
month, and you figure that out over five years, it amounts to a 
fair bit of money. And it certainly hasn’t all come from the 
taxpayers of this province. 
 

You’ve got to consider the fact that Technigen, which now 
owns Joytec, has also put a substantial amount of money into 
that company and, in fact, has been carrying it for some period 
of time. And all indications are that it will continue to do that. 
 
So there have been people that have been employed there, there 
hasn’t been . . . I mean if you’re still carrying 25 people on an 
ongoing basis, and they haven’t had any lay-offs, I think, since 
last summer some time, that seems to me to be a fair 
commitment that something is happening in that company. So 
you know, you keep on saying about the waste of the taxpayers’ 
money being spent on wages. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Ho, so you say. Perhaps it’s been spent on 
wages, but Saskatchewan people want to know where that 
money really did go and what there is to show for it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about 25 employees; there are 10 times 
that number of people who invested in Joytec equity 
corporation — some 250 Saskatchewan shareholders. They 
want to know what happened to their investment and what, if 
anything, is going to be left of it, based on the mismanagement 
that’s taken place at this company. What kind of answer do you 
give to the shareholders . . . who are shareholders in Joytec 
equities? What kind of accounting do you give to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I haven’t had 
any of the shareholders coming to me asking that particular 
question. They’ve got about 20 per cent . . . 20 per cent of the 
company is owned by Saskatchewan people, and obviously the 
company is still viable. So what’s the concern as far as the 
Saskatchewan shareholders are concerned? Obviously they 
haven’t been beating down the door of the company to find out 
what’s happening, and certainly I have not had any contact with 
them. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me if Mr. Neil 
Peckover is still associated with Joytec company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I have no idea who 
Mr. Neil Peckover is, and I suggest that if the hon. member 
wants to find out information like that, maybe he should go and 
visit the company. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, my understanding is that 
Neil Peckover was hired, or it was announced on February 8 by 
Technigen that Mr. Neil Peckover, a chartered accountant, a 
vice-president and controller with Malloy Energy in Vancouver, 
was hired on February 9 as chief executive officer at Joytec, and 
that by the end of March he had quit. Do you have any idea why 
that might be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I thought we were 
doing estimates for Science and Technology. We were 
approached by Joytec, prior to my being appointed minister for 
this department, for funding to assist them in research and 
development. Those moneys, the last moneys were paid out to 
them, I believe, in August of 1986. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

774 
 

Now certainly it is not the policy of the Department of Science 
and Technology to run around to the high-tech companies in 
this province to find out who’s being hired and who’s being 
fired. If they want to find out from the companies, then I 
suggest that they go and talk to the companies. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, one wonders, one can only 
wonder if, when a person of the stature of Mr. Peckover comes 
into the company to take over as chief executive officer and 
leaves in some six weeks, what kind of credibility is attached to 
that operation. Obviously he saw that there were no machines 
being produced, there was no money there, there was no 
production taking place, and he chose to go elsewhere. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’re aware of the fact that the 
president of Technigen corporation, one Lawrence Neisis, last 
year purchased a house in Vancouver for $830,000. Could it be 
that that’s where some of the money the taxpayers from 
Saskatchewan invested into Joytec, and shareholders invested 
into Joytec equities went? Do you think that might be a 
possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea whether 
that’s a possibility or not. And as I’ve already suggested to the 
member, if he wants to find out about who Joytec is hiring, that 
possibly he should visit the company and find out who they’re 
hiring, and if they’re firing somebody, why that are letting him 
go. That is not the responsibility of Science and Technology. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, if you are responsible for 
Science and Technology, you should be knowing some of the 
answers to these questions. And I think that’s part of my 
concern all along is apparently you take very little interest in 
what has been happening with some of these companies, and 
this is just one example. We’re stopping with one example 
tonight. 
 
Are you aware of the terms of the production to take place in 
Japan, seeing that your Premier has been there to talk directly to 
Marubeni? Can you tell us about the terms or conditions of that 
deal? How many machines are going to be produced this year, 
or over the terms of that contract; what the value of the contract 
is? Do you know anything about that contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I have no idea of the 
terms of the contract; that’s between Joytec and Marubeni. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, this is rather astounding that 
you have responsibility for an investment, a public investment 
of $1.5 million and you don’t even know what’s going on in 
Japan. You like to put rose-tinted glasses on when you look at 
the article in the Star-Phoenix today, when the chief operating 
officer, Rodger Touchie of Joytec says from his own mouth: 
 

The reality in high-tech today is offshore marketing. 
 
That certainly seems to suggest that there is going to be no 
production in Saskatoon or anywhere in Canada from  

Joytec, and it’s going to take place in Japan, but you don’t 
know anything about that. What do you know about Joytec 
other than that you hope it’s going to produce some machines 
some time? What do you know about the company other than 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s really 
something that the member opposite can do nothing more than 
sling mud in here at some of the high-tech companies in this 
province. I would think that if he really had a sincere interest in 
Joytec that he would take a little bit of time to visit the 
company, sit down and talk with them, find out from them what 
the terms of the agreement are with Japan. That’s certainly 
between them. Go there and find out what’s happening. But 
instead, you prefer to stand in here in your place and run down 
the company when you have no idea whether or not they are 
going to be successful at this point in time. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’m not running down the 
company. I’m talking about your public accounting and your 
waste of taxpayers’ money, $1.5 million, at a time when the 
provincial deficit is ballooning. We’re paying $1 million a day 
interest on the provincial deficit in part because of 
irresponsible, incompetent actions with respect to giving grants 
to companies like this Joytec, with no strings attached and no 
accountability. And Heaven only knows if you’re going to be 
prepared to give yet more money to them to bail them out of 
their present financial predicament. I mean, we still haven’t 
heard any assurances that you won’t sink still more good public 
money after the bad that’s been put in there. Can you give us 
that kind of assurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would simply point 
out to the hon. member that Joytec is a company that is still in 
operation. They still have 25 people that are employed there. 
The shareholders have not been making any noises to me about 
being dissatisfied or concerned about their investments. As far 
as I know, they have not been making any kind of noises to 
Joytec and voicing concerns about what was going to happen to 
their investment. So for the member to stand there and say that 
this company is not going to be successful, he has absolutely no 
basis at all on which to put forth that answer. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, we have a lot of grounds on which 
to be very critical and concerned about what’s happening with 
this firm and what’s happening with your Department of 
Science and Technology. And it’s our role as opposition critics 
to be very concerned about what’s happening with the 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
Now you have said over and over again that things happened 
when you were not the minister of this department. And yet it 
was just this afternoon that we received the ’86-87 report for 
your department. Part of that time you’re going to say you were 
not the minister. We’ve only received the ’85-86 Public 
Accounts; we have not yet received the accounts from ’86-87. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

775 
 

Ms. Smart: — and I don’t want to be questioning you in this 
House if you are going to constantly not take responsibility for 
what’s been happening in Science and Technology, even though 
it may have happened before you took over as minister. You are 
now responsible for ongoing decisions and for decisions that 
have been made in the past. And we have to point out to you the 
loopholes in your policies and your programs and in the funding 
that you’re doing when we have this kind of situation 
happening here in Saskatoon with firms like Joytec. 
 
Now I was shocked to hear you say a little earlier — and 
perhaps you can clarify it for me — that you’re not concerned 
about the 60,000 to $80,000 that Joytec may now be owing and 
is in arrears to the local businesses, because it seems to me that 
when we put taxpayers’ money into these firms, we should be 
sure that those firms are going to stand up in the community 
and pay their way. We’ve got people in debt now who are 
paying interest on money that’s owed to them by this Joytec. 
You say it’s still there, it’s still in production, it’s still got 
people working for it. But what about these arrears to the local 
business men? What about them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out to 
the hon. member that I certainly take full responsibility for the 
Department of Science and Technology. And comments that I 
was making were simply in reference to the question asked by 
the hon. member with regard to one Carlo Zanon and when he 
received money. And I would point out again that that was all 
prior to my time as being minister. 
 
I am certainly very proud of what’s happening in the 
Department of Science and Technology. We have many, many 
good things happening in this province in science and 
technology. And the member from Saskatoon University, it 
might be a good idea, too, for him to just take a look around and 
see some of the good things that are happening in science and 
tech in this particular province. 
 
Certainly I’m concerned when a report comes out, such as did 
today, that the company is having trouble meeting its 
commitments to the local businesses. But at the same time, I 
have no reason to believe that Technigen will not be coming 
forth as they have in the past. They’ve been financing Joytec for 
several months now, so I have no reason to think that they 
won’t be coming forth with the package which is going to allow 
them to continue on with the activities that they have going on 
with the research and development. 
 
So hopefully within a short time they will have that 
information. And the information that I have is that it is just a 
matter of days before they will have the confirmation from 
Technigen that that money is indeed going to be coming. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:53 p.m. 
 


