


















































June 14, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 14, 1988 
 

2117 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 7 – Changes in Canada Post Affecting Towns 
and Villages (continued) 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
It is my intention to speak about the closure of rural post offices 
tonight. I’m very proud to be seconding the motion moved by the 
member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada that it sees the closure or privatization of small post 
offices across Canada as seriously undermining the 
economic and social well-being of rural communities, 
placing hardships on seniors and physically disabled 
citizens and threatening thousands of rural jobs, many of 
them currently held by women; and further, that this 
Assembly urge that rural post offices continue to be 
federally owned and operated institutions maintaining a 
permanent presence in Canadian towns and villages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is my intention to outline just how the closure is 
serious, how it is affecting people of rural Saskatchewan in 
particular, some of those people coming from the area that I was 
originally brought up in. And why I say that is, I see in the latest 
list of closures that the neighbouring town of Demaine is slated 
to lose its post office. Indeed, it may already have lost it. This list 
of closures includes many, many towns. I’m not going to list 
them, but there’s about 20 on this page and 20 on this page, places 
like Dollard, Elstow, Forget, Hepburn, Lafleche, Leslie, Lewvan, 
Middle Lake, Redvers, Scotsguard, Spiritwood, Springwater, 
Vonda, Zelma, Clavet, Brownlee — there’s four pages of 
closures. I just read some of them at random. The point is, there 
has been quite a number of closures already. I understand that in 
Saskatchewan we’ve had 54 rural post offices closed — 54 out 
of 620. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can draw an analogy to purchasing a vehicle that’s 
new to you. You see a vehicle on a sales lot, and you think, my, 
that’s the first time I’ve seen that particular car — what a 
beautiful car — and you buy it. And then on the way home you 
meet four more cars identical — identical — to that one, so 
suddenly there’s five cars like that. And it’s going to be the same 
thing in rural Saskatchewan regarding post offices. 
 
There are people in 54 communities that already know and are 
feeling and experiencing what it is that my colleague from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake spoke of earlier and what I am now speaking 
of. People from 54 communities are feeling that, and there’s 
many, many more that are going to experience it because, as I 
understand it, in Saskatchewan, there’s 39 more that are under 
review and slated for closure before the end of next year — 
another 39 out of 620 post offices in Saskatchewan. That’s going 
to be close to 15 per cent of our post offices closed by the end of 
next year, and then the Canada Post goes on and talks about 
closing a total of

5,221 post offices across Canada by the year 1996. We are going 
to have a post office system that is going to be unrecognizable 
from what it is today, totally unrecognizable, and it's going to be 
much to the detriment of the people of, particularly, rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I get registered mail in Regina, I get a . . . the mail 
comes right to my door; I sign a little note agreeing that I’ve 
gotten the letter. If there’s nobody home, then I have to go to the 
post office. If there’s nobody at my house to sign for the 
registered mail, then they leave a card in my mailbox, and I have 
to go to the nearest sub post office, which, in my case, is a matter 
of 10 blocks. For people in rural Saskatchewan, it’s not 10 
blocks; for many of them it’s not 10 miles; for many of them 
we’re talking 20, 30, 40 kilometres one way to the post office, 
particularly after we see the continued closure of rural post 
offices. Now this is going to be a very severe hardship. 
 
The best way I can outline that is: I have received some registered 
mail that, frankly, I don’t know why anybody bothered to register 
it. It is almost a nuisance for me to have to open it at times, but, 
of course, the sender thinks it’s important. Picture me 40 or 50 
kilometres from the nearest post office, and Canada Post drops 
this registered note in my super mail box, and I’m thinking, gee, 
maybe, maybe my long lost aunt or uncle decided he wanted to 
leave me a thousand dollars. So I drive 40 or 50 kilometres to the 
post office only to find out essentially what I’ve got is registered 
junk mail, or worse yet, maybe it’s bad news. 
 
The hardship is going to clearly be there and it shouldn’t be. 
Rural Saskatchewan people are not second class citizens. Indeed 
many of us in the city originated out in rural Saskatchewan and 
many of us are fond of remembering the towns and the villages 
and the hamlets and the farms that we grew up in and on. We 
bring some of the values of rural Saskatchewan with us here to 
this Legislative Assembly, and it also prompts, in my case, me to 
stand up and speak out on behalf of rural post offices. 
 
People in my original home town where I grew up, many farmers 
chose to retire in that town. Some of them have built beautiful 
houses. Indeed, a couple of houses come to mind that I would 
quite happily trade my residence here in Regina for — really nice 
houses. But they made a conscious decision that said . . . they 
said to themselves they had farmed in that community, in that 
area, all of their lives. They knew everybody in the community. 
They felt good about their neighbours. They knew that in small 
town Saskatchewan, people look out for each other, and they 
knew they could count on Canada Post being there. They knew 
their post office was safe; they knew their hospital was safe. Both 
of those things are very much in question right now in my 
original home town — both matters very much in question, and 
it’s a shame because the people of that community deserve much, 
much better. They thought they were getting much better, and 
they have been sorely let down. 
 
In addition to seniors requiring the use of post offices that are 
fairly handy, fairly close, we have physically disabled 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2118 
 

people that now have a choice of staying in their community 
rather than having to move into the city. But with the closure of 
our post offices, it’s one more nail in the coffin of small towns 
and small villages and hamlets throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s a shame. That’s a shame because . . . Not that 
we don’t welcome people into the cities of Regina and Saskatoon 
and the other cities of our province. Of course we welcome 
people in, but we want them to come here because they see the 
city as a good place to live, not because we’ve driven them away 
from their small towns and their hamlets, not because we’ve 
driven them away. We want them to come here by choice. We 
want them to be happy here, and indeed, we want to extend them 
services here. We also should be extending those services 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In the motion we talk about jobs, many, many jobs about to be 
lost. And I find in preparing for this, a note that 83 per cent of the 
postmasters in Saskatchewan are women — 83 per cent. Those 
are the very people that are going to lose their jobs that are 
starting. They pay them now $12.44 an hour, Canada Post pays 
postmasters. Those folks are going to be out of work, and when 
the post office is closed or privatized, whatever the alternative, 
some of those people may find jobs. 
 
I defy you, Mr. Speaker, or any of the government members 
opposite, to find a clerk in a store that is making $12.44 an hour. 
They’re very, very far and few between. And in every case you 
can bet your bottom dollar that they’re the son or daughter or 
somehow or else other related to the owner. And I comment those 
people for being able to get that kind of a salary. I think it’s great, 
but there’s not very many people working in drug stores, working 
in small grocery stores, working in hardware stores throughout 
Saskatchewan that are commanding $12.44 an hour. 
 
So what we’re going to do by closing rural post offices is create 
a job ghetto: 83 per cent of the postmasters . . . or postmistresses 
are women — 83 per cent. We’re going to abolish their good 
paying jobs, and we’re going to say, well look, some of you may 
find work in the local hardware store or the local grocery store or 
the local drug store, and that work will be at 4.50 or $5 an hour. 
So we’re creating a job ghetto primarily for women — women, 
Mr. Speaker, that currently are earning something in the 
neighbourhood of 60 per cent of what men are. And here we have 
Conservative governments federally and Conservative 
governments provincially applauding it — not just applauding it, 
but, Mr. Speaker, urging it, pushing it, advancing it, saying, yes, 
let’s create another job ghetto for women. Let’s do away with it. 
We can’t have these postmistresses making good money. 
 
One further point regarding the $12.44 an hour that postmasters 
and postmistresses start at, that is, these people live in the 
communities. They live in the communities where their post 
offices are. They spend most of their money in those 
communities. That helps the local grocery store, that helps the 
local drug store, that help in cases where there still is an 
automobile dealership, that helps that. It also help keep the local 
hospital open because when you’re residing in a community, the 
first place you go for health care is the

nearest hospital. You don’t drive 200 kilometres or further just to 
get to the city to see another doctor. If you’ve got a doctor in your 
local community, that’s where you go when you’ve got the flu, 
that’s where you go for your illnesses. 
 
So by doing away with these jobs, we are in fact putting another 
nail in the coffin of rural Saskatchewan. Small towns and hamlets 
in Saskatchewan are declining at a rate . . . The population has 
been declining for over half a decade now at a rate of 9 per cent 
per year. So if you have a village with 200 people this year, if it 
is statistically with the normal, next year you’re going to have 
192 people; and the year after that, you’ll have 183 people; and 
the year after that, 174 or 75 people; and the year after that, 
160-something. And it doesn’t take very long and those 
communities just dry up and blow away like the land was just 
before our recent rain here. We’ve seen it in my travels 
throughout Saskatchewan. I have seen where there used to be 
communities — nothing, nothing at all. It’s sad because it seems 
to escalating under this administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1915) 
 
I want to point out that I am not advocating that we should be 
taking away mail services from urban people; that’s not what I’m 
advocating at all. I am simply standing up and saying rural 
citizens are at least as valuable, are equally valuable with their 
city cousins, their city brothers and sisters. People in rural 
Saskatchewan deserve good service as much as possible. 
 
When Saskatchewan joined confederation in 1905, we expected 
certain things to be provided by the federal government. One of 
those things was a communication network that would bind 
Canada together, would keep Canadians from coast to coast able 
to communicate with each other, with businesses. Indeed Eaton’s 
operated its mail order business for many, many years, and they 
did it on the Canada Post system. They did not do it on a system 
that required rural people to drive 50 kilometres one way to the 
nearest post office. They did it on a rural postal system where 
post offices were almost always within 20 kilometres and in 
many, many cases much closer than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see in the Leader-Post of Saturday, May 28, 
“Canada Post ‘wounding small towns’” is the headline, and 
wounding small towns. “Canada Post’s plans,” the article says: 
 

Canada Post’s plans to close or privatize 5,000 small post 
offices (and this) will wound rural communities and are 
unnecessary in view of the Crown corporation’s expected 
profit of $26 million this fiscal year . . . 

 
Leroy Kuan, president of the Saskatchewan branch of the 
Canadian Postmasters and Assistants Association (CPAA), 
said his union was concerned with the impact on jobs and 
job opportunities for its members. 

 
He goes on: 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2119 
 

“Saskatchewan is probably (one of) the hardest hit 
provinces in Canada” 
 
Of the 620 post offices in Saskatchewan 54 have already 
been closed and 39 more are under review . . . 

 
This, Mr. Speaker, is precisely why the motion has been brought 
before this Assembly; it is precisely why we have Rural Dignity 
crossing Saskatchewan, getting people’s awareness of the 
situation elevated, because in this day and age, if people aren’t 
aware, before they know it, their post office, their local post 
office is closed, it is gone, and it is too late. 
 
How do you tell the Postmaster General in Ottawa that you want 
your post office back after it’s already closed, the windows are 
boarded, the doors boarded shut? It is too late then, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing short of a miracle would bring those post offices back. 
That is why this motion today . . . That’s why we have raised this 
issue repeatedly in this Legislative Assembly because members 
on this side of the House feel very strongly that rural 
Saskatchewan deserves to be equal and they deserve to have their 
rural post offices. 
 
Another article, again in the Leader-Post, this time June 3, and 
the headline says, “Province’s postal concerns said quelled.” 
Isn’t that interesting — quelled. In other words, Canada Post 
came out, did a little sell job, did a little con job, said, oh don’t 
worry, we’ve done all the damage we’re going to do. Nice 
soothing words, but it isn’t going to help in the 39 communities 
that are slated for post office closure within the next 12 months 
and the many hundreds more slated for closure between now and 
1996 if the Conservative government federally and its cohorts 
provincially get their way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 18, Saskatchewan MLAs voted 
unanimously, meaning members on this side of the House and 
members on that side of the House, everyone, voted for our 
resolution, an NDP resolution, opposing rural post office 
closures because of the “negative social and economic impact of 
the closures.” The minister responsible who voted for the 
resolution, along with other Progressive Conservative MLAs, 
told the legislature “post offices are very important to rural 
communities and must be maintained.” 
 
He then went on and, indeed, had met with Canada Post, and he 
is quoted in this article as saying, “If they do what they say 
they’re going to do, postal service should even improve in rural 
Saskatchewan.” Well I don’t know what in the world that 
member is dreaming about when he thinks that closing an 
additional 39 post offices is going to improve any, in any way, 
shape, or form, improve the service in rural Saskatchewan, 
indeed through this list, I’m not sure whether Briercrest was in 
that member’s riding, but I see it’s on this list. I suspect if I went 
through the four-page, 70 or 80 rural post offices that are being 
closed, I could find several in that particular member’s riding 
alone, and he has the audacity to say that rural postal service is 
going to be improved. I just don’t know how he can stand up with 
any hope of being credible and say that postal service is going to 
be improved.

And part of why we are so upset about it is . . . that I have another 
newspaper clipping, this time from The Globe and Mail from 
June 11, and the headline in this one says, “Tory cash missions 
soar higher than polls.” And it outlines, Mr. Speaker, how in 
Calgary, Agriculture Minister Wise swooped in with a $12 
million drought relief package. It’s a welcome package; indeed 
we’ve said it’s not enough. They got $12 million for drought. 
Health Minister Jake Epp, in Ottawa, announced $40 million to 
combat family violence, and then flew to Winnipeg late the same 
day and he announced $129 million — $129 million — for 
advertising, education, and research into AIDS (acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome) — very serious matter, no 
question about that, but $129 million for that. 
 

Then (the article goes on) the Gallup poll damaged the 
Tories by showing them 10 points lower than the month 
before in Quebec. 

 
Ten points lower! They must be nearing the bottom of the slide. 
If they get much lower, they’re going to be below the ground 
surface. 
 

In response, (the article says, Mr. Speaker, it says) Mr. 
Mulroney hurriedly bumped Industry, Science and 
Technology Minister Robert de Ĉtret from the command 
post, to personally deliver $515-million to Quebec City for 
a $970-million federal-provincial regional development 
fund for the province. 

 
So over half a billion dollars just like that, because the federal 
government happens to drop 10 more points in the polls. Half a 
billion dollars for Quebec, just like that! 
 
And what do they do for the rural post offices? They secretly 
make plans, they devise plans for closing 5,221 rural post offices 
across the land. What a mistaken priority! 
 
The Conservative government federally and its counterparts 
provincially all seem intent on following the same blind 
ideology. They’ve closed the government offices, shut them 
down completely, piratize, privatize – doesn’t matter what 
service is offered, let’s save a nickel here and a dime there – and 
people don’t really count, unless you happen to be in Quebec 
where, as you know, there is a huge number of seats, a huge 
number of seats. We have a federal government that is nearing 
the end of its four-year mandate; indeed it’s nearing the end of 
its mandate that it will ever get, and now they’re desperate to 
pump up some support so they got over half a billion dollars, just 
like that, for Quebec – nothing for post office. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the plans to close rural post offices have 
been devised, not originating in Canada Post. They’ve originated 
in the federal government caucus office. The plans were 
submitted . . . the plan was tabled in the House of Commons last 
November. It was a plan that, as I mentioned, was conceived 
behind the closed doors of the Conservatives, and it was imposed 
upon Canadians, rammed down our throats. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2120 
 

This federal government is so completely insensitive to rural 
Canada and it has refused to see the implications that this plan 
has for rural Saskatchewan. They fail to understand, Mr. Speaker, 
that the rural post office in many, many instances is the hub of 
our small communities. I can remember long before I went to 
school, going to town and one of the stops was to pick up the 
mail. And that was always an amazing sight to see, as my mother 
or my father would stick the key in the post office box, open it 
up, and there’d be somebody talking from behind the boxes. I 
couldn’t figure out what it was, and there would be this 
conversation going back and forth. I was probably five or six 
years old before I realized that indeed there was a postmistress 
behind that wall of post office boxes. I thought it was magic — 
you just opened it up and people started talking. 
 
But we found out how neighbours from the other side of town 
were doing. We were 20 miles one way from town, and we found 
out about neighbours on the other side of town and all around our 
community at the rural post office. That hub of rural 
communities, Mr. Speaker, is what makes rural postal service 
tick; it’s what makes it work. That has to stay if we want to 
maintain service for our rural cousins, our rural brothers and 
sisters. 
 
I had spoken about the 83 per cent of the postmasters and 
postmistresses in rural Canada that are, in fact, women. There 
are, indeed, Mr. Speaker, 9,000 postmasters and postmistresses 
who will lose their jobs in the next 10 years alone under this 
scheme — 9,000 of them out of work. That is a present from a 
government that was elected in 1984. We all remember the 
slogan — jobs, jobs, jobs. All we have seen is jaws, jaws, jaws, 
and very little jobs, very few jobs for Canadians, and now they 
want to put 9,000 more hard-working men and women out of 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: They go on, Mr. Speaker. Canada Post has said, for 
instance: 
 

that no closure of a rural post office, or change in postal 
service, (would) be undertaken without meaningful 
consultation and the consent of the community affected. 

 
Well I defy them to tell us that the people in Aylesbury, or the 
people in any of the other total of 54 rural communities in 
Saskatchewan that have lost their post office . . . Name me one 
of those communities where the community said: yes, close our 
post office; we didn’t use it anyway; it was just a nuisance; you 
know, my son from the city used to write once in a while, or my 
daughter from Toronto used to write once in a while; it was just 
a nuisance picking up the mail, and I’d get The Western Producer 
every week — well you know that paper is hardly worth reading. 
I don’t think people are saying that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1930) 
 
I think that the people in those 54 communities are saying: we 
want our post office back; we want to be first-class citizens, the 
same, treated on an equal basis with everybody in the province, 
indeed everybody in

Canada; we don’t want any more than everybody else, but we 
don’t want anything less. And they have a right to think that way. 
I’d be disappointed if they didn’t. 
 
The consultation, Mr. Speaker, has not happened. The minister 
responsible for Canada Post in the federal government, Harvie 
Andre, “chose not to touch on this recommendation in his 
response to the committee.” Canada Post, as I mentioned, is 
going ahead with its plans to close rural post offices, I’ve said 
before there’s over 100 are slated for closure by early in the new 
year — that’s across Canada — and in 10 years, the rural post 
office will no longer exist. That’s, Mr. Speaker, if Canada Post 
and the federal government, with the help of its provincial 
counterparts here in Saskatchewan, allow this plan to go ahead. 
That’s what this debate is all about. It’s about rural post offices. 
It’s about people — not just the walls of the post office, but the 
communities that Canada Post is serving throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s put a stop to these insane closures of our rural post offices 
right here in Saskatchewan. We can do our friends all across 
Canada a huge favour just by sending a clear, unequivocal 
message that our post offices are not for closure. They’re not for 
sale. We want the service that we have expected ever since 
confederation, and indeed in the communication age it’s 
probably more important now than ever before that we have that 
Canada Post system and that it be a viable one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I got a letter from Canada Post. Interestingly 
enough, it’s from Ottawa, Ontario, and it’s also from Donald H. 
Lander, who is president of Canada Post Corporation — he signs 
it. But it’s interesting what Mr. Lander, from Ottawa, has to tell 
us in Saskatchewan about post offices. He was talking in the 
letter about, we’ve probably been approached by some crazy and 
insane people. He did not name them but I suspect he was talking 
about the Rural Dignity folks. And he comments about, we’ve 
probably been approached to speak up for Canada Post, speak up 
for service, and all those things. And he says, I want to give you 
the real story the way it really is. Well here he is, from Ontario, 
telling us in Saskatchewan how the post office affects us on a 
personal basis. Well I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker, but I 
have never seen Mr. Lander in Saskatchewan, much less in rural 
Saskatchewan. He may have been, but certainly doesn’t make it 
a practice. 
 
He says in the letter, and I quote: 
 

These businesses are already established within 
communities and open longer hours than outlets we staff 
ourselves. This gives them additional products to sell and 
provides an extra source of income. By encouraging local 
shopping, it contributes to the local economy. 

 
Well at first blush, perhaps there’s some reason to that. But when 
you look at it and start to see what they are saying, they’re saying 
we’re going to move the post office from the current post office 
building and into a store, into a business where they’ve already 
got people employed. Now those folks, those businesses are 
going to sell stamps. The business that bids the lowest price is 
going to get it, is going to get the post office. They’re going to 
have 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2121 
 

the business. They have agreed to sell the stamps for the lowest 
amount of remuneration — the lowest commission is the word I 
was looking for, Mr. Speaker. They will become commissioned 
agents for Canada Post, and the lowest bidder will get the job. 
 
How can you . . . In a small community where the volume of 
stamps sold is not going to be as big as it would be, say, in Regina 
or Saskatoon or one of our other major cities in Saskatchewan, 
how can you possible pay $12.44 an hour for someone to look 
after the post office under this circumstance that I have outlined? 
And that’s going to be $12.44 per hour that that local community 
and that business, indeed, is going to lose. Instead of the local 
hardware store having the postmaster coming and spending some 
of his or her money in that local store, the postmaster is already 
going to be working there, but for much less money than they 
currently are; they’re going to have less disposable income. So it 
clearly does not contribute to the local economy. 
 
The letter goes on and says: 
 

When proposing any change in service in any community, 
we introduce our plans and give municipal officials and 
local customers at least ninety days in which to express their 
preferences and concerns. 

 
Probably this is an accurate statement. But where it stops short is 
it says . . . it does not say, and we respond to these local concerns 
and these local preferences. They don’t respond at all. They just 
give you 90 days to blow off a little bit of wind before they close 
your rural post office, 90 days to elevate your blood pressure. But 
the end result is there, totally there — closure of a post office; 
loss of jobs, as I pointed out earlier in my speech, a loss of over 
9,000 jobs throughout Canada — 9,000 jobs, 9,000 good jobs, I 
might add, and the driving of many people into a job ghetto. 
 
And here we have Canada Post, letter from Ottawa telling us 
about our rural post offices. I think it’s just a shame, Mr. Speaker. 
I think that this Assembly has got to approve this particular 
motion. I think it is the only fair and honest thing we can do for 
rural Saskatchewan, and I challenge the members opposite to 
stand up, speak in favour of this motion, and send the message to 
Ottawa — send them the message that our rural post offices are 
not for sale, they’re not for closure. 
 
We demand, expect, and will get continued service throughout 
Saskatchewan. Whether it be in a small hamlet, or whether it be 
in one of our major cities, the service should be as reasonably 
close to the same as is humanly possible. That is what we should 
be expecting, Mr. Speaker, and that’s indeed what we want. 
 
There is a letter that my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
spoke of in his speech, and it’s from the Archdiocese of Regina 
— very interesting in that it starts off saying: 
 

I have recently been made even more aware of the effect the 
closure of rural post offices has had on communities. In 
Saskatchewan the plan is for the

closure of 645 post offices, with a job loss of 1,032. 
 

One thousand, thirty-two. It’s not a number, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
1,032 jobs. At a time when we desperately need to be putting 
people to work, Canada Post is putting people out of work — 
Canada Post, led by our Harvie Andre, minister responsible, and 
given the support, I will add, of the members here in this 
government, the members opposite of the government. Certainly, 
they’re not getting support from members on this side of the 
House. 
 
What this job loss adds to this potential 1,032 jobs in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it adds to the growing list. I have 
article from the Star-Phoenix that the headline is, “26 more 
workers in city purged in plant cutback.” This article goes on to 
list the job losses in Saskatchewan that these Canada Post job 
losses are going to add to, and this is just Saskatoon alone, and it 
says: 
 

July 1986, 45 Domtar workers laid off; October 1986, 34 at 
Northern Telecom; march 1987, seven at Joytec; May 1987, 
74 instructors at Kelsey Institute; June 1987, 16 Norcan Air 
employees; July 1987, 30 at Develcon; September 1987, 63 
Dominion grocery store workers; November 1987, 18 at 
Redi-Mix’s pre-cast operation; February 1988, three more 
at Joytec; May 1988, 88 Domtar workers; May 1988, 26 at 
Develcon; May 1988, 200 Cory potash mine employees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what a sad litany; what a sad list; what a damnation 
of this government’s actions. And now they want to go on and 
support a further 1,032 jobs across rural Saskatchewan, 
disappearing as the Canada Post office closes. It just defies logic, 
Mr. Speaker. Who’s going to be left to pay the taxes? 
Everybody’s going to be unemployed. 
 
People want an opportunity to work. They want to contribute to 
our society — people right throughout the province. 
Saskatchewan has a history of proud, industrious, hard-working 
people wanting to make things happen, wanting to make our 
province a better place. Indeed that’s what motivates us to be 
here. We want to leave Saskatchewan a better place at the end of 
the day than it was when we entered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of people losing jobs is a terrible, terrible 
thing, and it’s not just numbers. When we talk about 200 
employees at Cory potash mine, we’re talking about 200 families 
immediately affected by a loss of their major pay cheque — 200 
families. How many children going to school? How many 
children that preciously, when they’d go to school, they’d be 
talking to the child in the next seat: what’s your daddy do? Oh 
my daddy’s a miner, and they’d be very proud of it. Now the 
child in the next seat says: what’s your daddy do? The kid 
mumbles, because how do you tell a child in the seat next door, 
next to you, that your daddy is unemployed or your mommy is 
unemployed? How do you do that in a society where all too often 
we put too much importance on what a person does for a living? 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2122 
 

We judge people by their occupation, we judge them by their 
income, far too often. We should not be doing it, but the reality 
in 1988 is all too often that’s how we judge people. When we 
meet somebody: what do you do? You know, when you’re not at 
a party? And they’ll say: I’m a student, I’m a nurse, or I’m a 
doctor, or I work for the city. Oh what do you do for the city? 
Well, I work in public works, and then that generates a 
conversation. 
 
Here we have a plan to eliminate more than 1,000 jobs in 
Saskatchewan and a government that is saying, good, is saying, 
go for it. 
 
The post office, Mr. Speaker, is the heart of our small 
communities. And I want to read a quote from a Ray Morrison of 
Dominion, Nova Scotia. His quote is: 
 

It may be that the heads of Canada reside in the larger 
centres, but for sure the heart of what makes Canada work 
as a nation resides in places like this. We will continue to 
fight . . . until we win or can fight no longer. But if we lose, 
Canada will be a much weaker nation, with a broken heart, 
and that is truly very, very sad. 

 
The quote from Ray Morrison of Dominion, Nova Scotia, the 
post office to be closed in early June 1988. 
 
(1945) 
 
And just to outline some of what I have said about the Canada 
Post, the rural post offices, Canada Post corporate plans call for 
the privatization, amalgamation, or closure of all of Canada’s 
5,221 rural and small community post offices over the next 10 
years. That’s what this is all about. More than 200 have already 
been closed or privatized. In Saskatchewan alone, there’s been 
54 post offices closed and that was before the Canada Post plan 
was okayed by parliament, before it was approved by the House 
of Commons. And right now we’ve got 52 post offices in 
Saskatchewan and 49 in Ontario that are under review by Canada 
Post and there are, of course, many, many more post offices 
under review in other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we are about to vote on this particular motion, I 
urge the members opposite to consider this. Just think about the 
people at Glenburnie, Ontario and Head of St. Margarets Bay in 
Nova Scotia, amongst some of the others, and ask them about 
their experience with Canada Post’s closure and privatization, 
because the equal or better service that Canada Post proudly 
brags about, proudly talks about in its advertising, equal or better 
service usually for those folks means that the mail will get 
delivered to an outdoor green box or a super mail box while 
counter service for stamps, money orders, and so on are 
transferred from the post office to a local store. That’s if there is 
a local store that agrees to take them. If not, the service simply 
moves to the next town. And in the meantime, the postmaster’s 
job is lost for ever, and that job is lost for ever to that community. 
And that is happening all too often. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read a resolution from the 1988 
convention of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, dealing with this very issue. And as I’m reading it, 
members can be assured it was passed. It’s not

a motion that was put forward and then defeated. This motion 
was passed. It says: 
 

Whereas page 4 of appendix 2 to the Canada Post 
Corporation business plan for the period of 1986 to 1991 
states that 3,500 rural post offices will be turned over to the 
private sector, probably through franchising, and that a 
further 1,700 rural post offices will be amalgamated or 
replaced with supermailboxes, and, 
 
Whereas the franchising, amalgamating and replacing rural 
post offices by supermailboxes will result in a reduction of 
postal service to rural Canada, 
 
Be it resolved that the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association demand that the Government of Canada 
instruct the Canada Post Corporation to abandon its plans 
for franchising, amalgamating, and replacing rural post 
offices with supermailboxes, and also that the Government 
of Canada instruct Canada Post Corporation to retain the 
existing rural post office network. 

 
That resolution passed at the recent SUMA annual convention. 
 
Who would know better, Mr. Speaker, than these people about 
the effect of closure of their rural post offices? This resolution, 
Mr. Speaker, and resolutions like it have been supported . . . 
Indeed there have been resolutions passed, as the member for . . . 
I’m trying to recall the name of the constituency just outside of 
Moose Jaw, the one where we lost the by-election a number of 
years ago, and so I try not to remember the name of Thunder 
Creek. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek says, well that’s fine, SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) passed this 
resolution. What about SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities)? SARM recently passed a similar 
resolution. The United Church women recently passed a 
resolution. SUMA, as I’ve just read, passed the resolution. 
Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of Women and 60 
municipal councils in Saskatchewan have all passed these 
resolution. So, clearly, the people that are going to be affected 
are in the know. Indeed, I urge them to contact the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
You might be interested in finding out about what’s going on in 
your constituency and others regarding Canada Post. It will be 
interesting to watch that member and how he votes — whether 
he’s saying, that’s fine, let’s do away with 1,032 jobs in 
Saskatchewan. Let’s do away with that. Let’s do away with the 
postal service for rural Saskatchewan, as we have known it. It 
would be really interesting to see just what happens. 
 
There was one further resolution that I would like to read. This 
one is a resolution re the reduction of postal services in rural 
areas. The source is the Cadillac-Neville-Vanguard pastoral 
charge of the United Church of Canada. Well, the member for 
Melville isn’t here, so I guess I can relay this on. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2123 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. Member knows what I’m going 
to say, so I’ll just allow him to apologize. 
 
Mr. Threw: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, most generous, and I do, 
of course, apologize. I should not refer to a member’s absence or 
attendance in this legislature. 
 
This motion was presented to the annual congregational meeting 
of the pastoral charge. The resolution received unanimous 
support of members present, and copies were sent to the Hon. 
Michel Côté, minister responsible; the Hon. Geoff Wilson, the 
MP for Swift Current-Maple Creek; Don Lander, president of 
Canada Post Corporation, and Rural Dignity of Canada. 
 
The resolution stated, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Whereas the Canada Post Corporation has already started 
reducing services in certain rural areas, and has confirmed 
its intention to continue systematically closing an important 
number of post offices in rural areas, and 
 
Whereas our Church Council is firmly opposed to any 
reductions of the normal service to which our population is 
entitled, we do not accept, and will not accept at any time, 
that our small communities be penalized by the planned 
reductions. 
 
Therefore be it resolved that we request an immediate 
answer from Canada Post Corporation and our elected 
representatives: 
 
First of all, our council wants to be guaranteed that our 
communities will not to have to suffer any form of 
discrimination regarding the quality of our postal services. 
Canada Post must not negate its responsibilities by 
franchising or contracting out of the services which it is 
required to provide. 
 
Secondly, the rural communities which have already been 
badly affected by the reductions will soon recover the 
complete postal services to which they were accustomed. 
 
In the meantime, we are supporting “Rural Dignity of 
Canada” in order to obtain justice and satisfaction to our 
legitimate requests. 

 
Unanimous. Unanimously approved, sent on to the appropriate 
people, and what has been their response? What has been the 
response of the Conservative government federally and what will 
be the response of the Conservative government provincially? 
Federally, they want to do away with 1,032 jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan: postmasters’ jobs, and assistant postmasters’. As 
I pointed out, 83 per cent of those are women. They want to do 
away with those very good paying jobs, very needed jobs 
throughout rural Saskatchewan at a time when we need jobs for 
more people, simply put, but we also need additional income 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. There are . . . I suspect a fair 
number of those 1,032 people are helping supplant the income of 
their farm. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have talked of the need for post offices

throughout rural Saskatchewan. I have spoken of people retiring 
in their communities where they earned their income. They’ve 
retired there with the assumption that the service offered by 
Canada Post would continue as it is required by statute. And what 
we have got is a situation where the federal government is saying, 
well you know, that’s all fine and good for years ago, but no 
more. We’ve got to treat rural Saskatchewan, rural Canada, as a 
distinct, a distinct second-class citizenry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge everyone in this Legislative Assembly to 
support the motion put by the member for Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake, my colleague and seat mate, and I urge everyone to support 
this motion. I am proud and honoured to have been able to speak 
up for rural Saskatchewan and I challenge members opposite to 
do the same — speak up for rural Saskatchewan, show your 
support for this motion that is going to maintain service 
throughout Saskatchewan — would maintain more than 1,000 
jobs throughout Saskatchewan, and provide for the people of 
Canada and Saskatchewan something they have been 
accustomed to and something that they are very much entitled to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am supporting this motion and urge others to do 
so, also. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I listened a little 
bit before the supper break and again afterwards, I felt, even 
though I am not an expert on the postal service in Canada, that I 
must get to my feet and make a few remarks. And I think that all 
during those remarks from the other side, Mr. Speaker, no one 
really made a good argument that this government has not 
supported rural Saskatchewan. And of course, if we wanted to 
get into all the various programs and initiatives of this 
government, I could go on for a great length of time, but that 
would get us off the topic of rural post offices, so I won’t. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that our minister of rural affairs has 
been very forthright in his discussions with Canada Post. He 
recently met with them and I think to some degree of satisfaction, 
on some of the problems that have cropped up in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think what we’ve heard tonight is another ringing rendition of 
why the NDP do not understand rural Saskatchewan. And I only 
go back to my own childhood, Mr. Speaker, in a very small town 
in rural Saskatchewan. I think the most people that I could ever 
remember living there were 23 when I was going to school in a 
one-room schoolhouse. And I would hate it to be said of Harry 
and Cora Ulf who ran the store — and he was the elevator agent 
— that they weren’t up to providing service to the people of the 
Baildon community because they weren’t a unionized employee, 
or they were substandard as compared to the service that they 
gave the people in my community versus the people in the city 
of Moose Jaw who had a big, fancy post office. 
 
And I think it says something about the members opposite when 
they would make that kind of comparison about people like Harry 
and Cora Ulf in Baildon because they provided excellent service 
to the people in my 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2124 
 

community. As a matter of fact, that small community, very close 
to Moose Jaw, probably survived a lot longer as a community 
because that post office was in the store than if that store had not 
been there and we had simply had a Canada Post building. 
 
And I think all across rural Saskatchewan, that same scenario has 
been the case. It’s been real people with some initiative who took 
the post office upon themselves to integrate as part of their 
business and as part of their family. And you know, in that family 
there was five people involved with that store and post office. It 
wasn’t just one. There was five people because somebody was 
behind the counter in the post office and somebody was behind 
the counter in that rural store. And because they showed a little 
initiative and were willing to take that on and provide service 
from 7 o’clock in the morning till 9 or 10 at night for the people 
of that community, I think those kind of people should be 
congratulated. 
 
And no, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t unionized and they weren’t 
paid $12.44 and hour, but they were a very integral part of our 
community for a long time. And I think if someone else had come 
along and taken that over, rather then them selling out, we might 
still have a post office today because the people in my 
community would far sooner have gone there than strictly to a 
post office, because there was a sense of community in that store 
besides the post office. 
 
(2000) 
 
I haven’t heard anyone from Canada Post or anywhere else in 
government, either provincially or federally, say anything about 
closing all of the post offices in rural Saskatchewan. I mean that’s 
an absolute ludicrous statement to make. There are many places, 
particularly in the larger towns where there’s a very large 
investment already, that that would never happen and to argue 
otherwise would be just foolish. 
 
If in some of our smaller centres it is decided that the post office 
should be in a business, whether it be a garage, an implement 
dealer, a community association, a craft shop . . .There’s all kinds 
of enterprises out there in rural Saskatchewan, that if putting that 
post office in there is going to help maintain that town, because I 
maintain, Mr. Speaker, that if people are going to a dual-purpose 
location it’ll mean more to the community than simply walking 
into a post office that’s open from 9 to 5. People in my 
community did it for a long time and enjoyed it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the resolve of this government has been there 
for rural post office . . . I mean the member from Arm River was 
front and centre with the whole issue of Aylesbury. And I’m sure, 
as Canada Post has said, that there will be a post office back in 
Aylesbury — as rightly there should be — but it perhaps will be 
in private hands. I think the people of Aylesbury can thank their 
MLA for getting up and fighting for their community, and also 
their federal MP who also fought for that community. And if that 
post office ends up in the store or in the garage, I don’t see where 
it takes away from the service of that community because those 
people who provide that service are every bit as good as someone 
who is in a unionized post office.

It really bothers me, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite 
use these scare tactics, and we see it so many times with all topics 
in this Assembly. All 1,200 or whatever are going to be fired 
immediately — they’re all women over the age of 40 or whatever 
— and they’re all going to be fired, and they’re all going to be 
out in the street. And that’s the kind of sensationalism, the kind 
of, if you will, Mr. Speaker, garbage that the members opposite 
fee on. 
 
I wonder what the people in Canada, particularly rural Canada, 
really want, and I think it’s service. They want service, and I 
don’t really think they care one way or another how that service 
is provided. I know one thing, Mr. Speaker: they’re sick and tired 
of postal strikes. It’s a common topic of conversation out there 
that every time Christmas rolls around, we’re going to have 
another postal strike. 
 
And I firmly believe that people, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, are sick to death of Jean-Claude Parrot and some 
others holding the Canadian population up to ransom every 
Christmas. What the people out there want is service. They want 
the service in their community, and I firmly believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that they will accept private initiative in the postal service or they 
will accept public initiative, but what they want is service. That’s 
the bottom line. 
 
When someone in rural Saskatchewan mails a letter, they want to 
know, Mr. Speaker, that maybe two or three days down the road 
it’s going to get where it’s supposed to go — not 8, 9, or 10, as 
we have in the present system right now, so it’s not perfect. And 
if a little bit of initiative out there in rural Saskatchewan makes 
sure that my letter gets to where it’s going in two or three days, I 
don’t think anybody’s going to knock it. 
 
Because what people want is service, and that’s what the 
Canadian postal system in rural Saskatchewan was developed for 
in the first place. It wasn’t a job creation project; it wasn’t as a 
builder of buildings in every town in rural Saskatchewan; it was 
to provide service to people at the lowest cost possible. 
 
I think this government has shown that resolve in all manner of 
things in dealing with rural Saskatchewan. And I don’t know 
where the members opposite get off in saying that we on this side 
of the House are in favour of destroying the postal system in rural 
Saskatchewan. That’s ludicrous — absolutely ludicrous. 
 
We don’t object to a little initiative on the behalf of individuals, 
and some of us don’t believe that it will destroy our towns if the 
individual is running the post office rather that Canada Post. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, before I finish up on this topic, that this 
government has stood four-square in the last six years behind 
rural Saskatchewan. We stood in this legislature and voted to a 
person on the postal question brought up by the members 
opposite. We have done our utmost for every community in this 
province that has had a problem with Canada Post, and I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that the meeting, which the minister of rural affairs 
had with 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2125 
 

Canada Post two weeks ago, will bear good fruit for rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that if we’re talking about service to 
rural Saskatchewan, we’re all on the same side. If we’re talking 
about protecting Jean-Claude Parrot and his outfit, then probably 
we’ve got a difference of opinion, because I’m not sure that that 
is what is good for rural Saskatchewan. And I think the members 
opposite, instead of getting their chain jerked all the time by 
union leaders in eastern Canada, should honestly go out into rural 
Saskatchewan, where a lot of us grew up and still live, and talk 
to people and ask them: is it service you want, or is it maybe 
somebody in a fancy building? And I’ll place my be on service 
every time, no matter how it’s delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn 
debate on this particular motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Resolution No. 9 – Addressing the Needs of Rural Families 

 
Mr. Anguish: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would introduce a 
motion at the end of my remarks, and I will read that motion into 
the record now that I will be moving when I have concluded my 
remarks: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government of Saskatchewan 
to reverse its decisions to cut back health and other services 
to rural families; and further, that this Assembly urge the 
government to implement new programs that specifically 
assist farm families in economic and social distress. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people in the province of Saskatchewan have 
always had a great dream. They had a vision of what they wanted 
their province to be, and they wanted to work in co-operation 
with other people within the province and right throughout 
Canada and throughout the world. But in the co-operative spirit, 
the people in the province built many, many programs and 
institutions that served the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan well for a number of years. 
 
Look back to the period prior to 1944, from when Saskatchewan 
became a province, we relied almost totally on the fur trade and 
on agriculture, and we weren’t a very diverse area. We were 
certainly a virgin territory that had been previously inhabited by 
Indian people, originally, and then by people coming out into the 
fur trade, and then the migration of farmers into the farming areas 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it started out that there was a dream, Mr. Speaker, and that 
dream was one of getting wealth from a new land. And as the 
area became more populated and various types of people came to 
the province of Saskatchewan, they had another dream. That 
dream was to build programs that would serve people even 
though that we were a very small population spread over a large 
geographic area.

And people spoke loudly in 1944 when they elected a CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government under the 
premiership of Tommy Douglas, and at that time the dream came 
into place because people did not have access to adequate health 
care, and those that did have access to health care, quite often 
could not afford to get the services that they required for 
themselves and for their families and for their friends. And it was 
a totally user-pay system, although many of the medical doctors, 
the physicians that were in the province at that point in time, 
especially those in rural areas, sometimes showed their 
benevolence by taking meals and taking almost a barter system 
to pay for their services because they knew in many of the areas 
that they did not have the money to pay for the services that were 
required. 
 
I think every pioneer family in the province of Saskatchewan has 
some example of a doctor that they could find to treat their family 
in a very understanding way — understanding that the doctor 
would know that the family might not have money to pay for the 
services, but nevertheless provided those services. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that every pioneer family in Saskatchewan 
would also have a story of being in dire need of medical treatment 
and running into a physician who would not perform the needed 
procedures or to provide the medication because the family did 
not have the money, or the individual did not have the money to, 
in fact, pay the doctor for the services that they had required. 
 
So in 1944 this — with the poor economic standing of the 
province — drove people in large numbers to the polls, not only 
here in Saskatchewan, but overseas as well, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
aware that the Second World War was going on at that point in 
time. People came in record numbers to vote for the CCF and 
elected a very heavy majority government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some strange things started to happen once the CCF government 
was elected, Mr. Speaker, strange in the sense that they had not 
happened before in the province of Saskatchewan, our young 
province. And that was that budgets were starting to be balanced 
so that your revenue would equal your expenditures, and so that 
the increased debt that the former governments had placed on the 
taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan was not something 
that was an acceptable practice. 
 
For the first time in the history of our province there was a thrust 
by the government and the people in the province to accept a 
mixed economy. And by mixed economy, what we mean is that 
there was a three-pillar system in which our economic system 
revolved around. First was one of public ownership; the second 
was one of co-operative movements; and the third was the private 
sector, recognizing how important the private sector has been, is 
now, and always will be in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of the co-operatives many people got together, 
especially in dealings with agriculture, the formation of the wheat 
pools that I acknowledge it started before 1944, but were then 
complimented after 1944 by a government that believed in a 
co-operative approach. And that co-operative approach was 
necessary because the agricultural people, the farmers, were tired 
of being taken 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2126 
 

advantage of by the grain exchange and wanted a fair return 
through their own marketing system, so that they could acquire a 
decent living off of their toils and their labours on the land to 
grow food, not only for themselves and other people in the 
province, but for people throughout the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also saw electrification come into the province 
of Saskatchewan, rural electrification. I remember one time 
doing some work for the member from Regina North East in the 
Humboldt constituency when he represented that constituency. 
 
An elderly gentlemen at Watrous by the name of Mr. Allen, 
described to me his experiences of trying to convince the 
government that they should put electricity into the rural areas of 
Saskatchewan. And his response that he had received from the 
previous administration before the CCF came along was that he 
should buy a wind generator through the supply catalogue that 
had been mailed out to his farm, and that it was unrealistic for 
there to be electrification put into rural areas of Saskatchewan 
because of the vast areas, the sparse population, and the great cost 
that it would be on the taxpayers to in fact put electricity into 
rural areas. 
 
(2015) 
 
And, of course, Mr. Speaker, we know that after 1944 there was 
a great movement for electrification of rural areas, and people 
were appreciative that their way of life in rural Saskatchewan was 
coming closer and closer to the way of life that people had in the 
urban centres — in our cities and in our towns — that we often 
had taken for granted, those that lived in the urban centres. And 
life was becoming much easier in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of revenue sharing, a number of those things were not 
perfected until later years. 
 
The many services that came into rural Saskatchewan developed. 
It was an evolving process whereby more and more services were 
provided to rural Saskatchewan, and people wanted to remain 
living in the rural part of the province because they liked the 
life-style. They felt they had some attachment to the land and that 
they felt different. They felt a part of being in rural 
Saskatchewan, as opposed to those people that had chosen to live 
in urban centres where the identity of the individual was less. 
You sometimes don’t know the next door neighbour, as opposed 
to rural areas where you know your entire community. And it’s a 
caring, sharing society where people assist each other in many, 
many ways that I wouldn’t even try to go into answering or listing 
here this evening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And during those years — from 1944 until the late 1970s, Mr. 
Speaker — were, I would say, the best years in agriculture that 
we’ve ever experienced. Prices during some of that time were 
good. The farming operation became much more mechanized. 
The services were there to make life easier and not a hardship to 
live in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know that there are some factors that are beyond the

control of any government. They are beyond the control of 
individuals. They are factors that come into the market-place. 
They are factors that are geographic. There are factors that are 
climatic. But there are many things that governments can do, Mr. 
Speaker, to affect people living in rural areas. 
 
One of the things that we on this side of the House have always 
believed in, Mr. Speaker, is that the rural way of life in 
Saskatchewan is well worth preserving — that that way of life 
should be preserved. It’s a way of life that’s worth keeping, and 
it’s a way of life that people appreciate and want to continue 
living. 
 
However, we do find, Mr. Speaker, that more and more people 
are leaving rural Saskatchewan, not by their own choosing, but 
they are leaving rural Saskatchewan because of declining 
services that are there. They are leaving rural Saskatchewan for 
the instances where farms have gone into bankruptcy. And the 
statistics do bear it out, that we find in our province today there 
are fewer and fewer farmers, and those that are there are farming 
larger and larger tracts of land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of this government coming into place in 
1982, there has been a lack of emphasis or, I should say, more 
accurately, a change of emphasis on how rural Saskatchewan is 
viewed. I know that the Premier and part-time Agriculture 
minister in the province is on record, prior to his entry into 
politics, saying that there were a good portion of Saskatchewan 
farmers that were inefficient and should be off the land to allow 
those more efficient farmers to take over and become more 
productive. And I don’t know how that fits in now with what the 
Premier and part-time Minister of Agriculture is saying. But he 
is not saying anything to dispel what he had put out prior to him 
entering the political arena back in the days when he was a 
agricultural economist. And I think looking at it from a very 
narrow scope, one of an agricultural economist and not someone 
who had a true appreciation for living and surviving in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And today we see a government that promotes the way of 
agri-business, bigger and bigger farms with fewer and fewer 
farmers, and that might be all right if that’s part of the philosophy 
or the ideology of the government of the current day. But I want 
to be very clear on record, Mr. Speaker, that we are opposed to 
that thrust. We want to see rural Saskatchewan remain a vibrant 
and active part of Saskatchewan. And rather than seeing the 
depopulation of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we want to see 
a repopulation of rural Saskatchewan, and with that repopulation, 
a revitalization of the rural area of our province. 
 
We look at things like the motion that was introduced earlier this 
evening from the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, where 
we want the postal services in rural Saskatchewan to be 
maintained and so that there is a great presence in the rural 
communities that centres, to some degree, around the post office. 
Many other things have happened. We saw this government of 
the day, under the Premier, sell out the Crow rate. No protection 
for the Crow rate; no protection for rural branch lines – most 
economic way of moving grain in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. A rebuilding and 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2127 
 

revitalization is certainly more important than the twisted 
policies that the government is placing on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in current years alone, I would want to run 
through some of the things that this government has done. 
There’s a loss of some $24 million from the farmers’ oil royalty 
refund program — $24 million dollars they took out of the hands 
of people in rural Saskatchewan; just one program cut. 
 
They cancelled the travel grants and clinic operating grants for 
veterinarians. Last year the province allocated some $317,000 for 
travel and granted an additional $130,000 for clinic operations. 
Now the member from Weyburn, who’s a veterinarian, you 
would think would speak on behalf of rural Saskatchewan, but he 
seems to be so consumed by the changes he’s making to the 
education system that he’s forgotten how important it is, if you 
have a farming operation, that you have access for your livestock 
to a veterinarian to be able to come to your farm or to have that 
clinic close at hand so you can have your livestock dealt with by 
qualified people in the rural areas. 
 
In terms of rural municipalities, they’re receiving 1 per cent less 
in revenue sharing than last year, Mr. Speaker. And we know the 
pressures that R.M.s are under at the present time in terms of the 
roads, in terms of their administration of local programs — the 
autonomy that they should have. And what the government is 
really doing by cutting back funding under revenue sharing to 
municipalities, is that because of the economic mess that this 
government has created by perpetual deficit financing year after 
year, they’re putting that responsibility onto local governments 
to raise additional moneys to allow the provincial government off 
the hook. And the provincial government is the one who is 
responsible for the debt that we have. The Minister of Finance 
and the Executive Council have driven this province into a 
position that we’re about $4 billion in debt at the current time, 
spending, I think it’s somewhere in the area of a million dollars 
a day that we pay in interest, Mr. Speaker. And they put this 
blame back on others. They say it’s world economic conditions, 
things beyond their control, which is not accurate; it’s contrary 
to the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1982, when this government took over, the agricultural scene 
was not better but certainly no worse than it was in the late 1970s 
and the early 1980s. You look at oil prices. When this 
government took over, oil prices hit the highest they’ve been at 
any time in history, and they still ran deficit budgets. They ran 
these deficit budgets, not keeping in tune with their predictions. 
They predicted deficit budgets but when the public accounts were 
tallied up at the end of the fiscal year we found that their deficits 
ran far above over what they had predicted. 
 
Lack of planning, Mr. Speaker. You can’t run a government by 
reacting to public opinion polls all the time. Every time the public 
opinion polls flinch, this government wants to throw it another 
million or another billion dollars in some direction without any 
adequate planning as to how that money will be repaid, how 
much of that share is going to be on the back of the average

taxpayer, or whether or not the money is doing any good. 
 
If money was put into a program that had long- or short-term 
benefit to the target group, then I think people could accept that. 
But when there is no plan at all in place, I think people become a 
little frustrated with this incompetent management that we’ve 
seen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has also eliminated some $120,000 
used by R.M.s for perennial weed control, and they’re 
eliminating some $365,000 in the rat control program. And I 
know that the Premier said at the SARM convention that that 
program would not be eliminated. But I would ask the members 
opposite, how much money is in the rat control program this 
year? Are you providing more cats in rural Saskatchewan, or is 
there actually some money there for the rat control program in 
the province so that it can be an organized and planned program 
and not a wild cat policy or a dog biting policy or some other 
policy that the government gives very little thought to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve also . . . They’re cancelling grants 
supporting soil and feed testing at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Last year the province supplied some $80,000 for 
soil testing and another $200,000 for feed testing. Seems to me 
that if we’re an agricultural province, it makes some sense to 
have programs that complement agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have great research facilities that are 
sometimes taxed to the limits at the university. But when you cut 
funding for testing programs that deal directly with agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s very ill-founded and bad planning 
on the part of the government — a very short-sighted reaction to 
a situation that has been created by a lack of planning and huge, 
massive deficit budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial funding for agriculture fairs and 
exhibitions will be phased out over the next four years. And we 
know very well that you’re helping to end, in some cases, more 
than 100 years of history for local Saskatchewan fairs. There are 
some 63 community agricultural societies in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ve been eligible for matching grants of about 
$5,000 a year. And there are some 12 regional exhibitions which 
have been eligible for matching grants of up to $10,000. The 
grants were used, of course, as you know, for the operation of 
fairs and the maintenance of facilities. 
 
Now this doesn’t bear any reflection on the amount of money that 
the fair boards and agricultural societies and exhibition boards 
require for their annual budgets but it was certainly something 
that the boards counted on every year to fund the operations that 
they go through, the fairs that they put on to bring together the 
people from urban and rural Saskatchewan to have an 
appreciation of our rural way of life and the importance of 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. And of course the 
fair boards and agricultural societies were doing something that’s 
completely contrary to what the government does, because every 
time the government has a member get up to speak, they try and 
drive the wedge between people living in rural and people living 
in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
They talk about union busting versus the farmers and how the 
union cause all the problems for the farmers. Mr. Speaker, they 
continually drive that wedge between 



 
June 14, 1988 

2128 
 

working people, agricultural people, business people. Anybody 
in our society they feel they can divide and conquer, they 
continue with that type of a policy. And we think it’s a little 
destructive in the province of Saskatchewan to be continuing 
with that, and we don’t think it will work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on here. I want to continue on with this 
for some time. Funding for the 4-H regional programs will be 
dropped 25 per cent each year until it’s eliminated in the year 
1990-1991, in that particular fiscal year. Well I wonder, what did 
the 4-H do to hurt the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They must have done something because the 
government now wants to cut their funding out, to an 
organization that’s been very important in rural Saskatchewan 
for young people who want to have some understanding, who get 
more involved in an organized way, Mr. Speaker, for the rural 
way of life in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
the cuts to the 4-H regional program amounts to some $138,000 
in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s not even one-tenth of 
one day’s interest that this government has run up in the six years 
or so that they’ve been the pirates in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what about the cuts to the Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute? This year they are already struggling, Mr. 
Speaker, to deal with the 25 per cent reduction that Alberta had 
put into the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, and if 
you’re not aware, the funding for the institute is shared by the 
three prairie provinces, the province of Manitoba, the province 
of Saskatchewan, and the province of Alberta. And what did the 
province of Saskatchewan do to protest the reduction from 
Alberta, their 25 per cent reduction to the machinery institute? 
Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. The facility is located in this 
province, centrally located in the town of Humboldt, just on the 
outskirts of the town. And what was their response? It wasn’t to 
protest Alberta cutting the funding by 25 per cent. The 
government of the day here responded by cutting their budget by 
10 per cent to the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute. And 
it makes it very difficult to plan, Mr. Speaker; it inhibits the work 
that the agricultural institute or the machinery institute do for 
rural people and farmers in the three prairie provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of the devastating cuts that the 
Conservative government has put forward since they’ve been in 
office. They’ve taken and they’ve made the agricultural sector, 
where farmers used to farm the land, they’ve changed the 
mentality of that, Mr. Speaker. What this government has been 
forcing farmers to do over the past few years is to farm 
government programs. You can’t blame the farmers for this, Mr. 
Speaker. The blame has to rest squarely on the shoulders of the 
government. The government has to accept the responsibility of 
forcing farmers to farm government programs; they want to farm 
their farms so that they can get a return from the farms that’s 
adequate to pay their bills and feed their families.

This is especially true for those people who are heavily burdened 
with debt in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Farmers that are 
burdened with debt cannot make ends meet these days; they just 
can’t make it happen. So I think that the government has to take 
action, not only for farmers but people living in rural 
Saskatchewan, if they want to continue to live there. And it’s not 
the type of things, Mr. Speaker, that we want to see where they 
devastate health care for people in rural areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in the province by this time knows that 
there were changes to the prescription drug plan in the province, 
where people who rely on prescribed medications, medications, 
prescribed by physicians, that they can’t afford, they phone their 
MLAs — and I know the Minister of Health has had a number of 
inquiries come to his office. But what’s the government’s 
response? They’re not understanding of the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. Maybe they’re all wealthy enough and their parents and 
grandparents are all wealthy enough to afford the great cost 
increases in prescription drugs. 
 
Their response is that they had to do it — I heard the Premier say 
this one day in the legislature — they had to do it because there’s 
too many prescription drugs being used illegally on the streets of 
Saskatchewan. What an insane comment for the Premier of the 
province to make, Mr. Speaker. Seniors in this province are not 
drug abusers. 
 
In the report that just came down on the prescription drug plan, 
Mr. Speaker, in the year where it was still operating so that 
people could take their $5 — less than $5, you can round it off to 
$5; you could take your $5 and go and get their prescription drugs 
— Mr. Speaker, the people that utilize that program the most are 
our senior citizens in the province. Mr. Speaker, about 13 per cent 
of the Saskatchewan population is 65 years of age and over, and 
do you know that that segment of our population, Mr. Speaker, 
utilize over a third of the entire prescriptions in the drug plan; 
over 33 per cent is used by seniors in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Premier of this province is saying that they can’t have 
that plan, that program any more because they’re abusing drugs. 
 
That’s absolutely correct. The member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland says they’re abusing seniors, and that’s exactly what 
this government is doing. In the long run I think they’ll pay for 
it, Mr. Speaker, but that remains to be seen come next election 
time. 
 
Now the other example of a devastating cut to rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the dental plan. We had in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, a school-based dental program for 
children that was the best anywhere in North America and 
possibly the best anywhere in the world. That program has been 
completely obliterated by this government. The government 
gives all kinds of rationale as to why they did it, but the fact 
remains is that they changed the program so fewer people have 
access to dental care in the province of Saskatchewan. Fewer 
communities have dental clinics than under the program, Mr. 
Speaker. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2129 
 

On this side of the House our leader, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, has pledged that under a New Democrat government 
these programs will be reinstated — the prescription drug plan 
and the school-based children’s dental program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are asking for this. In 
fact, the Premier of this province has acknowledged, “On Friday, 
November 13, 1987, Premier Grant Devine announced his 
government had made a mistake . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The members are not to use names of 
other members in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I was quoting from an 
article here. I’ll just read the quote to you. “On Friday, November 
12, Premier (beep, beep) announced his government had made a 
mistake.” That’s the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 
and he was referring to the school-based children’s dental 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they’ve acknowledged they’ve made a mistake in the drug 
plan. They’ve acknowledged they made a mistake in the dental 
plan. What are they going to do about it? Well first off, in the 
drug plan, they’re going to have rapid payment envelopes where 
your money comes back a lot quicker. I understand now they’re 
going to have a plastic card system so that everybody in the 
province, I guess, will get a plastic card. We don’t know all the 
details on that plan yet. And I guess when you go into the drug 
store or the hospital, eventually, or the dentist, I imagine you’ll 
shove your card through a computer and that’ll dictate to you 
whether or not your services will be paid for and so that you can 
receive the medical treatment that’s necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost all children in the province still qualify for 
some dental care as they did under the old plan, but it’s the 
accessibility that’s been devastating for rural areas, and the 
limitation on the number of visits that can be made to a dentist. 
 
I know in our own family, Mr. Speaker, we have three children 
that qualify under the plan. Two of the children have not been to 
a dentist since the plan was changed because it wasn’t necessary 
for them to go; the third child has been to the dentist to receive 
some service, and now we’re informed that they can only make 
that one visit per year — once per year, Mr. Speaker. When our 
three children were under the school-based children’s dental 
program, they received visits on the basis of need. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not true, what you’re telling us. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The Minister of Health says what I said is not 
true. I challenge the minister, Mr. Speaker, to check with the 
dentists in North Battleford. Our three children have been 
enrolled in the program, the new revamped program of the 
Conservatives. Our one daughter — Ashala is her name, Mr. 
Minister; you can check this out. She made one visit to the 
dentist; now we’re informed that she has to make another visit to 
the dentist. There will be a charge to the family. Now that’s 
accurate. Now that’s accurate, Mr. Minister, so now who is 
saying things that

are contrary to the facts? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You are. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — That’s not correct, and I ask the minister to 
check that out. 
 
They don’t have any answers; it changes from time to time, Mr. 
Speaker. But we do know that we can likely afford to have our 
daughter Ashala go back to the dentist again if she requires 
further dental work to be done this year. But I know many people 
in the province that can’t afford to have that done. People living 
in rural areas can’t always bring their children in the distance that 
they have to come. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — They’re asking why. Why? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The member from Shaunavon — let’s see. 
Let’s see the Shaunavon constituency — what have we got out 
there in Shaunavon? Oh yes, Shaunavon. Shaunavon — there 
were school-based clinics in nine communities; now there is a 
dental practice in one community in the Shaunavon constituency. 
That’s the answer for the member from Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s because you’ve got a reduction of almost 90 per cent in the 
dental services in the Shaunavon constituency. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And he supports that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — That’s fact, Mr. Speaker, and the member from 
Shaunavon supports that. 
 
We should maybe review some of the other communities, Mr. 
Speaker, that have been devastated by the changes to the 
school-based dental program. Arm River constituency — 
children’s dental care was available in school-based clinics in 12 
communities under the old plan. It is available in private dental 
practice in two communities under the new plan — from 12 to 
two. Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, there were school-based clinics in 
nine communities; now there is a dental practice in one 
community. I guess the dentist is still travelling to Gravelbourg 
— hasn’t arrived there yet. I asked the question in the legislature, 
must be a month ago now, and the dentist was on the road, and 
everything had been set up. He must have got stuck in Old Wives 
Lake as he was crossing the road there. 
 
Bengough-Milestone, the member from Bengough-Milestone, in 
your riding there were school-based clinics in 15 communities; 
now there’s a dental practice in one community — 15:1, good 
ratio. Biggar. Biggar, the member from Biggar . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes. There were school-based clinics in nine 
communities; now there are dental practices in two communities. 
Canora. Canora constituency, there were school clinics in 11 
communities; now there are dental practices in two communities, 
Mr. Speaker. Cut Knife-Lloydminster — the member with the 
report card — there were school-based clinics in 10 
communities; now there is a dental practice in one community. 
Estevan —  
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2130 
 

the riding of the Premier and part time Minister of Agriculture — 
there were school-based dental clinics in seven communities; 
now there is a dental practice in one community. Indian 
Head-Wolseley, there were school-based clinics in 12 
communities; now there are dental practices in four communities. 
Well Indian Head-Wolseley didn’t do bad. It did a lot better than 
the average constituency. This must be intervention by the 
member, the minister of piratization. 
 
Kelsey-Tisdale, there were school-based clinics in nine 
communities; now there are dental practices in three 
communities. That’s not bad. The Minister of Rural 
Development must have done his work. There’s only — what is 
that — a 60 per cent reduction? 
 
(2045) 
 
Kelvington-Wadena, Kelvington-Wadena. There he is. I think 
he’s the Legislative secretary to the Minister of Agriculture. We 
look forward to you being appointed as Minister of Agriculture 
as soon as the part time guy is done. Kelvington-Wadena, there 
were school-based clinics in nine communities; now there are 
dental practices in three communities. 
 
In Kindersley — there’s another cabinet seat — there were 
school-based clinics in seven communities; now there are dental 
practices in two communities. Kinistino, there were school-based 
clinics in 16 communities; now there is no dental practice in any 
community. The member from Kinistino should be ashamed of 
that. I don’t know how he answers questions to his constituents 
when they don’t have any dental clinics in the constituency. 
 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, there were school-based clinics in 
14 communities; now there are dental practices in nine 
communities, as one dentist has seven satellite practices. So, 
although nine communities are served, seven of them are 
satellites, where — how often do they have someone come 
around? Is it once a month, once every two weeks? Maple Creek, 
there were school-based clinics in eight communities; now there 
is a dental practice in three communities — better than average, 
but we have to appreciate that that’s the riding of the Minister of 
Health, Mr. Speaker. Melfort, there were school-based clinics in 
six communities; now there is one dental practice in one 
community. 
 
Melville, there were school-based clinics in nine communities; 
now there are dental practices in two communities. Moosomin, 
there were school-based clinics in eight communities; now there 
are dental practices in three communities — how about that, 
member for Moosomin? Morse, there were school-based clinics 
in six communities; now there is no dental practice in any 
community in the Morse constituency. Nipawin, there were 
school-based clinics in eight communities; now there is a dental 
practice in one community — way to go, member from Nipawin. 
Pelly constituency, there were school-based clinics in four 
communities; now there is a dental practice in one community. 
That’s only a reduction of 75 per cent, Mr. Speaker.

Prince Albert-Duck Lake, there were school-based clinics in 
three communities; now there is a dental practice in one 
community. Qu’Appelle-Lumsden — Minister of Finance — 
there were school-based clinics in 10 communities; now there is 
a dental practice in one community. Quill Lakes, there were 
school-based clinics in 11 communities; now there are dental 
practices in three communities. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What a record! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Shameful. Redberry, there were school-based 
clinics in 10 communities; now there is a dental practice in one 
community. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read that again. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — That was the Redberry constituency. I don’t 
want to repeat anything, Mr. Speaker, because I have a list that I 
want to go through here. 
 
Now Rosetown-Elrose, there were school-based clinics in eight 
communities; now there is a dental practice in one community. 
Rosthern — the member from Rosthern — there were 
school-based clinics in 11 communities; now there are dental 
practices in three communities. Saltcoats, there were 
school-based clinics in nine communities. Shaunavon, there were 
school-based clinics in nine communities; now there is a dental 
practice in one community. 
 
Oh. The member from Shaunavon holds up the two-fingered 
salute . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There was one announced 
today? The program is really moving. I will adjust that figure, 
Mr. Speaker, so that we’re with the greatest deal of accuracy. 
Now I was wondering if the member could motion to us what 
community that went into . . . He doesn’t know. Let the record 
show he doesn’t know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Shellbrook-Torch River: there were school-based clinics in nine 
communities; now there is a dental practice in one community, 
Mr. Speaker. Souris-Cannington, Deputy Premier, the Deputy 
Premier comes from there: there were school-based clinics in 11 
communities; now there are dental practices in 3 communities. 
Thunder Creek, there were school based clinics in 10 
communities; now there is no dental practice in any community 
in the Thunder Creek constituency. The member from Thunder 
Creek, Mr. Speaker, is up here tonight saying how much he had 
done for rural Saskatchewan. I can see he must have spent a lot 
of time helping rural dental clinics out, Mr. Speaker. The 
Turtleford constituency, there were school-based clinics in 10 
communities. Now that’s the best record of any constituency in 
the province, Mr. Speaker, held by a Conservative member — 
only a 50 per cent reduction in that amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can look now at the — where are we? — the 
Weyburn constituency. There were school-based clinics in 5 
communities; now there are dental practices in 1 community, Mr. 
Speaker. Wilkie constituency, 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2131 
 

Wilkie constituency, there were school-based clinics in 8 
communities; now there are dental practices in – does the 
member know? – three communities, Mr. Speaker, 3 
communities. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s 4. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — He says four. Could you name the fourth one? 
I’d like to amend the record to make sure it’s accurate . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Let the record show the member 
doesn’t know how many clinics there are in his constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What a group. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What a group. And, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
great deal of inaccuracies in what is said about what happened to 
people that were in the program. There are some 411 workers that 
worked in rural communities, had wages that went into rural 
communities, had housing, shopped at stores, used post offices 
— 411 people that are no longer employed there, Mr. Speaker. 
And when one Elaine Bouvier phoned her MLA to criticize the 
government’s action . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where was that at? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, where was that at? She phoned her MLA 
— PC Shaunavon constituency — to criticize the government’s 
action. Know what he told her, Mr. Speaker? You know what he 
said? He told her to apply for welfare. No wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
the welfare rolls in the province of Saskatchewan are rising so 
rapidly. 
 
Their solution is — when they devastate a program — is to have 
all the people go and apply for welfare if they took the direction 
of the member from Shaunavon. Hard to believe that that would 
be a recommendation coming from an elected member of this 
legislature; hard to believe that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that we on this side of the House 
believe in rural Saskatchewan. We believe in the way of life, we 
believe in the people that live in rural Saskatchewan, and we 
believe that the way of life there is worth preserving. It’s worth 
revitalizing rural Saskatchewan so people can go back onto the 
farms and farm their land. They can go back to their communities 
and work in their jobs. They can go back and build businesses in 
rural communities centred around elevators and post offices and 
essential services such as schools and churches in rural 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to put forward the following 
motion. I move, second by the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to reverse its decisions to cut back health and other services 
to rural families; and further, that this Assembly urge the 
government to implement new programs that specifically 
assist farm families in economic and social distress. 

 
I do so move, seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake, Mr. Speaker.

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m, 
pleased to enter this debate and, as well, to second this motion 
put forth by the member from The Battlefords. And as I listened 
to his address to this House tonight, it told me clearly that from 
one corner of this province to another people are feeling betrayed 
and have good reason to feel betrayed by this government led by 
our Premier. This government that has become so insensitive and 
so out of touch and so out of tune with not only urban 
Saskatchewan but now even rural Saskatchewan, what was their 
electoral base. 
 
This weekend, Mr. Speaker, I had the occasion to talk to a family 
member, and he indicated to me that although he comes from a 
PC riding, a riding held by the member from Shaunavon, that the 
people in his area are feeling the pressure from an insensitive and 
an uncaring government. And this family member talked to me 
about the incompetence of this administration, but he also talked 
about the devastation of rural Saskatchewan and the families who 
live in that area. And he indicated to me that his feeling was, and 
the feeling of people that he talked with right from Estevan 
through to Gravelbourg, through the Lafleche area, through 
Shaunavon, that the people in those areas are concerned about 
two areas. And if there are two issues that are going to defeat this 
government in Saskatchewan, and he’s convinced firmly that 
they are, it’s the decimation of the drug prescription plan and of 
the school-based children’s dental program. 
 
And as my colleague from The Battlefords went through the list 
of clinics, dental clinics that used to be in this province, and when 
I hear the comments from members on the other side who 
indicate that they feel the program is intact, it’s in place, and that 
the children are getting the service that they require, it just 
confirmed that family member’s indication and feelings that 
these people are out of touch and that they no longer care. 
 
And when I look at the riding that my family came from, from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I look at the fact that there are . . . 
there were nine communities served by that program and now 
only one, and when I listened to the questions from the member 
from The Battlefords questioning as to when Gravelbourg is 
going to have dental service in their community, it brought me 
back to years back when I used to go there to get my teeth 
repaired as a kid. And it reminded me of the hours I spent in that 
dental chair wishing that I would be anywhere but, but it 
reminded me that there was a dentist at that time. And it reminded 
me that the children of the generation after me had the luxury and 
the opportunity to be served by a dental therapist that they didn’t 
fear, a person that they respected, a person now unemployed by 
this government. And I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad commentary 
on a group of 30-some MLAs who purport to represent and care 
about the people of this province. 
 
And I say that this motion before us today is just so much more 
appropriate even than it would have been a year ago because 
what I say is that the true Tory colours are coming through in this 
session and in the last session of this administration. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2132 
 

Mr. Speaker, never before in the history of this province, perhaps 
with the exception of the Ross Thatcher years, have so many 
people been hurt, and so many people, so many families been 
torn apart by such a small group of uncaring politicians. Never 
before in the history of this province have urban and rural 
families suffered the number of breakups, and never before have 
so many families lost family members to suicides because of the 
stress that they could no longer take; a pressure, I suggest, 
unparalleled, with the exception of the Liberal Thatcher years. 
 
I want to look at some of the programs that they promised to . . . 
that would alleviate some of this social distress and some of this 
economic disharmony. 
 
(2100) 
 
In 1985 the Premier of this province promised the people of rural 
Saskatchewan, along with his federal cohort Mr. Wise, from 
Ottawa, that there was going to be a drought program. There was 
going to be a flood program. There was going to be a program to 
eliminate pestilence in the province; the rural people were 
expecting that there would be relief from insects. 
 
But I tell you what this government has done. This government 
in ’85 made a promise — made a commitment — and in ’88 a 
program that could have and that should have alleviated those 
problems, in ’88, in the winter, when there’s no snow and the 
farmers know that they’re going to be facing dry conditions in 
the spring — where’s the program Oh, well it’s not there yet. And 
later on in the spring when they’re preparing to seed and there’s 
no rain come, where is this long-term planning, where is this 
long-term program? Oh, well it’s not there yet. 
 
And I want to say that the people of rural Saskatchewan are 
disappointed in this government. There’s a feeling of mistrust 
and a feeling of total uneasiness. And I want to say that the 
government will pay for this, Mr. Speaker. Families in rural 
Saskatchewan shouldn’t have to be subjected to the kind of 
pressures, economic and social, that this government has allowed 
to happen. 
 
We travelled through, when we were on a bit of a drought tour 
throughout the province, and going into the communities that 
were suffering under those conditions. We met with urban 
business people. We met with councillors of one of the members 
here who haven’t seen him since he was elected in 1986. The 
member from Shaunavon, there were councillors complaining 
that he wasn’t around. Well where is he? They’d like to meet with 
him; they’d like to talk with him and tell him the problems that 
they’re having in their town, not being able to collect taxes from 
their business people because they’re making no money, because 
there’s no money in the community, because there’s no long-term 
programs from this government. That’s what they were asking. 
 
We met with business people who said, we’ve heard these guys 
talk about alleviating the agricultural problems in rural 
Saskatchewan but not one word addressed to the small businesses 
in Saskatchewan — just talk, just

rhetoric, but no action. 
 
We’ve talked with people in those communities who have said 
their towns are dying, their populations are dwindling. They’ve 
talked about the loss of the health care programs that they had. 
They’ve talked about the increased costs for prescription drugs. 
And they’ve talked about all of these things, but the overlying 
thing that they’ve talked about is the inability of accessibility to 
their MLAs. 
 
It’s no wonder that that inaccessibility is there and that they don’t 
understand that there are economic and social problems out there. 
Because when you scrap — and the Kinistino riding is an 
example — when you scrap 16 dental clinics — 16 — and not 
one left, how can that member comfortably go back to those 
communities and with any conviction tell them that he cares 
about their problems, that he understands their problems, that his 
government is concerned, and that things will change? 
 
I’ll tell you what’s happened, Mr. Speaker — their credibility 
rating is so low that they’re afraid to go back and speak to their 
people. And I can go through instance after instance. I can single 
out some in terms of The Liquor Act right now who are afraid to 
go back to their ridings. I know who they are and you know who 
they are. And I know the member from Morse is not that 
comfortable with it, and I’m waiting to see what he’s going to do 
with it. Or is he going to have yet more problems in going back 
and facing the people in his riding? I’d like to know whether the 
member from Elrose is going to be comfortable going back and 
presenting this kind of legislation. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
I don’t believe he will. 
 
And I would ask the member for Moosomin if he’s proud of that 
new Liquor Act, and if he wants to see easier access to alcohol to 
young people in this province. Is that what he wants? Is that what 
his people are asking him for? I suggest to you that that’s not 
what they’re asking for. That’s why this kind of a motion is just 
more and more relevant, and as this government gets closer and 
closer to the crunch, come election time those members will be 
disappearing further and further into their little knot-holes into 
the woodwork. 
 
How do they deal with the community organizations that are 
sponsoring the fairs – the fairs that they’ve cut back funding to 
that the member for The Battlefords alluded to — the fairs that 
had been funded for decades; places where people gathered to 
look at new farm machinery, to visit with their neighbours, to 
allow their kids a day away from the farm, or from their town — 
a day of fun? 
 
And this government scraps even the funding that was there in 
order to maintain buildings and help them present these fairs in 
63 rural communities in this province. 
 
And cutting funding to something as basic and as decent to the 
rural children in this province as funding to the 4-H groups — I 
say shame on you members from that side. You’ve got $10 
million for Peter Pocklington, but you haven’t got any for the 
kids whose parents you represent in this legislature. You haven’t 
got any to fund their local 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2133 
 

4-H groups, but that’s your priorities. That’s where your 
priorities lie. The PC government’s priorities lie with the 
millionaires and the out-of-province entrepreneurs and the fat 
cats, and you cut little elementary programs to people in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And in my home area, Prince Albert Rural School Division No. 
56, that school board had to make a decision because this 
government chose Peter Pocklington over the kids in Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. And that school board had to cut nine school 
teachers — nine people who were delivering educational 
programs to the children of that area, who are no longer there 
because of the decision you made to support Peter Pocklington, 
and Weyerhaeuser from Tacoma, Washington. 
 
And we understand you’re broke. I mean, clearly we know you’re 
in debt $3.7 billion; we understand that. But with your kind of 
mismanagement it’s inevitable, and with your kind of 
mismanagement you’ve got to see educational programs cut 
back, and you’ve got to see health care cut back, and you’ve got 
to see the dental programs cut back. There’s only so much money 
to go around. And when you spend like drunken sailors, as you 
guys have done, on your PC, fat cat friends, you can only expect 
to have people programs cut. And people programs to me are the 
community fairs, and people programs are the dental program, 
and people programs are schools. 
 
And I say, as you guys decimate rural Saskatchewan, and as the 
small towns dwindle and die, and as there are less kids out there, 
it’s your neighbour’s children that are going to be driving 50 and 
60 miles to find a school to go to. And if you want residence 
schools like some of the people of northern Saskatchewan have 
been forced to do — to send their kids from La Loche and Buffalo 
down to Prince Albert to get a decent education, and if you want 
residence schools for your rural children in southern 
Saskatchewan, you just keep devastating rural Saskatchewan and 
small town Saskatchewan. If you want your kids from Shaunavon 
to be going to school in Assiniboia, you keep bankrupting 
small-business people out there. 
 
And you develop schemes like equity financing that will allow 
your fat cat friends to buy Saskatchewan people off of their 
farms. That’s what you keep doing. And when you see farms that 
average 30 and 40 and 50 sections out in the Shaunavon and in 
the Gravelbourg and in the Assiniboia and in the Ponteix area – 
when you see farms of that size and one farmer per 20 square 
miles and you see those kids being bused 60, 70 miles to find a 
school, then maybe you will rehash what you’ve done in the early 
1980s, and maybe you will sit down and say, I made a mistake, 
and I deserve an apology to the people of this province. 
 
What have you done in terms of long-term viability? What have 
you done in terms of debt restructuring? Your solution is nothing 
but equity financing. Bring your fat cat friends in to bale the 
farmers out. How do you bail them out? Move them off the land; 
they don’t have a debt problem any longer; somebody else owns 
the land. And where do we go when we get them into the cities? 
Where

do we find them work? You put 299 potash workers out. You’ve 
got unemployment unparalleled in this province; you’ve got 
people by the thousands leaving the province because you can’t 
find work. Where are you going to send the farmers that you 
shove off the land? That’s why I say, Mr. Speaker, that this 
resolution is very appropriate and very much in tune with what 
this government has been doing, and that members on this side 
of the House are urging this government to rethink their 
programming. 
 
We’re asking them to not come out with piecemeal programs and 
a deficiency payment when an election is imminent. We’re 
asking for a program for some help for the family farm viably 
sound. We’re asking for some help for the business people in 
those communities who are facing bankruptcies and closures. 
And we are asking for a reasonable level of health care for those 
people, not only in rural Saskatchewan but in urban 
Saskatchewan as well. But we’re asking this government to stand 
back and have a look at what they’ve been doing, and from their 
mistakes, take that lesson, develop a program with vision for 
rural Saskatchewan, develop a program that shows some care for 
the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess in short what we’re asking you to do is to govern as 
people in this province are used to having government, because 
the people in Saskatchewan are not used to the kind of 
government that this administration has delivered since 1982. 
They’re used to a government that does some long-term 
planning, that is willing to intervene in the economy when 
necessary in order to deliver the revenue that we need to bring 
services such as education and health care to the people of this 
province, the revenue to help the farmers in the tough times 
without breaking the bank. They’re looking for a government 
with a vision for the future of this province. 
 
And I’m sad to say, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that I would 
want to support this resolution and that I was glad to second it is 
because this government needs some new direction. And if this 
debate in any way will urge this particular government to step 
back and re-think its priorities, re-think the Weyerhaeusers over 
the people of the province, and re-think the idea of giving to 
Manalta Coal ahead of the people of this province, and re-think 
the idea of giving to Peter Pocklington before the people of this 
province – and we’re asking the government, through this 
resolution, to re-think those priorities so that you can deliver a 
decent level of health care, so that you can alleviate some of the 
economic and the social distress in rural Saskatchewan — in 
short, Mr. Speaker, so that the people of Saskatchewan can be 
proud of the government that reigns in this legislature, that rules 
in this province. 
 
Because I would say, Mr. Speaker, if this government doesn’t 
re-think where they’re going, and if this government doesn’t 
re-think what its been doing, the people of this province will 
make the choice. And that choice will be to remove you from 
making those decisions, because there is a feeling right now that 
you are not only incompetent, but that your government doesn’t 
care. And I believe, when you have people of a mood and of a 
mentality where they’ll no longer accept the direction you’re 
going, you would wand to step back, re-think your priorities. And 
so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would simply say that I am pleased 
to second this motion. 
  



 
June 14, 1988 

2134 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I just wanted to get into this very 
exciting debate and, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned, on division, at 9:14 p.m. 
 


