


















































June 28, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 28, 1988 
  
 

2663 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, my officials are just on the 
way in, and here they are. Sitting on my right is Bill Gibson, 
president of CMB (Crown Management Board of 
Saskatchewan), and sitting on my left soon will be Roy Lloyd, 
president of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation), and there he is. And those are the officials dealing 
with this legislation tonight. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Chairperson, I’ll do a quick overview 
in regards to the Act, and we will be proceeding with comments 
by other members. 
 
In general, there are three aspects to the Act. Number one, it’ll 
probably go down in history as one of the worst deals for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Secondly, the gains that were made in 
the ’70s in regards to such topics as the environment and 
workers’ health and safety have not been covered by this new 
Act — absolutely no mention. The other aspect to the Act, of 
course, is its lack of any mention whatsoever about jobs — 
absolutely nothing in the Act that says anything about jobs. 
 
In regards to the first topic, that it’s a bad deal for Saskatchewan; 
I will outline my argument in regards to the positive aspect of 
SMDC and also in regards to the problems of the deal itself in 
relation to the Act. One has to look at, therefore, the situation as 
it exists. The Act in itself . . . the Bill in itself, Bill 56, does not 
have any justification other than the turnover of the people’s of 
Saskatchewan resources over to large-scale business. 
 
The important point to note here is that it goes against the usual 
argument of efficiency that has been utilized, whether it’s by 
Thatcher’s government or by the proponents of privatization in 
the province of Saskatchewan and elsewhere in Canada. 
 
And I would state that we have to look at the concept that was 
brought in historically on SMDC. SMDC came in here in 1974. 
It was generally an approach, a mixed economy approach, a joint 
venture approach. And that type of Saskatchewan experience 
had been started previously in the past where a joint venture 
system had been utilized, had been talked about for many years. 
And for many years a lot of people thought it could not be done 
in the mining industry. What it has proved is that the joint 
co-operation of the private sector with a public corporation like 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation has been 
highly successful. 
 
It has been highly successful in many regards. I’ll deal with the 
financial end immediately and an overview. SMDC has gone 
from nothing to a world-class organization in about a 12-year 
period. There is 914 million in assets. Last year it made a profit 
of 60 million. The sales on uranium alone last year were $186 
million; 

on gold it was 8 million. The dividends were $30 million and the 
royalties and taxes amounted to 22 million. The return on 
investment was 20 per cent and the average in the past four years 
had been close to 50 per cent. In regards to the reserves, the 
uranium reserves were about 304 million pounds and at $18 a 
pound, that would be approximately $6 billion. In other words, 
what we are doing is turning over in this merger to a 
privatization scheme $6 billion, which is twice what the PC 
government has put us in in the past six years. It’s $6 billion 
worth of reserves. 
 
The other thing in regards to gold from the known deposits is 
that there is about $120 million. So what we are looking at is, on 
the two key minerals, over $6 billion. And that’s not counting 
the areas such as copper, zinc, silver, and many other base 
metals that exist in northern Saskatchewan. In other words, what 
we are seeing here is the give-away of our . . . what many people 
might come to think of as the last crown jewels in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Our Crown gold will be gone to some big 
private corporation. 
 
In others words, what we are seeing here is patronage — 
patronage of the highest order, that we have never seen in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Because basically what it is, is that 
we already own the resource. We already control the vast 
amount of the resources whether its gold, zinc or any other 
minerals, and what we are doing is shifting it to a merger 
position then fully privatized within a seven-year period. 
 
The only thing that the PC government can say in regards to this 
is that there are these shares that people can buy. Well I think it’s 
simply to say that the shares can be bought up by three 
corporations, and they can own 75 per cent of the shares. Three 
large corporations can own three-quarters of the company; one 
company can own up to 25 per cent of the shares. So three large 
corporations can control three-quarters, and three-quarters of the 
voting as well. In other words, what will be left is a small 
number of shares for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other aspect to the deal is the question of environment and 
workers’ health and safety. In regards to the Key Lake 
agreement, in regards to the period of the ’70s, one of the things 
that was very important — and there is absolutely no mention of 
that in the Bill — is the issue of environment and workers’ 
health and safety. 
 
We had a period of involvement and consultation with people. 
One of the key things that arose from that is, in fact, the 
importance of environment and workers’ health and safety. We 
had the Cluff Lake report and Cluff Lake inquiry and the Key 
Lake inquiry, but the record shows that when I asked the 
question during committee, to the minister, all he gave me were 
promises that something, indeed, we would keep up with the 
standards. But the standards have been brought down since the 
PCs have been in power. The worst spills occurred after the 
Department of Environment people had been laid off. The worst 
spills occurred when the monitoring committee was disbanded 
by this government when they come into power in ’82, so that 
there was no public scrutiny in regards to the mining. So a lot of 
things went down in 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2664 
 

regards to environmental and workers’ health and safety 
considerations. 
 
Although the record has improved recently, the overall during 
the middle period after some pressure by the public, the record 
was starting to be a little bit shaky. And as we look back in 
history, we were utilizing ’77 records, and although they were 
the best in the world, we were starting to look at the realization 
that the latest reports today now will now show that the 
international commission on radiological will now say that the 
levels need to be improved by five times the international 
standards, which means about two times the Saskatchewan 
standards. So that aspect, people are a little bit worried about in 
regards to privatization, because of the simple record of the PC 
government. 
 
The other aspect are jobs — absolutely no mention of jobs. I will 
be talking a lot more about jobs as we go along, so I will leave 
the topic out for a while. 
 
So the statement is this: how do you see success, Mr. Minister, in 
the areas, the different areas that I’ve mentioned, in regards to 
the returns on the amount of money and the profit that is made 
by the mining companies, on the long-term reserves which are 
going to be transferred to some private corporation? How do you 
see this benefiting the families and the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There’s not a great deal that has been 
changed, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, as a result of this new 
company taking over the assets of Eldorado and SMDC, except 
that the sum is greater than the individual existing entities for the 
purposes of Saskatchewan economic well-being. There will be, 
for instance, the head office of a very significantly major mining 
company, primarily uranium company, situated here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I know that you will argue, we 
already have one. This one will be bigger. In addition to that, Mr. 
Speaker, the research facilities that now exist in Ontario under 
Eldorado will be located in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
(1915) 
 
Your earlier concern as it relates to the environment and to the 
jobs in the North, nothing changes there except that there will be 
an additional or an enhanced emphasis on northern development 
through the new company. The surface leases that now exist 
under SMDC and under Eldorado will become part of the 
obligation that will be there for the new company to take up. 
 
So the short answer, Mr. Speaker, is that in those areas related to 
the surface lease, nothing changes. In the broader picture, the 
synergies that come with the merger, if you like, of these two 
companies, I think bring additional new jobs, head office 
economic activity to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, we’ve spent some time in Crown Corporations 
Committee discussing the merger of SMDC and Eldorado 
Nuclear. We’ve also spent some time in the legislature 
discussing the merger, but this is our first 

opportunity to specifically discuss the details of the deal. 
 
Now you have said and your Finance minister has said and your 
Premier has said and your privatization minister has said that 
those deals will be tabled, that those deals will become public 
knowledge, that they will not only exist for the benefit of the 
private sector, but they will soon become the information of the 
public sector. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, tonight I’m asking you to table the deal, give 
us all of the documents, table the evaluation of Saskatchewan 
assets, SMDC, table the deal between SMDC and Eldorado 
Nuclear. Would you do that tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, of course, the member’s asking 
the impossible. We had said and we have always said that . . . 
Back in February, we signed a letter of intent, and there was a 
media package at that time. It set out the essential elements of 
the letter of intent. At that time we announced that we were 
targeting for a closing of the deal, I think, the end of June or the 
first of July. 
 
The document is still being worked on; it cannot be finalized 
until this legislation and the federal legislation is passed. So that 
documentation simply does not exist to be tabled at this time. 
 
We are now targeting for . . . and the wild card in this is the 
federal legislation, I suspect, because it’s now reported back to 
the House and, I think, at third reading stage, after which it goes 
to the Senate and so on. But we’re now targeting for the last half 
of July, I think, I think probably late in July to have everything in 
order so we can, in fact, do the closing of the deal. Following 
that we would be in a position to table the appropriate 
documentation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when you say you’ll table the 
appropriate documentation, will you outline to us tonight what 
documentation you’re prepared to table whenever this deal is 
finalized, whenever both the House of Commons and the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly pass the appropriate 
legislation. What documents will you table? What documents 
will you make available to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would say that following the closing 
of the deal . . . the closing of the deal can’t happen before the 
passage of this legislation and the federal legislation. I would say 
that similar to the situation with Weyerhaeuser where we tabled 
virtually all of the closing documents — is that right? — that we 
could legally be allowed to table, we would be prepared to table 
following the closing of the deal. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, will you table the evaluation of 
the assets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the evaluation and 
evaluation documents are literally volumes and volumes and 
volumes of computer runs, etc., etc., and we are not prepared to 
table them. We are however prepared — as we were with the 
sale of the undeveloped gas reserve from SaskPower to Saskoil 
— we are prepared to deal with letters of fairness from 
independent financial advisers, and those letters of fairness, after 
the closing of the deal — after the closing of the deal, Mr. 
Speaker — we 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2665 
 

would be prepared to table it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, book value of SMDC, 
according to your annual report or the assets that are stated in 
here, comes close to $1 billion. But, Mr. Minister, that doesn’t 
take into consideration all of . . . that does not necessarily take 
into consideration the potential of all of the gold reserves, the 
potential of all of the uranium reserves and what that means in 
terms of development, the potential of copper and silver. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that we’re going to get a good deal for this 
asset, that we will have a return to the people of Saskatchewan of 
some $400 million. Mr. Minister, last year this company — this 
company that’s not very old and is just starting to begin to pay 
dividends to people of this province, made over $60 million. It 
doubled its profit from the year before. It paid out to the people 
of Saskatchewan in 1987 some $30 million. That’s a return on 
equity of 20.2 per cent — not bad, Mr. Minister, not bad at all. 
 
Now on the contrary we have Eldorado Nuclear. Eldorado 
Nuclear has assets in the neighbourhood of 900 million, but it 
also has a debt of close to 420 million. It’s had an accumulated 
deficit since 1981 of 144 million. And this company lost 57.2 
million in 1985 and 64.3 million in 1986. Eldorado Nuclear is 
not a good example of Crown corporations and involvement in 
the public sector by the federal government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in Crown Corporations Committee we 
talked about the implications for the privatization of SMDC with 
regard to income tax that would accrue to the province of 
Saskatchewan with regard to royalties and that sort of thing. Mr. 
Minister, I know that you’ve had Bennett Jones involved in 
doing some tax implications on the privatization of SMDC, and 
I’d be interested in knowing what exactly are the tax 
implications once Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation is privatized. I’d be interested in knowing what we 
as taxpayers and as potential government-in-waiting can expect 
to receive for this asset that you’re about to sell off in terms of 
income tax; and I’m not talking about royalties, I’m strictly 
talking about income tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the deal was put together 
based on relative market values and cash flows of the respective 
assets, each individual asset. It was also put together without 
regard for the debt existing at Eldorado, or at SMDC, for that 
matter. 
 
So based on that, Eldorado showed a hundred million earnings 
last year. And so . . .(inaudible interjection). . . I’m sorry 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . So what you’re looking at in the 
annual report, the book values, etc., have no real direct 
relationship to what we’re talking about here as it relates to the 
final deal. 
 
Your question as it relates to taxes. Like any other company, this 
new company will be in a tax paying position once all the tax 
banks that are there at the closing have been used up. And that’s 
the case; that’s how it works. It’s the case in many other deals as 
well, and so there is nothing particularly new or different about 
this one. 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, as I understand it from the 
information that you gave us in Crown Corporations Committee, 
this is a company that has assets of over . . . close to $1 billion. 
This is a company that has long-term debt of some $318 million, 
which you say in three years will be paid off. This is a company 
that last year, even with that debt, returned to Saskatchewan a 
$30 million dividend, or 20.2 per cent return on equity, and had 
net earnings of $60 million — not bad. I understand from the 
information you gave us in Crown Corporations Committee that 
this company, in three years, after the long-term debt is gone, 
will be very, very lucrative — and we’re talking in excess of 
$100 million. I suspect it would be closer to 150 million or $200 
million. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, your government has made a decision to 
privatize this company. You’re going to have some sort of share 
offer. We have no guarantees that those shares will be held 
inside of Saskatchewan. We have no guarantees that when this 
merged company, this new company, goes to pay a dividend to 
its shareholders, that those shareholders will be Saskatchewan 
citizens paying Saskatchewan taxes. In fact it’s a very real 
possibility, as we’ve seen with Saskoil, where those dividends 
will be paid to people outside of Saskatchewan, and they will 
pay taxes outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would think if you are a competent 
minister, and I presume that you may be or you could be — 
you’re the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan — that you would 
have done, you would have done some calculations as to the tax 
implications in terms of revenue that will accrue to this province 
through taxes once this company is privatized, and what the 
province can expect given the present trends of this company. 
And, Mr. Minister, last year this company made over $60 
million, paid royalties and taxes of over $6 million. And I’m 
interested in knowing, once this company is privatized, what can 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers expect in terms of taxes that will be 
paid to the province of Saskatchewan to pay for important public 
services like health and education and social services. What can 
the people expect? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The benefits to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, are as follows, or Mr. Chairman. Number one, the 
royalties whether it’s privately or publicly held will be the same. 
Okay? Number two, there will be a return, initially, until the 
share offering at seven years or whenever is completed, from the 
sale of the asset. Number three, initially Saskatchewan, as a 
shareholder, owns 60 and a bit per cent of this new asset, of 
which Eldorado is coming in with a $100 million earning from 
1987. Right? Well 60 per cent of that comes to the 
Saskatchewan shareholder, Mr. Speaker, and that ain’t chicken 
feed. 
 
So our mathematics is probably something that you and I are 
going to, you know, come down on different sides on. We spent 
six hours going through this in Crown Corporations Committee 
and after six hours we agreed that we weren’t going to agree. 
And I think we could spend at least that much time here again 
and I think likely 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2666 
 

we’ll end up agreeing that we’re not going to agree. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is the way I see it. 
Here is a company that was developed here in Saskatchewan at a 
time when other companies weren’t prepared to come in here 
and at a time when Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation was prepared to enter into joint ventures with other 
hard rock mining companies. 
 
Here is a company that last year alone had net earnings of $60 
million at a time in this province when your government, for 
some reason, has great difficulty in collecting revenues; at a 
time, in this province, when you’re cutting back on health and 
education and social services. Three years from now after the 
long-term debt is gone — because SMDC had done a 
tremendous job of eliminating its long-term debt in the last 
couple of years — this company stands to make profits of $150 
million, Mr. Minister. It’s quite feasible. That’s money that 
could stay in Saskatchewan to pay for health and education and 
all of the kinds of public services that the Saskatchewan people 
have determined are important to them. 
 
Mr. Minister, you haven’t been able to tell us here tonight what 
the implications are once this company is privatized in terms of 
the kinds of revenues that will accrue to the province of 
Saskatchewan. You, for some reason, don’t have that 
information. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I ask you — this will be my last question to 
you tonight on this particular issue — I ask you: in three years, 
once Eldorado Nuclear and SMDC are privatized and are 
distributed throughout Canada in terms of shares, can the 
province of Saskatchewan expect to receive $150 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, with all of the activities 
that we expect to go on around this new, diversified mining 
company headquartered in Saskatchewan — and I’m just as 
excited as the hon. member is about the potential successes of 
this organization — and whether it’s privatized in three years or 
seven years . . . The outer limit, I think, is seven years; I’m sure 
the member knows that. I would hope that if this company is as 
successful as she indicates it is — and I’m hopeful that it will be 
— that through royalties, through taxation, through the spin-offs 
that will come from the enhanced activity in Saskatoon, in 
Saskatchewan, in the North, that the benefit will be every bit as 
great as it is today. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to change the question on to looking at some 
of the environmental implications of this deal for a moment. 
 
The nuclear industry is one that’s been massively subsidized by 
government for . . . ever since its beginnings in this country, and 
we’re seeing another example of that in this deal, where the 
federal government is going to, in effect, pick up the huge costs 
associated with disposing of most of the radioactive waste from 
the Port Hope refinery operations. 
 
But I want to focus on the Saskatchewan aspect of this. 

Mr. Minister, it would be my contention that the real value of 
your newly merged company is inaccurate, because it fails to 
take account of the real cost of properly disposing of the tens of 
millions of tonnes of radioactive tailings from uranium mine 
operations that the new company will own, and also that it will 
plan to operate in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think that the real cost of disposing of these 
tailings will be, at least, some $200 million to properly dispose 
of them. These tailings have not been properly disposed of in the 
past and they’re not being properly disposed of now. And, Mr. 
Minister, these tailings piles in the North that Newco will, in 
effect, now own are like extremely slow atomic bombs. They 
emit radon gas constantly from these piles that travel long 
distances and will deposit radioactive fall-out on the vegetation 
below over very substantive distances. The nuclear regulatory 
commission in the United States, Mr. Minister, has estimated 
that U.S. tailings piles there are causing some 100 global deaths 
a year. And these tailings piles are going to be radioactive, Mr. 
Minister, for the next 76,000 years. 
 
Now, my question to you, sir, is simply this: why have you not 
accounted for the massive cost of disposing of these radioactive 
tailings that SMDC and Eldorado have already created and that 
will be created in the new mining operations of the newly 
merged company? 
 
Why have you not accounted for those in this deal, Mr. 
Minister? I can only conclude that the fact you haven’t 
accounted for them means that you’re going to continue to 
dispose of radioactive tailings in northern Saskatchewan in a 
highly improper way — that the disposals methods that you’re 
using won’t last for more than 50 to 100 years. These tailings 
will be radioactive for over 100,000 years. They have a half-life 
of 76,000 years; they’re going to be a burden on all future 
generations in this province. My question to you is: why haven’t 
you accounted for the real costs of disposing of those radioactive 
tailings in this deal tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The merger, Mr. Chairman, has not 
created any waste. The waste that is there has been there prior to 
the merger. And the way the member was opening his remarks, I 
kind of sensed that he was suggesting that we should take 
responsibility for the waste at Port Hope and other sites in 
Ontario. And I’m having difficulty with taking the member’s 
suggestion seriously there. That waste, in our agreement, is the 
responsibility of the federal government. Naturally the new 
company will be responsible for waste that is created under the 
new company. 
 
As it relates to existing waste in the North, at Key Lake for 
instance, as I recall, it was the member for Saskatoon — I think 
it was called the Mitchell inquiry, as a matter of fact — that 
approved . . . I don’t know which Mitchell it was. It could have 
been George Mitchell, it could have been John Mitchell, it could 
have been any number of Mitchells. But my guess is it was the 
member from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, who approved the 
tailings operation at Key Lake — am I right? — approved that 
particular concept. It is the state of the art, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that that particular member, the fellow that did 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2667 
 

that particular report, is a very, very credible person — him 
along with all of the hordes of scientists and technical people 
that he had to advise him on that particular project. I think it’s a 
very, very credible report. 
 
As it relates, Mr. Speaker, to radon gas and the concerns that he 
raises about radon gas being let off to the atmosphere, it is done 
naturally. It is done naturally, Mr. Speaker, in many, many parts 
of Canada, in many, many parts of the world, where no uranium 
mines exist — basements down in the south-east corner of 
Saskatchewan, where I have never seen an operating uranium 
mine or anyone to tell me that there was even any uranium 
anywhere there, where they are regularly monitored for radon 
gas. Because it’s a problem in many, many parts of the world, 
whether or not uranium is mined. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, what you’re telling this 
Assembly is that the people of Saskatchewan are going to pick 
up the costs of disposing of these radioactive wastes in northern 
Saskatchewan because Eldorado, SMDC, and now Newco will 
not be responsible for those costs. That’s what you’re telling the 
people of this province. Because the current disposal methods 
will never do, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I want to ask you another question and that relates to the 
matter of foreign ownership. You’re making provision, Mr. 
Minister, for 20 per cent of the newly merged company to be 
foreign owned. It’s not hard to guess, Mr. Minister, who the new 
foreign owners are going to be. Many of them will be companies 
that have a stake in the nuclear weapons industry. I would 
hesitate to guess, Mr. Minister, that the new owners from the 
point of view of foreign investors will be KAPCO (Korea 
Electric Power Corporation), representing the South Korean 
military dictatorship, COGEMA, representing the French 
nuclear weapons industry; probably General Electric or 
Westinghouse or Union Carbide on behalf of the U.S. nuclear 
weapons industry will be interested in owning a little share of 
this new operation to secure their supplies, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, there’s absolutely nothing to be said for this loss of 
Canadian control. Not only have you sold out the ability of 
people in Saskatchewan to control what happens to this 
company, but you have now sold out the ability of Canadian 
people to fully control the company by opening the door to 
foreign investment. 
 
And I want to ask you a two-part question, Mr. Minister. The 
first is whether you are prepared to amend this Bill tonight to 
remove provision for foreign control because that will mean 
control by nuclear weapons companies outside this country. And 
second, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you whether you are 
prepared to modify this Bill to institute a provision that would 
disallow the new company from selling uranium to nuclear 
weapons states, which I personally think is a very, very high 
priority that your government ought to have, that no Canadian 
and no Saskatchewan uranium ought to go to a nuclear weapons 
state, Mr. Minister. So my second question to you is whether 
you’re prepared to institute that provision in this Bill. 
 
I want to say in closing, Mr. Minister, that one of my great 
disappointments about this Bill is that I think it’ll make the 

phase-out, privatization will make the phase-out of the industry, 
which I long to see, much more difficult. But given the realities 
of this Bill, are you at least prepared to disallow foreign 
ownership, and are you at least prepared, Mr. Minister, to ensure 
that no uranium from this newly merged company will be sold to 
a nuclear weapons state? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well the member’s suggesting that for 
one foreign owner with a maximum allowable holding of 5 per 
cent, somehow can control this organization. And I simply don’t 
accept that, Mr. Chairman; I simply don’t accept that. He does 
not control the company, he cannot control the company. If all of 
foreign owners got together — assuming they got the aggregate 
sum allowable — it would only be 20 per cent, and far short of 
effective control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1945) 
 
As it relates to your concern about these mines being more 
difficult to close or phase out following privatization, all I can 
say is that the member from Buffalo Narrows and most people 
on this side of the House, and I’m sure even the member from 
Cumberland, don’t share your concern, because, Mr. Chairman, 
we see this company as a very powerful force in the continued 
economic development of northern Saskatchewan, for northern 
Saskatchewan people, and for all Saskatchewan people and for 
Canadians, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I heard my 
name . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That was George Mitchell. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My Uncle George’s name mentioned tonight, 
so I thought I would intervene in this debate, Minister, by 
expressing some of the concerns I have and by asking you some 
questions. 
 
I first became aware of SMDC in a detailed way during the work 
of the Key Lake board of inquiry that you mentioned. And that 
was an inquiry that took a total of 13 months. A good part of 
that, as at least one of your officials know, was spent in a 
community-by-community visit of northern Saskatchewan. And 
I and other members of the board visited every one of those 
centres and spent as much time in them as we could and gained 
what I think was a detailed knowledge of the social and 
economic conditions of northern Saskatchewan as it existed in 
1981. 
 
Now my information is a bit dated because of course I’ve had no 
opportunity to revisit all of those communities, although I have 
revisited some of them. And in my view, the problems have not 
gone away. I couldn’t make a nice judgement as to whether the 
social problems are marginally better or marginally worse, but I 
dare to say that they continue to exist and they cry out for some 
type of resolution — I don’t say “solution,” but some sort of 
treatment, anyway. And in that connection, the governments of 
. . . The former government of Mr. Blakeney, and at least to 
some extent your government, have expressed concern about 
social conditions in northern Saskatchewan and have tried to 
address them, 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2668 
 

at least to some extent. 
 
The economic problems are linked closely to those social 
problems. In some of those communities, the effective 
unemployment rate is 100 per cent. In others, there would be 
some wage employment, but it remains a very large problem and 
a perplexing one — and I know you find it so — thinking about 
how you can bring any significant amount of employment to the 
people in those communities. 
 
This corporation, Minister, has been a vital player in the social 
and economic development of northern Saskatchewan during the 
years that I speak of, during the late ’70s and through into the 
1980s. And due to the work of people like Mr. Lloyd, who’s 
with you tonight, and others of his officials in SMDC, this 
company has made a considerable effort to address both the 
economic problems and the social problems in northern 
Saskatchewan; the economic problems, by creating a significant 
amount of employment in the North through the exploration 
program of the company and through direct employment by 
SMDC and by companies in which SMDC is a major player — I 
think particularly of the Key Lake Mining Corporation, but 
would add Cluff Mining and other companies in which it has an 
interest to that list. 
 
What I’m . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, the member from 
Wascana reminds me of the educational efforts, and this 
company has taken a very broad approach to its mandate in 
northern and it has extended to support for training, operator’s 
training, for example, and other types of training for people in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
My point is this: what happens next, Minister? What happens 
now? With SMDC as a Saskatchewan Crown corporation 
disappearing from the picture, what is the instrument of 
government policy or government social and economic policy 
for northern Saskatchewan to take the place of SMDC, given the 
. . . and acknowledging the role that that company has played in 
the past, who plays that role in the future? Surely we’re not just 
sort of sitting back hoping that this new merged company, when 
it has been privatized, will do what we want done. Surely we’re 
not just going to sit back and hope that they will adopt 
enlightened social and economic policies of the order that 
SMDC has adopted over the years. And what is to be our 
instrument of social and economic policy as regards northern 
Saskatchewan after SMDC disappears from the scene? 
 
I’d like your comments on that, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I agree totally with the 
member opposite as it relates to the concerns of maximizing the 
northern benefit from this northern asset, if you like, and 
education is part of it, employment is part of it — all of those 
things that both Eldorado and SMDC have done, not only as a 
matter of government policy but as a matter of conscience and 
good corporate citizens in the province . . . and Blind River, in 
the case of Eldorado and other places. I see nothing changing 
there, and in fact I hope for an enhancement as it relates to the 
merged company. 

It’s already been determined and not yet announced that there 
will be a vice-president in this new company, responsible for 
northern affairs — to take care of those very matters that you’re 
talking about. And I’m quite sure, as well, that you know the 
person who will be appointed, but I can’t tell you tonight 
because that will be a corporate announcement at some future 
time. But I have a high degree of confidence in the kind of 
management that will be in this company, and the conscience of 
the management to do exactly the kinds of things that you’re 
talking about. 
 
So I guess, in the broadest sense, that answers your question. In 
addition to that, there will be all of the obligations that now exist 
with the company separately on the surface leases, relative to 
employment and environmental matters and so on. So I hope — 
and we will be watching it — but I hope that things in this area 
are even enhanced over what they are today. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I thank you for that answer, Minister, but I 
offer this view: I think it’s going to take more than your hopes, 
our hopes in this Assembly. The problem is huge, as I’ve 
indicated and as you agree. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And it’s larger than this company can 
handle. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And it’s larger than this company can handle, 
but this company has been a main actor in addressing those 
problems and has set a standard which other companies are 
aware of and which to some extent they try and measure up to. 
 
I think it’s going to take more than your hopes, Minister. I think 
it’s going to take a very, very aggressive policy on the part of 
your government to require a privatized Newco, or whatever 
we’re calling this company — a privatized company — it’s 
going to require a very aggressive effort on your part to require 
that company to pursue these policies over the years because 
they’re expensive. SMDC found them to be very expensive. The 
Key Lake Mining Corporation has found them to be expensive. 
We on the inquiry, and we on this side of the House, regard 
those expenses as part of the cost of doing business in the 
uranium industry in northern Saskatchewan. And my point to 
you is that it’s going to take a very aggressive effort on the part 
of your government to ensure that the new company measures 
up to those very important social obligations to northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, we have 
a high degree of confidence in a management team that will be 
put together, including the VP of northern affairs that will be 
responsible for the kinds of things that we’re talking about now. 
 
In addition, we will have a board of directors that will represent 
the very best from the business community from Saskatchewan 
and other parts of Canada, that know that the cost of doing 
business, or a part of the cost of doing business, is to take care of 
those corporate obligations as a matter of good citizenship that 
we’re talking about tonight. And, in addition to that, you can be 
assured that this government will take an aggressive position as 
it 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2669 
 

relates to those very issues by the new company. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well, that’s what worries me, Mr. Minister. 
Let me give you an example though, just so that you can 
understand where I’m coming from on this issue. There was, in 
the Key Lake Mining Corporation surface lease, a monitoring 
committee set up. It was set up pursuant to recommendations 
made by the board of inquiry. it was a good idea. The monitoring 
committee was composed of people from northern 
Saskatchewan and their mandate was to ensure that employment 
targets for the training and employment of northern people were 
laid down and met. 
 
And their mandate also included a monitoring of the activities of 
the Key Lake Mining Corporation to ensure that all of the 
business opportunities that spun off from this mine, that could be 
sited in northern Saskatchewan, were sited there. So this 
monitoring committee had a double-barrel function — 
employment and spin-off economic opportunities. And it had 
just barely got going when the events of April 1982 intervened. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A light came on in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: I don’t know what happened in Saskatchewan, but 
we know the result of that event. And one of the things that 
happened in northern Saskatchewan is that the monitoring 
committee never met again, and that was a great pity. And if that 
is any indication at all of how your government will watch the 
situation as it develops in this new company, if the experience 
with the monitoring committee is any indication of how you’re 
going to handle this situation, then I am frankly very, very 
worried. I think that northern Saskatchewan was much better off 
when it had the direct connection between the government and 
the Crown corporation, SMDC, and it could then count on 
SMDC being an instrument of the government’s social and 
economic policies as regards northern Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is quite unrelated to all that presentation, Minister. 
But I’ve got a chance to ask one more question and I’m going to 
ask it now. What is this about Bennett Jones? Someone 
mentioned the name. My colleague from Nutana mentioned the 
firm Bennett Jones. Is it that we don’t have law firms in 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan law firms competent to handle this 
kind of a deal, that we have to import the services of Bennett 
Jones in order to handle your end of the legalities of this 
transaction? 
 
Minister, I don’t ask that question out of any self-interest 
because I never expected that you would refer the problem to me 
anyway. But I ask it out of interest to the profession, generally, 
in the province. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was wondering why your firm wasn’t 
contracted to do some of this work. The fact of the matter is, 
Bennett Jones does have an office in Saskatoon. You’ve maybe 
noticed the competition; I don’t know. They were doing a small 
part of, as you might appreciate, the vast amount of legal work 
that has to be done in a deal like this. Specifically, they were 
doing the tax work. 

Do we have that kind of talent in the province? I’m sure that we 
do. But with all of the things that we’re doing in this arena, some 
of the major firms with that kind of expertise were starting to trip 
over themselves and that presented a bit of a problem. Did I get 
any phone calls from lawyers in Saskatchewan when they heard 
the name Bennett Jones? You bet. Thousands. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
would like to direct a few questions to the minister who is 
piloting this legislation through the House this evening. And 
before I do so, I must preface my remarks, Mr. Chairman — and 
members of the House, and to those members of the public who 
may be watching this debate — by emphasizing the fact that we 
are here considering a very massive piece of legislation with 
important financial and social and political ramifications to the 
province of Saskatchewan, and indeed Canada, without the 
benefit of any of the supporting material or documentation 
placed before us, so that we can have an opportunity to consider 
it and base our questions and our positions on that 
documentation. 
 
Instead, the discussion of the events of the evening are 
essentially reduced to us asking some questions in the hope that 
the minister will be specific in response but, being satisfied — or 
so the minister would have us be satisfied — with the assurances 
that he is hopeful, the government is hopeful; in due course, 
some documents will be released, or may be released and so 
forth. 
 
And to be quite frank with your, Mr. Chairman, I find this quite 
a way to run a railway — or putting it bluntly, quite a way to get 
rid of a very successful Crown corporation such as the SMDC 
was and is. And the minister opposite . . . I know the evening is 
getting on, and the session is getting on. I suppose we’re all 
anxious to get out, but I think he makes a little bit too light of a 
very serious situation, at least serious from our point of view. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have in front of me here a copy of a 
newspaper story in The Financial Post, dated in February right 
after the announcement of the merger. The headline is, “Merger 
leaves Ottawa with Eldorado’s debts.” And some aspects of this 
story are a little bit discouraging, and frightening, I think, for 
anybody who is watching this deal and will watch it in the weeks 
and months ahead. 
 
One part of the story says the following, quoting a federal 
official: 
 

Both companies have too much debt but Eldorado in 
particular has a very large debt structure related to its 
capital expansion, a federal official said. 

 
And this, I don’t want to make too big an issue out of one 
quotation, but it is cited by me in support of the proposition, Mr. 
Chairman, that has been advanced by my colleagues here with 
respect to the merger of a successful Crown corporation on the 
one hand, SMDC, with a Crown corporation like Eldorado, 
which is plagued by a series of difficult and problematic 
decisions in the past few years. The company has been plagued 
with a long history of serious problems, and I think that the 
company’s balance sheet — I’m now talking about the Eldorado 
company that we will be subsuming, or the 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2670 
 

new corporation will be subsuming — the balance sheet, I think, 
clearly demonstrates that. 
 
The arguments have been well articulated by other members of 
this side of the House, but I think the intent of what the federal 
government had up its sleeve is stated quite accurately by the 
Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Mazankowski, who, speaking to the 
federal House of Commons committee considering the federal 
legislation, the mirror legislation, which is being introduced in 
the House of Commons, said the following. He said: 
 

Really what we are doing here is the government is 
facilitating a corporation to help itself get out of the burden 
of debt and to align itself with another going concern. 

 
And I think no understatement was ever made greater than that 
statement. It is true. Eldorado, with all of its merger and financial 
problems and other difficulties that it has experienced, has, in 
effect, found a willing, compliant partner in the PC government 
of this province of Saskatchewan in a merger with SMDC. And 
we have now the spectacle of the people of Saskatchewan, 
indirectly or directly as the shareholders of SMDC, merging with 
what really can only be described as a very bad commercial . . . I 
won’t say very bad, but certainly a bad commercial operation, 
namely Eldorado, with no evidence tendered by the minister this 
evening, or for that matter at any time since the arrangement has 
been announced publicly, that we will stand to gain anything — 
we, being the people of the province of Saskatchewan — other 
than some mystical, mythical, hopeful view that somewhere 
down the road we’re going to be the capital of a large uranium 
. . . the centre of a large uranium company. 
 
So this statement, I think, in The Financial Post, Mr. Chairman, 
says it all. Eldorado has a very large debt structure related to its 
capital expansion. And we’re taking on what is indeed a 
company which has not been a good example of management or 
operation in the uranium area. 
 
Having made that point, Mr. Chairman, however, what I really 
want to discuss for a moment is the privatization aspect of this 
deal. As I understand it, of course, SMDC and Eldorado are 
going to merge, they’re forming a new company. We’ll call it 
Newco. There then is a debt issue by Newco which is distributed 
as between the Ottawa and the Regina governments. But 
ultimately the success of the deal or the theology of the deal, the 
ideology of the deal, is that Newco will divest itself of the shares 
and that there will be, over a seven-year timetable, a period of 
share offerings to individuals in the market-place. Now this 
Financial Post story, Mr. Chairman, says that: 
 

Saskatchewan negotiators favoured a slower approach on 
the share issue than Ottawa, senior federal officials say. 

 
And I’d like to stop at this point and hear what the minister’s 
response is. I want the minister to tell me whether in fact that 
statement by this unnamed senior federal official, as reported in 
The Financial Post, is correct. Namely, in the negotiations with 
the federal 

people, was it your government’s position that with respect to 
the privatization, the ultimate sale of shares, that the regime and 
the schedule set out in the contract was not one favoured by this 
government, that you wanted a go-slower or a go-slower 
approach than the one that was ultimately agreed to? And if so, 
why was that the position taken by your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know who the federal official is. 
I’m not sure that the quote as attributed is accurate, but I’m told 
that when the negotiations began, the federal people wanted a 
rigid timetable — those are my words; I don’t know if they’re 
entirely accurate — but a rigid timetable as it relates to 
divestiture through public offerings. 
 
We took the view that to maximize the value, that other things 
other than timetable should be taken into account, like market 
acceptability and so on. And so the compromise was reached at 
seven years, that we should all . . . or both shareholders should 
be out of the company subject to at least one other condition, and 
that was being market shares. There may have been others, but 
market conditions were the key element. It was agreed that we 
ought not to be selling into a dog of a market. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, that the minister 
in charge has really come to the very heart of the point that I’m 
aiming at, because his argument was — and I commend the 
provincial government if in fact this was the position that they 
took — his argument . . . He says the provincial government’s 
argument was that they didn’t want to be tied to a rigid 
timetable. 
 
As I understand this deal, there is a very rigid timetable — a 
schedule which is, as the minister himself alluded to, not based 
on market conditions. The agreement, as I understand it, says 
simply, or at least the essence of the agreement says that: 
 

The two governments have agreed to sell off 30 per cent of 
their shares in two years, 60 per cent in four years, and 100 
per cent in seven years. 

 
Now obviously this is a rigid schedule and obviously it’s 
schedule which is not based on the market conditions. It’s not 
subject to what the stock markets are doing, or what the question 
of uranium supply is doing, or what the question of prices are 
doing. And by sticking to this market, I ask the minister n 
charge, is it not correct that it could very well be that in the 
timetable set out by this agreement, we could be going to the 
market on the share offering at a time when in fact there is a 
considerable loss in the value of the shares and loss of income, 
therefore revenue, to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My notes relative to that section of the 
letter of intent indicate that it has been agreed that CDIC 
(Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation) and CMB will meet 
at least annually to review the progress of the disposition of their 
interest and at that time take a look at these factors: state of the 
capital market, state of the uranium industry, the requirements of 
Newco for capital to be met through treasury offerings, and the 
implications for the market price of Newco shares of any 
contemplated secondary offering. Mr. Chairman, that is 
specifically set 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2671 
 

out in the letter of intent, that those considerations are taken into 
account. The seven-year compromise that I’m talking about, I 
think can be considered to be a guide-line, a desired end if you 
like, to the public offerings, but it could go, you know, faster 
earlier, or slower earlier and faster later, or whatever. But subject 
to those conditions only would a public offering be made. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I wonder then if the 
minister will clarify a little bit further. Is it correct to say, in the 
light of his last answer, that theoretically and practically it’s 
possible that if the market conditions, any one or all of those, 
whatever the relevant factors are, dictate that in fact there will 
not be any share offering, that the Newco, the partners in the 
new operation, might say conceivably within the seven-year 
timetable, I’m sorry, it’s just unfavourable to sell at low prices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’re probably stretching the limits of 
hypothesis here. Theoretically it’s possible, but it is our intent to, 
subject to market conditions and these other things that we’ve 
talked about, for both shareholders to be totally out of the new 
company at the end of seven years. So theoretically it’s possible; 
highly, highly unlikely. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if I can just ask the 
minister whether or not . . . Clearly there must have been some 
documentation, economic forecasts, based on future projections 
as to supply and demand and price for uranium. Did the 
government have an economic forecast in developing this 
seven-year privatization plan? Whose was it? And would the 
minister undertake tabling it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, we are now entering our 
fourth year as it relates to the discussions that have gone on 
between the two shareholders, and so projections have been an 
ongoing thing. And they’re even doing them to this very day. 
The seven years . . . It was agreed by both governments, based 
on the current data at that particular time in the discussion, seen 
to be reasonable by both shareholders, and it was agreed that 
seven years, subject to those conditions that I’ve already stated, 
was reasonable. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well you say it was reasonable, and I guess I 
have to take your words because it’s quite clear that you’re not 
going to table any documents. But it also seems very clear to me 
that your government was pressured by your PC counterparts in 
Ottawa to enter into this deal. Because what you indicated to me 
in response to my very first question was that it was the federal 
that insisted — I think that was the word you used; if not, that 
was clearly the message conveyed — to be tied to the seven-year 
schedule; that you wanted — remember the beginning of my 
question; I phrased it in the terms of The Financial Post article 
— the slower approach. You rephrased that to describe it in the 
sense of not slower, necessarily, but more market sensitive 
oriented, which I would have thought would have made sense. 
 
But at the end of the day, you ended up taking the seven-year 
schedule — what I described, the rigid 

schedule — of the federal government. It’s true that there are the 
provisions of review, which you say theoretically are possible, 
that there will never be a share offering, but you warn me and 
the members of the public that that’s not likely. 
 
So the bottom line of all of this is that the PC government here in 
Regina capitulated at the end of the day to a rigid schedule, 
which schedule is imposed by them by Mr. Mulroney and the 
PC government in Ottawa. What’s the public rationale for doing 
that? Contrary to all of your advice and your logic, as you’ve 
said to me just a few moments ago, the best thing would have 
been to do, the wiser thing would have been to do, is to have a 
privatization based on some sensitivity to the market-place. Why 
did you give in to the Mulroney administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member is taking a little licence. 
We got exactly what we wanted, exactly what we wanted. If, at 
the end of seven years, there hasn’t been one day when market 
conditions were right, there will not have been a share sold, or 
eight or 10 or whatever. What we have said is that we, the two 
shareholders, will be out 100 per cent, out of this new company 
at the end of seven years, subject to market conditions, subject to 
the condition of the industry, subject to capital requirements and 
so on. 
 
Now we got what we wanted. The federal government moved 
from their rigid position of going out at a fixed percentage over a 
fixed timetable. They moved from that to what we now have 
with a reasonable target of seven years, subject to those 
conditions I’ve already talked about. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well let’s just clarify this for me if you will, 
Mr. Chairman. Is it correct or not — just a simple yes or no; if 
you want to elaborate to make it more clear for me, fair enough 
— is it correct, yes or no, that the two governments in this deal 
“have agreed to sell off 30 per cent of their shares in two years, 
60 per cent in four years and 100 per cent in seven years, subject 
only to a review of that schedule”? Note the words — a review 
of that schedule based on some of the market forces and factors 
that you’ve described. Is that correct? Is that an agreement 
between the two actors in this merger and privatization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Yes. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And would the minister agree with me, if 
that is in fact what has been agreed to, that we have a schedule, 
and if we have a schedule, this is an obligation? It’s an 
agreement, an obligation that you must fulfil and an obligation 
which your partner the federal government must fulfil. 
 
That being the case, I want to ask you again: how is it that you 
capitulated to what clearly was the federal government desire 
and objective in this agreement as I’ve described it to you? Why 
did you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we came into this deal 
with a desire to privatize, offer for public participation the 
combined . . . Certainly that’s what it was all about. We thought 
we could put together this 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2672 
 

mining company that would have good market appeal and be a 
good engine for the development of the North. And we came 
into it fully with the desire to privatize the new company. 
 
Now, you start talking about timetables. We capitulated nothing; 
we got everything we wanted out of this deal. We did in no way, 
shape, or form capitulate. Subject to these conditions, we intend 
to privatize. We intend to go to a public offering subject to a 
review of these conditions on at least an annual basis — at least 
an annual basis. And if we can move faster than 30 per cent, 
we’ll move faster than 30 per cent. 
 
If market conditions or industry conditions, or whatever, dictate 
that we should move slower, we’ll move slower. If at the end of 
seven years we still have some left and the market conditions are 
lousy, obviously we will go beyond the seven years. But what 
I’m telling you, Mr. Chairman, is, we got exactly what we 
wanted as it relates to the timetable and the conditions for 
disposition of the assets. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the minister doesn’t have to 
convince me about this government’s commitment to 
privatization. It is very, very committed to privatization. I know 
that all too well, and unfortunately the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan know that all too well. 
 
You are so committed to privatization that you’re prepared to 
enter into, in my judgement — and I’m exploring whether or not 
this is another example — into almost any arrangement, no 
matter what the cost, no matter who carries the burden, the 
financial burden or the risk, any kind of an arrangement of the 
sake of privatization. 
 
Here you have a seven-year fixed deal which is not, by 
agreement, market sensitive or economic sensitive. It is subject 
to review, which you are trying to portray to me as having some 
form of ultimate veto power over the agreement, but nowhere is 
that seen in the documentation that we have. And if I’m proven 
wrong, send me a copy of the documentation which you have in 
order to demonstrate it. 
 
You have tied your hands to a rigid seven-year deal of selling off 
this shareholding offering to the public regardless of what the 
value of the shares may be, regardless of what the market 
conditions might be at that time. 
 
And, of course, that’s a classic case of what’s wrong with 
privatization and with the PCs in Regina. The public takes all the 
risk. The private people who end up buying the shares and 
getting the shareholders get all of the benefits. You say that if 
that seven-year timetable doesn’t work out quite well, then we’re 
not going offer it to the public and if we’re not offering it to the 
public — namely in private shareholdings — who carries the 
responsibility during that seven-year operation? Of course, we 
do until there’s such a time as deemed by your government, if 
you’re in office that long, to do some share offering and some 
share selling to the public at large. 
 
I don’t think that that makes very much sense. You say 

you got everything that you wanted out of this operation. I 
believe that you did, by your limited political objectives which 
are privatization at all costs. You’ve gotten that almost at any 
cost. There are no guarantees in the legislation, either federally 
or provincially, that I am aware of that talk about environmental 
protection; no arrangements that talk about the surface lease 
commitments; none of the protections with respect to worker 
obligations. Perhaps I could be pointed out by you or your 
officials where I’m wrong in this regard. You have none of those 
commitments. I tell you, I think that you got taken to the cleaners 
in this deal by the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I think this is the one occasion where Mr. 
Mulroney has proven himself to be a good negotiator. He ran up 
against the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and you 
and he got rid of a bad company, Eldorado Nuclear. He got that 
monkey off his back, all right. He’s got himself into a seven-year 
timetable which seems to be more geared to political objectives 
than economic objectives. Of course, he sees a sucker when he 
sees one walking down the hall — that’s your government and 
privatization. He’s got you people on that hook. You’re going to 
privatize come what may. 
 
And what is left for the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
We’ve got a $322 million write-down of the debt, which we may 
recapture initially on the initial Newco redistribution. We’ve got 
a terrific amount of public investment by SMDC over the years 
of building up, of which there is not guarantee — if you go to the 
market in that share offering in that seven-year period and those 
share values are down, no guarantee we’re going to recapture 
that. We have no guarantees of jobs for people of the province of 
Saskatchewan; no environmental considerations, as my 
colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland points out; no 
considerations with respect to the surface lease commitments, as 
my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview points out. 
 
We are being asked to buy a pig in the poke, thanks to your 
dogmatic, Oliver Letwin, U.K.-styled, U.K.-driven privatization 
which has absolutely nothing to do with the history and the 
interests of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, that’s 
a bad deal for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’ll just respond briefly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, take your time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I will take my time, but I’ll still be brief. 
And, Mr. Chairman, it is a very, very highly regulated company. 
He talks about his . . . or industry I should say, and he talks about 
his concerns for the environment, his concerns for the surface 
leases. The obligation of the surface lease, whether it be with 
SMDC or Eldorado, follows both those organizations into the 
new company and that’s the fact. 
 
It’s a very highly regulated industry. The government will 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2673 
 

regulate the industry as it relates to the environment, as it relates 
to the surface leases and the enforcement of the conditions of the 
surface leases, Mr. Speaker. And yes, we think that we did 
negotiate a good deal — a very, very large company, 
headquartered here in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is a 61.5 per 
cent shareholder in this very large company. We think that the 
benefits to Saskatchewan people will be significant, not only in 
terms of new jobs, new head office jobs, new research jobs, and 
so on, but as it relates to the development of the North, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this could go on all 
evening and perhaps all whole month, which I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve got the last word. This is it. Say 
whatever you want; I’m not getting up again. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well no, this is not a question . . . I know the 
minister is saying this half joking. It’s not a question of 
adjourning tonight because I find this to be a very important and 
interesting subject, but I do want to ask, if I can, this question. 
The minister talked about jobs here, and this is the kind of 
rhetoric which of course the minister in charge of privatization, 
or more accurately the minister in charge of piratization, the hon. 
member from Qu’Appelle Wolseley — is that his constituency? 
— Indian Head-Wolseley talks about. You people are very glib 
and very quick to point out that there’s job security, but of 
course we know differently. 
 
When the privatization takes place, there’s a certain merging that 
takes place. Then there’s a certain submerging that takes place, 
to paraphrase an American politician, and then there’s a 
beginning of the end of jobs and security. 
 
You say that there are jobs. You have done, no doubt, studies to 
give us some indication as to what kind of volume or numbers of 
jobs, new jobs, we’re looking at as a result of this enterprise. Tell 
us about that. How many new jobs do you expect as a result of 
this operation and where in Saskatchewan and in what fields? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I should point out first that 
in both companies, all operating and R & D (research and 
development) positions that exist today are secure tomorrow and 
in the foreseeable future. As it relates to new jobs — and this 
will be at Saskatoon, new jobs in Saskatoon — there will be 
about 30 research people in Saskatoon and there will be about 15 
additional management people in Saskatoon; that’s almost 
immediately following closing. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, you will note, sirs — I’m 
sure that you’re taking careful notes of this discussion tonight — 
that I asked the minister to provide us, first of all, to answer 
whether there was a study about new jobs and how many new 
jobs. He gets up and refers to 30 new jobs. I presume that’s in 
association with the head office being located in Saskatoon. But 
there has been no study tabled. I don’t think this government’s 
done a study as to the job implications or job possibilities for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you file them? 

Mr. Romanow: And if, as my colleague from Quill Lakes says 
— I will rephrase the question — if there are studies and they’re 
so beneficial both politically, if for no other reason, I don’t see 
why this government and this minister wouldn’t table those 
studies to rebut the kinds of criticisms which some people have 
raised. And I invite the hon. minister to do that if he feels that’s 
the case. 
 
His federal counterpart, Mr. Mazankowski, I think is a little 
more forthcoming, if I may say so with the greatest of respect to 
the Deputy Premier, than he is tonight in consideration of this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Mazankowski, before the House of Commons, says point 
blank: 
 

For both companies, administration, exploration functions 
may be subject to rationalization as a result of the merger. 
If there is, however, any duplication of employee functions, 
selection of staff by the new company will give equal 
consideration to eligible employees of both Eldorado and 
SMDC. 

 
(2030) 
 
Now the clear implication of that statement suggests that one of 
the benefits of merger is, of course, rationalization. You’re not 
going to have similar exploration functions; you’re not going to 
have similar administrative functions; you may not even have 
some similar mining functions in some ways. You might be able 
to stop the duplication of it. It is in fact one of the arguments for 
privatization or for merging — you’re going to be able to 
become more efficient. For the life of me I don’t know how that 
spells any new jobs for the miners in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to close off on this area, Mr. Chairman, by saying that in 
this task, the government . . . and this is a major area of concern, 
which quite frankly I’m amazed at not having received as much 
public consideration by the media and by, I suppose, even the 
politicians, all of us in this Chamber that it should. We have a 
major endeavour here of $1.6 billion, roughly speaking — 
whatever the figures are — merger, and we have a major 
philosophical next step after the merger: we have a privatization. 
 
There are some limitations as to the number of shares that can be 
sold outside the country, but there is no limitation of the number 
of shares which can flee outside the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Chairman, none. The nature, of course, of being able to trade 
shares on the open market-place is, of course, fuelled by the 
question of demand. And if there’s a high demand and if there’s 
the ability to pay, there is the danger — in fact, not the danger; I 
will guarantee it, Mr. Chairman, there will be the loss of control 
of this company out of Saskatchewan hands. 
 
It can be located here as a head office; I don’t diminish the 30 
people or the big sign on some building somewhere in 
downtown Saskatoon, but the effective economic control, if the 
shareholding change is fleeing from the government and the 
taxpayers of the province of 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2674 
 

Saskatchewan to private shareholders, the effective economic 
control, if not lost, is greatly diminished. 
 
On top of that, we are merging with essentially a very bad 
company — Eldorado. I don’t think that anything but 
discounting will take place as a result of the market taking a look 
at this merger and us assuming the obligations and the bad 
capital structure of Eldorado that The Financial Post talks about, 
on top of all of that. And we have no guarantees of job studies, 
and we have no studies, none whatsoever. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman, in almost any other jurisdiction in 
Canada, any government that came forward with this kind of 
legislation, with this kind of proposal, without any 
documentation, would be roasted and hounded out of office even 
if the deal was 101 per cent the right thing to do for the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is scandalous, nothing short of scandalous, Mr. Chairman, to 
come to this Legislative Assembly, to come to this Legislative 
Assembly ill-prepared, not prepared to advance any 
documentation — ask us to base the words on hope and 
assurance — on a fundamental, major act of privatization, the 
consequences of which could very well be the loss of economic 
control, let alone the loss of that guy’s job, if he’s watching on 
TV, and affecting his security and his family, which has been the 
history of this. It is scandalous. In any other jurisdiction, if that 
kind of situation pertained, these people would be hounded out 
of office or at least forced to table the documentation. 
 
Now I don’t know what more we can say on this issue. I don’t 
know what we can do. The government is obviously not going to 
table anything; they’re not going to give us any answers; they’re 
going to ask us to be assured. Well I want to tell the minister, as I 
take my place in this Committee of the Whole consideration, I’m 
not going to be assured by your assurances. 
 
This is why it is important that the public understands that when 
we assume office in 1990, in 1991, or whenever you and your 
colleagues screw up the courage to call the election, we will 
want to look at every act of piratization or privatization carefully 
to determine whether or not it is being done in conformity with 
the best interests of the families and the working people and the 
individual taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Not this closed door, behind the doors, 
closed negotiations, these kinds of discussions and no 
documentation to back the case by the government at all, simply 
the bland assurances which are being taken here. No new 
government could do anything else but, to do the responsible 
thing, to get some daylight, some sunshine in on those 
documents so that the members of the press gallery and the 
public could be apprised as to whether this is a good thing or a 
bad thing for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ll close on this point, but I do simply want to 
close by stressing very, very strongly, on the evidence which has 
been tabled here, you, sir, and the members of this House and 
the public of the province of 

Saskatchewan have every reason to be very leery and sceptical 
of what is being done by two PC governments, one in Regina 
and one in Ottawa, motivated more by political determination 
than by economic and social best interests for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to section 5, moved by 
the Deputy Premier: 
 

Amend subsection 5(2) of the printed Bill by adding “to the 
purchaser corporation or to facilitate any sale, assignment, 
or transfer of all or any part of the assets that are situated in 
Saskatchewan to a purchaser corporation” after 
“Saskatchewan.” 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, what this does: clause 5, 
without the amendment, could be interpreted to last for ever. 
And what this amendment does is extinguishes the right of first 
refusal, but only in relation to this transaction. Once this 
transaction, the Newco, takes place, that no longer exists. 
 
Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, this is . . . perhaps the minister 
can give me a brief technical explanation of this power in section 
6 which I understand gives the Cabinet the following power to: 
 

direct SMDC or an assignee, whichever at the time of the 
direction holds securities . . . to sell or otherwise dispose of 
any or all of the securities of the purchaser corporation . . . 

 
I’m reading this correctly, that Cabinet can direct any assignee at 
any time that they must sell or dispose of securities under any 
terms and conditions directed by the Cabinet to that group. 
What’s the reason for this power? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What that provides for is that SMDC 
will hold the shares, the 61.5 initially, of the new company. 
Cabinet may determine to assign those shares to CMB for 
instance, and that’s what that provides for. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would like to amend section 8, and: 
 

Section 8 of the printed Bill is amended: 
 
(a) by renumbering section 8 as subsection 8(1); 

  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2675 
 

and 
 
(b) by adding immediately after subsection 8(1) the 
following: 
 
(2) The Minister shall, by regulation, develop and 
implement programs and projects of special assistance to 
northern Saskatchewan including: 
 
(a) the establishment of a numerical or percentage 
employment objective of at least 50 per cent in order to 
maximize the number of people from local northern 
communities employed by SMDC or any other corporate 
entity established as a result of the transaction described in 
subsection 4(1); and 
 
(b) the requirement that SMDC or the purchaser 
corporation table in the Legislative Assembly, annually, in 
accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 
employment statistics and information necessary to 
effectively reflect the degree of achievement of the 
employment objective. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the only thing that I will 
point out here is that it’s a bit of a redundancy by virtue of these 
conditions being included in the surface lease that exist at the 
various mining sites now, and so I would urge the members to 
defeat the motion. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I was surprised by the minister’s comments in 
the sense that he says that it’s redundant. That only place where 
we have a proper lease agreement in the recent history of SMDC 
was in relation to Key Lake. 
 
And we well know that we need a law to back up statements in 
relation to jobs. We recognize in the privatization program that 
hundreds of jobs have already been lost throughout the province, 
and especially in northern Saskatchewan, the history where 80, 
90 per cent of the employment rate exists, the importance of 
jobs. 
 
One has to examine the problem of the minister’s statement on 
redundancy when he doesn’t even follow the law when it regards 
to Key Lake. The Key Lake figures that were given to me during 
committee did not meet up with the law that exists right now in 
the surface lease agreement. So the minister isn’t even following 
the law in regards to the current lease agreement at Key Lake. 
And what we want to do in this case is make sure that the 
minister follows the law in other mining operations by including 
it within the Bill. 
 
And that’s the important reason why people cannot live from the 
promises of this government. We’ve lost many jobs in many 
areas already, and we simply cannot believe. The people cannot 
believe what you say in regards to promises for jobs, and that’s 
why the inclusion of this aspect for jobs. We know the 
tremendous importance for jobs for all of us, whether we live in 
the South or the North, the importance that it has in not only 
putting food on the table but the fact that it provides a sense of 
stability for the family; that many, many family 

breakdowns occur in times of high unemployment rates. Suicide 
rates go up 4 per cent for every 1 per cent level of 
unemployment rise, and when you go into areas where there’s 
high unemployment, it’s even of greater significance. 
 
The minister has no compassion and no feeling for people in 
northern Saskatchewan. If he felt any real concern he would . . . 
and if he felt that the redundancy was there, then he should 
accept that redundancy. Just like that he should say, yes, this is a 
tremendous addition to the law because he knows that all SMDC 
situations are not covered by the same type of lease agreement 
that Key Lake is in. 
 
(2045) 
 
We have seen that also in Weyerhaeuser where you cannot even 
live up to the agreement. The clause says you will encourage 
people. All you’ve got to do is put one ad on the paper and 
you’ve accomplished your legal requirements to that particular 
agreement. And there are many other new agreements recently 
that are that way. The only ones that were good were the ones 
that put the specific objectives right down on the surface lease. 
But even those ones you don’t follow. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, and especially, you know, I refer to the people 
in northern Saskatchewan, this type of amendment is a must. We 
can’t live on the promises of this government. We have to be 
able to say, yes, we agree with you people and workers in 
northern Saskatchewan; yes, we agree that the opportunity has to 
be there for you. You cannot just say, yes, it’s redundant. You 
have to be able to follow it up with concrete action, and that’s 
what this amendment does. This amendment — and the minister 
said he agrees with the goal, but you have to agree with it in law. 
You have to back it up in law because your record is the worst 
record in regards to jobs that Saskatchewan has ever seen. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Chairperson, I will get my fellow member 
from Athabasca to also say a few words in regards to this 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise today to 
speak on this House amendment that my colleague from 
Cumberland has presented here, and I might add, it’s a very 
important amendment, an amendment that provides for the 
workers in Saskatchewan— especially who are working in 
SMDC or controlled through SMDC — security in the job place. 
Not only security in the job place, but, Mr. Chairman, it provides 
security for individuals and their families who for many, many 
generations have never had any security. 
 
And for the first time underneath the surface lease agreement 
that was signed, Northerners now have an opportunity to 
compete on a fair basis with citizens all over this province and 
all over Canada who come to work at our mines in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think it’s not unfair to ask for a 50 per cent security in 
those jobs. And this amendment, what it does is 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2676 
 

provide that when the amalgamation takes place between SMDC 
and Eldorado Nuclear that the surface lease agreement is in place 
and will also be implemented on any new developments that 
take place in northern Saskatchewan. And I think, Mr. Minister, 
that you indicate that this amendment is redundant; I say it’s an 
important amendment and that you should take a serious look at 
that. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Fairview indicated that this 
merger is a major economic and social development in northern 
Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan as a whole, and I want to 
say to you, Mr. Minister, that it is. But as my colleague from 
Cumberland just indicated, can we trust the government on that 
side to honour the jobs that we have? 
 
Let’s just take a look at the minister of privatization, what he 
said in the House today. And he was talking about Chaplin, and 
he indicated that once it was privatized, the government no 
longer had any control over the jobs that were there. So if the 
private industry wanted to get rid of jobs, the government had no 
say in it. And that’s what’s going to happen in Saskatchewan 
with SMDC. 
 
And you talk about market conditions dictating how soon you 
are going to sell the shares. You’re going to sell 20 per cent in 
the first two years, and I just say that if you take a look at what 
has taken place, and when the Leader of the Opposition 
indicated that SMDC or the province of Saskatchewan had been 
taken to the cleaners, he was right. Saskatchewan has really been 
taken to the cleaners. 
 
What we are doing now, we are taking a strong, healthy 
company, as SMDC, and we’re bringing in a weak sister like 
Eldorado Nuclear from the federal government, and what is 
going to happen? We’re going to amalgamate all the assets of 
the strong and healthy company, as SMDC, and you’re going to 
offer it to the private sector. And let me tell you, the private 
sector is going to gobble this up very fast. And once it’s in the 
private sector’s hands then we have no more control; we lose 
that control. And what are they getting? The amalgamation 
putting the two, Eldorado Nuclear and SMDC, together is going 
to take all the assets, and those assets are tremendous. Those 
assets are just so great compared to the assets that you are going 
to get from Eldorado Nuclear. 
 
You have the Cigar Lake which is worth $10 billion Canadian. 
That is going to go into the amalgamation and that’s going to be 
privatized. You have the biggest operating mine in the world in 
Key Lake. That is going to go into the amalgamation and that is 
going to be privatized. And you just take a look at all the other 
holdings. We’re going to lose control of the surface lease; we’re 
going to lose control of our assets. And we have many assets up 
in northern Saskatchewan. We have gold, silver, graphite, 
limestone. We’re going to lose control of all those, plus we have 
another one in platinum and that may be a sleeper. 
 
But SMDC is a major shareholder in all of these minerals and 
we are going to turn that over to a corporation that is going to be 
privatized. And I tell you it is going to be privatized very fast, 
and we are going to be the big losers. 

So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to look at this and take this serious 
— this House amendment proposed by my colleague from 
Cumberland. And I think it’s fair to say that it should be there 
and it’s the only way that we’re going to have protection for the 
. . . And we’re only talking about 15 per cent of the employees in 
the industry — 15 per cent go to northerners, but 85 per cent go 
to southern Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatoon and all the industries such as the salt mine at Unity, 
those people are going to be the big losers. They all go into this 
here amalgamation and they will all be privatized. And I say that 
in Saskatoon, with the head offices, when you amalgamate those 
head offices and you make one big one, there are going to be a 
lot of individuals who are going to be losing their jobs. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, and I say to the individuals who 
are working in the head offices up in Saskatoon that they better 
be careful when you create this new head office because there’s 
going to be some job losses to the citizens of Saskatchewan and 
to that industry up in Saskatoon. 
 
And with that, Mr. Minister, I just ask you to seriously consider 
the amendment that my colleague has proposed, and I’ll just 
leave it at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
(2106) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 25 
 
Romanow  Atkinson 
Prebble   Anguish 
Rolfes    Goulet 
Shillington  Hagel 
Tchorzewski  Pringle 
Koskie    Lyons 
Thompson  Calvert 
Brockelbank  Lautermilch 
Mitchell   Trew 
Upshall   Smart 
Simard    Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky  Koenker 
Solomon 
 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Duncan   Meiklejohn 
McLeod   Pickering 
Andrew   Martin 
Berntson   Toth 
Lane    Johnson 
Taylor    McLaren 
Smith    Hopfner 
Swan    Petersen 
Muirhead   Swenson 
Maxwell   Martens 
Hodgins   Gleim 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2677 
 

Gerich    Neudorf 
Hepworth  Kopelchuk 
Hardy    Britton 
Klein 
 

 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, on my left is Walt Manley 
for the Department of Rural Development; on my right is Rita 
Vogeli of the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just to inform you, Mr. Chairman, and the 
minister, that we have not got any difficulty with this Bill. I will 
ask a question on clause 5 and on clause 13, and when we get to 
them, I will then ask the questions of the minister. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I note in this clause 5, that 
there is a striking out of the need to print in the Saskatchewan 
Gazette, or publish in the Saskatchewan Gazette. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, what the reason for that is. If the only requirement for 
. . . (inaudible) . . . printing of notices is in the weekly 
newspaper, in the particular community where this event takes 
place, there are many other people throughout the province who 
need this kind of information, and use it from time to time, who 
will not have access to that. 
 
It seems to me that the gazette was one in which, for example, 
most legal offices or law offices, and not all of them, will 
subscribe to, and therefore have readily accessible information. 
Now I may be wrong in this, and if I am I would appreciate the 
explanation. But I am wondering whether you’re zeal for trying 
to reduce the amount of notification that has to be given by 
eliminating the gazette is not going to cause more problems than 
you’re trying to solve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my officials say that 
one reason it was done was that, as the member said, it’s posted 
in the local weekly or daily newspaper. The second part is that, if 
I understand from the land titles office, it’s used very little, if 
any, and it was just a way of streamlining the way that it’s been 
done. So really that’s the two reasons it was done. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it may be used very 

little by the land titles office, but I happen to know that it’s used 
a great deal by law offices where clients come to . . . and where a 
lot of the transactions are handled by legal advisers. This is not 
going to help them at all, Mr. Minister. 
 
In fact, I’m deeply concerned that it’s going to go the other way. 
And a law firm handling an affair for a client in Swift Current, 
dealing with property in Hudson Bay, Saskatchewan, very 
unlikely is going to be getting the Hudson Bay Post-Review. 
And I just really wonder, Mr. Minister, whether you have 
seriously considered this from the point of view of the service 
that is necessary, and the information that is required, by the 
people who have to process some of these transactions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well my officials say that one of the 
reasons is that, first of all, those who would be affected by any 
changes are properly notified anyway, if there is any transfer of 
land. And the other part, is that it’s just a way of streamlining the 
system. It’s used very little even by others and those who are 
transferring land and those who are already notified. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — My final comment, Mr. Minister: I still 
want to put on record my reservations about this elimination. 
The Saskatchewan Gazette is published for a particular purpose. 
It serves that purpose well. I think your so-called desire for 
streamlining is ill-placed in this case. I think that you’re going to 
find that there are going to be difficulties created by it. I wish 
you would consider changing it. I know you don’t . . . you have a 
House amendment, but it has nothing to do with this one. And I 
just want to put on the record our reservations that yours or your 
officials’ desire to streamline for the sake of saying you 
streamlined something in the legislation is not an adequate 
explanation for what I suggest to you is going to cause some 
difficulties to the point where you may have to, or somebody 
else may have to, reconsider this provision at another time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the other reason — and I 
know the member is probably aware of it — is that the 
municipalities can, if they want, put it in the Gazette. They don’t 
really have to. It’s a cost saving to the municipality so it would 
be an option they still have. They can still gazette it if they so 
desire. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, in order to assist you and 
the committee, may I suggest that we do it by page. When we 
get to page 4, I will ask questions on clause 13, and then we can 
do it by page. 
 
Mr. Chairman: I have two House amendments that I have to deal 
with as I go through the Bill, so . . . 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
(2115) 
 
Clause 7 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2678 
 

Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 7, moved by the 
Minister of Rural Development: 
 

Amend section 7 of the printed Bill by striking out 
“November 15” where it appears in subsection 10(3) as 
being enacted therein and substituting “September 1”. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. I would like the 
minister to explain that, because as I look through the 
explanatory notes, there seemed to be quite a definitive 
statement of why this date that’s in the Bill now is such an 
important date; either there’s a typographical error or there must 
be a reason. Just for the record I would like the minister to point 
out what that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member’s 
question, the city of Regina requested it because they do their tax 
notice on September 1 and they needed those extra days to get it 
through. So that’s one of the reasons it was done that way. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Page 3 agreed to. 
 
Page 4 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have a question on clause 13. I’m not 
arguing with it, but I just . . . I want to point out that here is 
another example of the kind of numbers we’re dealing with 
when this government decides to increase fees or penalties or 
registrations or whatever. We have here an increase of 600 per 
cent, and it seems to me that that is a fairly astronomical increase 
in numbers. I know that the argument is going to be, well it 
hasn’t been increased for a long time, but surely, Mr. Minister, 
one way to do that might have been to phase it in over time. 
 
I’m not saying that because I want to encourage people who 
don’t keep up with their taxes to not keep up with them, but I 
just think it’s important to point out, because it is so common 
with the government opposite, that this is an increase of 600 per 
cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that was drafted 
about 40 years ago or so, and that was at $25, the fees at that 
time, and I think the fees are more appropriate now to what it is. 
 
Page 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment, moved by the Minister 
of Rural Development, to amend section 16 of the printed Bill. 
Will you take the amendment as read? 
 
Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 
 
Pages 5 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Forms after section 22 to section 23 agreed to. 
 
Clause 23 agreed to. 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 83 — An Act respecting the Operation of All 
Terrain Vehicles 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce my 
officials. Seated right beside me is Bill McLaren, chairman of 
the Highway Traffic Board; behind me are Mr. Dave Stewart 
and Dave Abbey. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My comments will be 
very brief on this Bill, Mr. Minister. 
 
I congratulate you on bringing this Bill in. We are dealing in this 
serious matter with carnage and even death of many young 
people in Saskatchewan, and this Bill does go some considerable 
distance in, hopefully, stemming that problem; so I congratulate 
you for that. 
 
If I have a major complaint with it, it’s that you didn’t bring the 
Bill in two years ago when it was first a problem; however, 
leaving that aside, I have literally seen no major problems. 
There’s some wording I might quibble a bit. If I were wording 
the legislation, I might have worded it a little different, but 
essentially I’m in favour of the Bill, and as such we will be 
supporting the Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I would suggest, with 
leave of the Assembly, that we go page by page on this Bill. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Pages 4 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 37 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, just before reporting the 
Bill I would like to thank the hon. member and the entire 
opposition for their co-operativeness in making haste to pass this 
legislation through the Assembly. 
 
I know that many groups in Saskatchewan — many people in 
Saskatchewan — have been waiting for this Bill, and I do trust 
that in the interests of safety that all owners and operators of 
all-terrain vehicles will respect the legalities of this Bill and we 
shall have a much safer environment for the youth and adults 
who use all-terrain vehicles. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Ambulance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have Jim 
Simmons with me, who is the head of the ambulance services 
division. 
 
Clause 1 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2679 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, I just want to advise you that we have contacted some 
of the chairs of the boards of various ambulance boards across 
Saskatchewan, and they did not know about the Act, or if they 
knew something, they knew about the Act, they knew something 
was coming, but they weren’t quite sure what was coming. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’d like you to explain to the House tonight 
why you believe it’s so important to amend The Ambulance Act 
to such an extent that boards across this province can no longer 
refuse to renew contracts, because if they do, Mr. Minister, they 
have to go through a mediation process, an arbitration process, 
and they may well end up before a Court of Queen’s Bench 
judge. So can you explain to me why you believe it’s necessary 
to have this legislation, because we believe that it’s taking away 
rights from the boards of various ambulance jurisdictions across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’d be glad to explain it, just to put 
this into the scenario. The Ambulance Act, 1986, has not been 
proclaimed. These are amendments to an Act which has not been 
proclaimed. When that Act was passed in ’86, there was a 
commitment at the time, throughout the process of developing 
that Ambulance Act, and afterward there was a commitment for 
consultation across the piece and the whole of that industry. 
 
And the ambulance advisory committee, which is made up of 
representation from boards, from the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association), from the SHA (Saskatchewan 
Health-Care Association), from the ambulance operators, the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association). All of 
those have representation on the ambulance advisory committee. 
 
And it’s that committee that has gone through an extensive 
process of development of, first of all, the Act in 1986, and then 
these amendments which were deemed by the committee to be 
necessary, and to be in the best interests of that industry prior to 
proclamation of the Act. And so that’s what these amendments 
are now about. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, yes, I understand that you’ve gone 
through some sort of consultation process. But, Mr. Minister, 
you still haven’t explained to me why you believe it’s necessary 
to amend The ambulance Act to such an extent that ambulance 
boards can no longer refuse to renew a contract. And if they do 
refuse to renew a contract, they have to go through a process, if 
there is a dispute, where they have to send the dispute to a 
mediator, and if that’s not satisfactory, then to an arbitrator and 
then to a Court of Queen’s Bench judge. Now I’m not quite clear 
what problem there was with the ambulance industry that has led 
you to change the legislation so that you now take away rights 
from the boards that they used to have. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t believe boards see this as a taking 
away of their rights, as the member would suggest it. First of all, 
you speak of mediation/arbitration and the potential for going to 
court, and so on. I think, in effect, what’s happening here is that 
with the process of 

mediation, which can be a fairly simple process and really not a 
very costly process for both parties if there is some type of 
dispute, what we have to recognize here, I think, is — and I’m 
sure you do recognize that — but what we must recognize that 
we have ambulance operators around the province who are 
under contract to boards and who have tremendous investment. 
And they have an investment and that investment is recognized 
by this legislation, basically, that they have this investment and 
that obviously boards aren’t tied to the operator if there’s some 
cause for them to change the agreement that they have. And 
that’s what’s being recognized in the Act. And that’s, like I say, 
that has gone through a whole series of a consultative process 
with the ambulance advisory committee. 
 
So it’s not something that . . . I think in your earliest statements 
you mentioned that there were some board chairpersons out 
there around the province who, in your words I think, were 
surprised or whatever. I’m surprised to hear that because I know 
that they have representation on the ambulance advisory 
committee, and I know that they do a . . . that the ambulance 
advisory committee represents the whole spectrum of all of those 
bodies in health care that would have a specific interest in this 
pre-hospital care area. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the legislation says that a 
board shall not unreasonably refuse to renew a contract. Now, 
Mr. Minister, I’m asking you: what was it that was happening in 
the ambulance industry that caused you to introduce this 
legislation? What problem did the ambulance industry have with 
the previous legislation that has caused you to introduce 
legislation that takes away rights from boards across this 
province, and really in essence, Mr. Minister, no longer allows 
them to refuse to renew a contract? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, the only thing is in 1986 when the 
Act was passed, the intention we had was to put these provisions 
in regulation. And through that consultative process the 
ambulance industry — through the operators of ambulances, the 
boards, and so on — they came to the agreement that said, look, 
put that process in mediation, the kind of contractual process, put 
that into legislation rather than in regulation. And that’s the 
change that’s been made in these amendments. 
 
And as far as what’s happening in the . . . nothing specifically in 
the industry, but remember that the Act, the very specific 
Ambulance Act did not exist before. I mean, we are operating 
without that Act now. That Act was done and everybody agrees 
with it, and it was not proclaimed. And everybody has a 
tremendous expectation out there in this whole sector for that 
Act to be proclaimed. And it’s two years basically, or almost two 
years now, so it was time to come to an agreement on all of this 
and finally come with amendments before proclamation. 
 
And there’s nothing specific, you know, out there in the industry 
that says this must take place. But it was our intention for the 
mediation-arbitration process, that process which you refer to, to 
be in regulation rather than in legislation, but we’ve now chosen, 
through 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2680 
 

consultation, to make it into legislation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that 
this is close to the original proposal of the ambulance industry. I 
understand, Mr. Minister, that the shakedown has already 
occurred in the ambulance industry, and we now have a fairly 
stable situation in regards to boards of directors or ambulance 
boards across the province and the ambulance industry. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you have said that you believe that that’s taken 
place, that the shakedown has occurred and things have 
stabilized, and I’m wondering what alternatives did you pursue 
besides your decision to introduce this legislation? And perhaps, 
Mr. Minister, instead of having a three-year term, perhaps you 
could have gone to a five-year term and that could have taken 
care of ambulance operators’ concerns that they are spending a 
great deal of money on capital equipment and that sort of thing, 
and that that could have been amortized over a longer period of 
time, and therefore, Mr. Minister, we wouldn’t have needed this 
legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I don’t agree because all sides of the 
boards, everyone believed that the legislation was needed and 
the amendments are needed for the legislation. I mean, 
everybody in the industry believes that. 
 
As far as whether or not we would, you know, in terms of 
alternatives we might have pursued in terms of should it be three 
years, we’ve said it shall be not less than three years. But the 
option of five years, as you suggest, or five years or more, is still 
available to boards and to operators. That’s still available — 
more than three years is still available to them. 
 
And I frankly believe that some of those will take place. But 
what we’ve done is a minimum of three years, and what it’s 
basically done is recognize the investment of the operators out 
there, and as you say, and I believe that you’ve characterized it 
pretty well in the sense that there’s a pretty stable industry out 
there, and that’s happened over a period of a few years now. And 
I think that that’s probably right. 
 
But the legislation is there and it’s recognition of the tremendous 
investment of these operators. And I know that you’ll 
acknowledge, everyone here will acknowledge, that there is a 
significant investment by operators, and a continuing investment 
as they upgrade their equipment to maintain the standards that 
are required and the increasingly more stringent standards that 
are required. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well my opinion, Mr. Minister, if you read 
the legislation, what this can do, in essence, is lock in minimal 
service. That’s what it can do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well I say that it can do that, Mr. Minister, 
because the legislation is very clear — an ambulance board 
cannot unreasonably refuse to renew a contract. They can’t 
unreasonably refuse to do that. 

Mr. Minister, I’m curious to know why a government that seems 
to be committed to a Conservative ideology, a privatization 
ideology, free market ideology, free enterprise, Mr. Minister, 
why would you feel the need to have such a massive intervention 
by the provincial government, by a Conservative government, 
into an industry that has stabilized over the last few years and we 
don’t really see a number of problems? Why the massive 
government intervention? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well first of all, I don’t believe it’s 
massive intervention; and secondly, what this legislation, the 
whole process of this legislation and the clauses and the 
provisions of this legislation were requested by both operators 
and boards across Saskatchewan, and that’s the case. 
 
And so when the ambulance advisory committee, made up of 
representation of all of those that I’ve outlined, says this is the 
kind of legislation we want — going back to the original 
legislation and then now these amendments which will finalize 
this legislation, which frankly, and I know that if you look at all 
of it, and I believe you have, that The Ambulance Act, when 
proclaimed with these amendments, will be without question the 
best — the best and the most forward looking in the country. 
 
Now in the terms of the kinds of standards and so on that you 
referred to earlier, there is no provision here which will, as you 
say, lock in minimums, because what we have here is obviously 
the provincial government, through the Department of Health, 
has the right and the responsibility, frankly, of setting standards. 
And those standards will change as time goes on and the kind of 
standards that are required. People will maintain their licence as 
long as they live up to those standards, but they certainly will not 
if they don’t live up to those standards as they’re set by the 
department in a responsible manner over time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again I have to 
reiterate, with this legislation all an ambulance operator has to do 
is live up to the bare minimum and an ambulance board can not 
refuse to renew the contract. Mr. Minister, where is the incentive 
in this legislation for ambulance boards to improve the quality 
and quantity of their service? I’m sorry, not ambulance boards 
but ambulance operators. Where is the incentive for the 
ambulance operators to improve the quality and quantity of their 
service? Where is it in this legislation, because my interpretation 
of the legislation is, live up to the bare minimum, don’t do much 
beyond the bare minimum, and an ambulance board can’t refuse 
to renew my contract. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I couldn’t disagree with you more. I 
couldn’t disagree with you more, the way in which you portray 
this legislation. You have said just a while ago that the 
ambulance industry is pretty stable out there — that we have 
some excellent operators. I believe I heard you say — we have 
good operators around the province, and so on. We have 
ambulance boards who take their responsibility seriously and 
there’s no question that that’s the case, and there’s no question, 
as well, that they are, on a continuing basis, on a continuing 
basis, upgrading their standards to the latest types of equipment, 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2681 
 

the latest kind of units and all the rest of that stuff that has 
continued and will continue in the province, and that’s to the 
credit of both the boards and the operators in the province. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, just so we’re clear, just so 
we’re clear, up until now ambulance boards and ambulance 
operators have not had this legislation. Ambulance operators 
have realized that a board could refuse to renew a contract. Such 
is contract law in this country and in this province. We now have 
a piece of legislation, Mr. Minister, that could change that 
situation, or will change that situation significantly. 
 
All I’m saying, Mr. Minister — and I’m not saying that 
ambulance operators are going to do this, I’m simply saying to 
you that it is possible that all an ambulance operator has to do is 
meet the bare minimum, meet the bare minimum, and an 
ambulance board cannot refuse to renew the contract. An 
ambulance board cannot decide to go and contract that service 
with some other ambulance operator. That’s what I’m saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And I disagree with you. First of all, 
let’s not suggest, because the minimums that you talk about, the 
bare minimum, and portray it as though they’re just very, very 
low minimums here — the minimums as set by the . . . The 
standards for ambulance services in this province are very high, 
there’s no question about that, and by comparison and by using 
anyone’s yardstick. That’s number one. 
 
And secondly, I believe that these ambulance operators are more 
likely, more likely to . . . There is more incentive for them to 
upgrade their equipment, their units, all of their operation, when 
they have this stability that’s offered by this legislation, stability 
which goes beyond a single year contract. So I believe that that 
stability in itself will be incentive for them to upgrade and for 
them, you know, to carry on upgrading their units because they 
have some planning horizons which are beyond one year. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is my . . . I just want 
to outline it this way: if an ambulance board decides that they 
want to get an emergency medical technician instead of having a 
technician, and a technician is the minimum standard, and if that 
ambulance operator doesn’t want to provide that emergency 
medical technician, Mr. Minister, that’s it. The board can’t force 
the ambulance operator to provide the better service because the 
board’s not in the position to refuse to renew the contract 
because they can’t unreasonably refuse to renew contracts if that 
ambulance operator is meeting the minimum standards. 
 
So I’m simply arguing, Mr. Minister, that it’s possible that your 
legislation that you’re introducing here tonight will lead to 
mediocrity in the industry. It is not going to increase the 
standards of the industry because you have locked ambulance 
boards into contracts with operators, and all they have to do is 
meet the minimum standards. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this legislation prevents the boards from 
setting up their own services or going to some other ambulance 
operator who may be able to provide a better service, as long as 
that ambulance operator is meeting 

minimum standards. And all I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is that 
I’m very surprised that a government that believes in the 
free-market system, a government that believes in free enterprise 
would introduce a piece of legislation which would be such a 
massive intervention in the system. I find that a contradiction, 
Mr. Minister, and all I’m saying is that I’m very surprised. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: I would like to thank the minister then. 
 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend the Income Tax Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me is Art 
Wakabayashi, deputy minister of Finance; behind me — 
immediately behind me is John Wright, executive director, 
taxation, economic policy division; beside Mr. Wright, Mr. Kirk 
McGregor, associate director of taxation policy; and Mr. Randy 
Simpson, tax analyst, taxation and economic policy division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to make a 
couple of comments in respect to this Bill. And I want at the 
outset to say that it provides, essentially, two policy amendments 
as is indicated by the notes provided by the minister. The 
proposed amendment prescribes an increase to the Saskatchewan 
flat tax rate from 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent, or a 33 and a third 
per cent increase in net income tax. And section 7(1) of the 
proposed amendment provides for extension of a two-year 
corporate tax holiday for new small business through to April 1, 
1990. 
 
I want at the outset to indicate to the minister and to the House 
that we are not opposing the proposed amendment that provides 
an extension of a two-year corporate tax holiday to new small 
businesses, but what we are objecting to, Mr. Minister, is the 
oppressive tax that you have levied against the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve been through this in the Department of Finance estimates, 
and I don’t think that we have to take a long time to reiterate the 
massiveness of the tax increase on the ordinary Saskatchewan 
citizens. 
 
And I want to say that we oppose the amendments in respect to 
the flat tax because it represents a thirty-three and one-third per 
cent increase. And as I have indicated, that this tax alone, besides 
the regular income tax we pay, on a 25,000 net income, people 
of Saskatchewan are now paying $500. 
 
I have talked to teachers and other people in the labour force, in 
the professions, and they have indicated that while their income 
has increased, because of the excessive taxes that their net 
take-home pay has been 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2682 
 

reduced over two years ago. We now have here in 
Saskatchewan, and I don’t think the minister can deny, the 
second highest personal income tax in the country at a level of 
$35,000 gross income, and second only to Quebec. 
 
And the minister very conveniently — because we used that 
figure last time that was included in his budget — excluded it 
this year, and he raised it up to 40,000 rather than use the 35,000. 
So our suspicions is that at 35,000, that we may well be the 
highest personal income tax in all of the nation. Last year on the 
budget alone, in the figures provided by the Minister of Finance 
on personal income tax, we were second only to Quebec. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are 
concerned; they’re concerned about the priorities of this 
government and its taxation policies. And for every $1 that we 
pay in income tax, corporations pay a miserable 16 cents. Yet 
this government has indicated in this budget that it has intentions 
of decreasing the corporate income tax by 2 per cent, from 17 to 
15 per cent. The reason given by the minister is that we have to 
create a level playing-field for the corporations. You know, the 
people of Saskatchewan are asking, we’d like to have a level 
playing-field as well with respect to the rest of Canada. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, the irony of it all is that this 
government proposed major tax cuts to the people of this 
province. You indicated that there would be a cut, net cut in 
income tax by 10 per cent across the board, and here in the last 
— in the 1985-86 budget, and subsequently in the ’87-88 and 
again this year, you’ve imposed a massive 2 per cent surtax, or 
flat tax — a 200 per cent increase on the flat tax rate. 
 
You indicated and you promised the people of Saskatchewan 
that you would reduce the E & H tax. You reneged on that 
promise, Mr. Minister. You indicated that in the first term of 
office that the E & H tax would be reduced. And I heard the 
Premier shortly after being elected, and he said: no problem, the 
E & H tax would go. And what has the people of Saskatchewan 
been faced with? They’ve been faced with a 40 per cent increase 
in the E & H tax. 
 
The income tax, the E & H tax, those are the taxes that hit the 
average income person in Saskatchewan. And if we take a look 
at the scheme of taxation in this province and we look at from 
’83-84 to ’88-89, extra revenue from corporate income tax and 
corporate capital tax add up to an additional $63 million. But the 
extra revenue that is garnered by the personal income tax and the 
sales tax is an additional $402 million on the backs of ordinary 
Saskatchewan people. And what is more, this government, your 
government, excluded from the tax break to the people of this 
province some $80 million eliminated in the property 
improvement grant. 
 
Yes, you indicated that you would also eliminate the fuel tax, 
and this has been reimposed, and I went through it this afternoon 
where you admitted yourself that some $13 million would be 
confiscated from the people of Saskatchewan. You estimated 
$39; you intend to pay out only $26 million. Moreover, what you 
have done is taken 

that money on the fuel tax and you have used it for a year, 
gained interest on it, interest-free money. And what you have 
racked up in the administration, the most inefficient 
administration of any program in the history of this province, 
somewhere around $ million just to administer that program and 
to send out your publicity to the people of this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, this government seeks to increase the 
property improvement tax, and at the same time in this very 
budget it indicates a corporate income tax reduction. And more 
than that, it indicates that there will be a resource royalty 
reduction. That is estimated at $20 million handed over to the 
resource industry. 
 
And I want to say, the thing that is most scandalous of all is 
while this government stands forward and taxes ordinary 
Saskatchewan people with excessive personal income tax, the 
minister, the other night in the estimates of Finance, indicates, 
yes, of course, we’re hoarding money. He called it a stabilization 
fund. And there he has packed away for future use by the Tory 
party several hundreds of millions of dollars tucked away into a 
Tory slush fund. And at the same time he stands up here and he 
is taxing ordinary people again on the flat tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: — If he doesn’t find it there, he just goes to 
Dome. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan are 
fair. The people were prepared and are prepared to pay more 
taxes for maintaining services, improving programs, but they’re 
not getting the value out of the dollar. 
 
There’s underfunding, Mr. Minister, of education, and I talked 
about it this afternoon. For the first time there is quota on 
students that can enter the University of Saskatchewan, the first 
time that the doors of higher learning have been closed by your 
underfunding. 
 
We have seen the massive cuts in health care where the 
callousness of this government would deny our children a proper 
dental program. We have seen the callousness of a government 
that would destroy the best drug program in Saskatchewan and 
deny our senior citizens needed drugs. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, on top of all of this the people of 
Saskatchewan see a increase in taxation on them, a decrease on 
the corporations, cut in services, and an ever increasing burden 
of debt imposed upon them — $11.7 billion, $3.9 billion in the 
Consolidated Fund alone. Debt, deficits, higher taxes, cut in 
programs, and sell off of our assets, the like of which we have 
never seen. And we asked in the Committee of Finance, the 
minister, whether he could advise what amounts have 
accumulated to the government of this province in the sale off of 
assets of this province — the highway equipment, the coal 
mines, the Saskoil, and the list goes on, and Sask Minerals. 
 
Where is this money? That’s what the people of this province are 
asking. All they’re getting is less services and more taxation. 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan 
are sick and tired of more taxes. They’re sick and tired of the 
arrogance of this government 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2683 
 

as demonstrated by the Minister of Urban Affairs. There is 
undoubtedly the . . . This is undoubtedly the most inefficient, the 
most incompetent government that this province has ever 
witnessed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And you know, Mr. Chairman, what is so ironic 
is that they have the audacity to go out and to advise city 
councils how to run efficient operation. I want to say, the people 
of Saskatchewan are facing a massive increase in taxation under 
this government. But more than that, they have seen the cost of 
services increasing; they have seen power rates go up; they have 
seen telephone rates increase; they have seen this government, 
which said they would remove taxation against services to the 
people of Saskatchewan, they have seen this government impose 
a tax upon a tax imposed by the federal government. Insurance 
rates are up. Fees and licences: we did an analysis of 234 
individual licences. Licences and fee schedules have been 
massively increased. And I want to say what is happening is that 
the burden of taxation is being transferred onto the local property 
owners throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that if this government wasn’t 
supported by the press and the media, it would have been run out 
of office by now. Can you imagine asking people to pay more 
flat tax at the same time that this government spends $8.4 
million on empty office space? Can you imagine any 
government being allowed to stay in office, when at the time that 
they’re imposing more taxes on the people of the province they 
have an advertising budget last year estimated at $25 million? 
Can you imagine the people of Saskatchewan wanting to put up 
with tax increases on them at the same time they’re cutting 
corporate income tax? Can you imagine the people of 
Saskatchewan wanting to pay more income tax while $21 
million is paid to Peter Pocklington? Can you imagine the people 
of Saskatchewan wanting to pay more taxes when $1 million 
grant was given to Canada Packers? 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine the people of 
Saskatchewan being pleased with this Minister of Finance 
asking them to pay more taxes when the air transportation of the 
government officials and cabinet ministers outside of 
Saskatchewan cost over $2 million? I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
can you imagine the people of Saskatchewan being willing to 
pay more flat tax when one of their Tory organizers, a Bruce 
Cameron, uses a tax-supported institution to do PC government 
work? can you imagine asking ordinary Saskatchewan taxpayers 
to pay more taxes when this government authorizes contracts to 
the likes of Paul Schoenhals in excess of $200,000? Can you 
imagine Saskatchewan people wanting to pay more taxes when 
they pay to George Hill in excess of $300,000? I ask you, can 
you expect the people of Saskatchewan to want to pay more 
taxes when Louis Domotor, the defeated cabinet minister, is paid 
excess of $40,000 and may be doing nothing? 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that the people of the province are 
sick and tired of paying more and receiving less. The people of 
this province are sick and tired of the deceit, the 
mismanagement, the waste, the 

incompetence of this government. The people of the province 
are watching, and they’re waiting, and they’re poised to turf this 
government out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I want to say that as the preliminary round, 
what was evidence in the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview 
and in Elphinstone clearly demonstrated to the people of 
Saskatchewan how they feel about this government. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, the main issue in respect to the tax 
increase is the massive cut in services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The people are saying: why do we have more 
debt, more deficits, more taxes, and less services? And that’s the 
question the people of Saskatchewan are asking, and that’s the 
question of the people of Saskatchewan are going to decide 
come the next election. 
 
(2200) 
 
I can only say that your political future will in large be decided 
by what you do with this Bill. And for the people of those who 
have worked and built this province, we ask, Mr. Minister, that 
you withdraw this massive tax increase — to withdraw it and be 
fair to the people of Saskatchewan that have built it. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, obviously we’ll be voting against 
this Bill, and I say to you, Mr. Minister, we’re not against the tax 
holiday in respect to the tax holiday for new businesses being 
started. 
 
In respect to the Bill, having completed my remarks, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to ask the minister if he wants to comment; I 
may have a rebuttal. But I want to ask him that in respect to the 
notes that you have provided, Mr. Minister, there are two parts to 
it that you have provided. There are what you term the technical 
amendments and those policy amendments. And what I want to 
ask you first of all is: in respect to the technical amendments, can 
you indicate and guarantee to this House that as a result of 
co-ordinating with the federal income tax — that’s the parent 
technical amendments — can you indicate to the House that as a 
result of co-ordinating those technical amendments with the 
income tax of the federal government, whether or not the people 
of Saskatchewan will in fact be paying more taxes as a result of 
those technical amendments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. There would be no change in the tax 
position as a result of the technical amendments and no change 
in the assessments. Let me respond though to the hon. members 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . don’t feel I have to; I feel that 
that’s not the general consensus, to the hon. member. 
 
I will indicate to the hon. member because I know that many of 
the people watching will be interested to know that three days 
from now virtually every taxpayer in this province will have 
more take-home pay. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, effective 
July 1 of this year over 90 per 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2684 
 

cent of the taxpayers in Saskatchewan will have higher 
take-home pay. 
 
I’m going to tell you effective July 1 — I’m going to tell the 
hon. member at the back row that in fact there is one category 
out of all the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Now I’m going to ask the hon. member to calm 
down back there. She’s a little wound up, it’s getting near the 
end of the session and she’s had a pretty exciting time down here 
in Regina, and I know that she wants to get back to Saskatoon. 
And I just ask her to calm down and settle down because we are 
winding up here tonight and we could have a rational debate. 
 
I’ll tell the hon. member opposite which category, which 
category of taxpayer, and I’m referring to the following 
categories: the single tax filer; the single with two children; 
married with two children; married; single tax filer. Every single 
taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, except those earning $50,000 a year will 
receive more take-home pay effective this July 1. 
 
And I’m going to tell you how much the tax increase is on those 
at $50,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. They will pay $14 a year more 
in tax. That’s a little better than a dollar a month more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want the people of Saskatchewan to realize 
that when they have more take-home, effective July 1, that the 
NDP opposed it, Mr. Speaker. They have fought the tax reform, 
they’ve opposed the tax reform, and we just heard the hon. 
member from the Quill Lakes tonight tell the people of this 
province that he’s opposed to the tax reform, Mr. Speaker, and 
he made that abundantly clear — he made that abundantly clear 
to everybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
So when the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, effective July 1, have 
more take-home, have more take-home, not only do they refute 
what the hon. member said tonight, but they will remember, and 
remember in spades, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it was the New 
Democratic Party that had opposed the tax reform. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to reiterate what we had 
talked about the other day in estimates. And we went through 
that debate, Mr. Speaker. But the hon. member opposite either 
wasn’t listening or did not want to hear, because we now have, 
we now have, Mr. Speaker, the results of all the other provincial 
budgets. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, for those earning $20,000 a 
year, Saskatchewan — on taxes and charges — has the second 
lowest taxes and charges in Canada. For those earning $30,000 a 
year, the taxes and charges, Saskatchewan are the third lowest. 
For those earning $40,000 a year, Mr. Speaker, taxes and 
charges by the provincial Government of Saskatchewan, it’s the 
second lowest. And for those earning 50,000, Saskatchewan is 
the second lowest. And for those earning more than 60,000, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the third lowest in taxes and 
charges in the province. 
 
And I find the arguments a little interesting, Mr. Speaker, 
because we did debate the other day, and I know that there was 
silence as I reminded the NDP members 

opposite, who were so opposed and who said in this House, who 
said in this House — and we will be communicating this with 
the people who submitted gas rebates — that the NDP in this 
House said specifically, get rid of the gas rebates. And that’s 
what they said. The fuel tax rebates, they said they’re going to 
get rid of them; they don’t want them; they don’t like them. 
 
And all I say, Mr. Chairman, and to the people of this province, 
is that when the people are reminded that the NDP are going to 
take away the rebate, we will watch NDP candidates around this 
province say — as the member from Humboldt did the other 
night when he tries to deny any participation in the potash 
nationalization — the NDP will run around and say, oh, that’s 
not me, that’s not me that’s against the rebate. oh no, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what they’ll tell them. That’s what they’ll tell 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Hansard of this House, the record of this House shows 
in no uncertain terms that the NDP during this session, Mr. 
Speaker, said they’ll do away with the rebate. So again, Mr. 
Speaker, when we talk about taxes — and we’ve had a lengthy 
debate this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the 
expenditures, and the various expenditures, the record 
expenditures in health and education and others, Mr. Speaker — 
the debate will go on, but I have little doubt, Mr. Speaker, that 
we will be debating some other issues. As the hon. member 
indicated, he didn’t want to talk about them, Mr. Speaker. And I 
say to the hon. member that we know you’re opposed to tax 
reform. And we know you’re opposed to the public participating 
in the ownership of this economy. And we know you’re opposed 
to the fuel rebate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, whether you like it or not, you can’t have it 
both ways on this bill. You can’t stand up on the one hand and 
say, oh, you’re in favour of the tax holiday for small business. It 
doesn’t work that way. The people affected on that will know, 
and we will tell them that you voted against the tax holiday for 
new small businesses. You can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s not the way the system works. 
 
So the hon. member stands up and says you’re taxing business 
. . . you’re not taxing business enough; you’re giving them a 
corporate holiday — we’re in favour of that, but we’re against 
the other. All I say to the hon. member is that we have gone 
through this debate several times now, and I suggest to the hon. 
member that certainly in the public he’s not having much 
success. 
 
And again I’ve reiterated now, on numerous occasions, the 
actual tax position. but I would like to take the opportunity, and 
I’m sure the hon. member will join with me in urging the people 
of Saskatchewan to recognize that on July 1 they will have 
higher take-home; and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that all — 
particularly the wage-earners in this province — will note on 
July 1 that the take-home should be higher. 
 
If the take-home’s not higher, I’d certainly like to be told about 
it, Mr. Speaker, because I’ll be glad to get in contact with the 
employers because all the tax tables are to be adjusted July 1, 
Mr. Speaker, which gets more take-home 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2685 
 

pay for the average worker in this province — more take-home 
pay for well over 90 per cent of the taxpayers of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure the hon. member will, as I say, join 
with me in making sure people read, read after the July 1 tables 
are into effect, their pay cheques to make sure that they are 
getting the full benefit of tax reform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that this minister 
has a credibility problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you feature this, this man getting up and 
telling people anything about statistics or financing or deficit? 
This is the guy that stood in this House in 1986-87 and said to 
the people of Saskatchewan, we’re going to have a reduction in 
the deficit. It’s going to be $389 million. And when it turned out, 
it was $1.4 billion. And he stands up and he wants to say, listen 
to me, people of Saskatchewan, I got credibility. Well what a 
joke — what a farce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And here is the Houdini of the Tory Party. He 
says, I’ve increased taxes but you’re going to pay less. Well isn’t 
that something remarkable. Only a Tory, only an ex-Liberal, 
running Tory, could come up with a statement like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — He increases the taxation and he says he 
reduced them. Can you feature it? Now that is a remarkable feat 
— credibility, I say. 
 
I want to ask the minister a simple question. Can you indicate . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I wouldn’t expect anything else, Murray. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well it would have to be simple for you to 
answer, so I’m going to keep it simple, And I’m going to ask 
you, Mr. Minister, can you indicate, with the one thirty-three and 
a third per cent increase in the surtax, what is the additional 
revenue, gross revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The effect of the increase in conjunction 
with the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, no. That’s because this is the way the 
Bill is introduced, is $22 million. Oh yes, the Hon. member . . . 
We lose a substantial amount of money because of the effect of 
federal tax reform. We’ve indicated that. So we get an increase 
in revenue of $22 million. 
 
I can throw out to the hon. member, as well, that the effect of tax 
reform, Mr. Speaker, nets out in tax reductions for the people of 
this province, effective — really effective July 1, about $40 
million. 

Mr. Koskie: — I’m sure you missed the question. I just ask you, 
on the basis of the gross amount to be collected by the half a 
percentage increase in the flat tax. In your 1987-88 budget, Mr. 
Minister, in your tax revenue, you indicated that a 1 per cent 
increase yielded in excess of $100 million — $107 million, to be 
exact. And that’s the figure that has been produced. And what 
I’m asking to you, Mr. Minister: what is the gross amount that 
the province of Saskatchewan gets in respect to that imposition 
of a half a percentage, a thirty-three and a third per cent increase 
in the flat tax? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated to the hon. member that with 
the conjunction of federal tax reform, the increase is $22 million. 
So I’ve indicated to the hon. member on numerous occasions 
that it’s about $52 million a half point, less the $30 million that 
federal tax reform comes into play . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It has nothing to do with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, the hon. member says nothing to do 
with it. First of all you’re opposed to it, so we should keep that 
on record. But secondly, Mr. Speaker, the way the legislation 
before us is designed is that it tracks the federal tax reform, and 
the tables are adjusted July 1 as they are with federal tax reform 
so that the net increase straight on the income tax is roughly 22 
when we add the other tax benefits of tax reform — and the 
biggest beneficiary in Saskatchewan will be seniors — it will be 
in the range of $40 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Fifty-two million dollars, thank you very much. 
That’s what the people of Saskatchewan will be paying, an extra 
thirty-three and a third per cent increase in the surtax, in the flat 
tax. And you call it a tax reduction. The people of Saskatchewan 
will well appreciate your tax reduction. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, you also indicated at the time 
that you threw on the backs of the people of Saskatchewan an 
increase of $52 million in the flat tax at the same time you 
reduced the corporate income tax rate from 17 to 15 per cent, 
and you wanted a . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, you aren’t 
doing it in here, but in your budget you indicated that you will be 
doing it. And you didn’t have the gall to stand up here at the 
same time while you increased the personal income tax on 
ordinary citizens, to include in The Income Tax Act the 
reduction in respect to the corporate income tax which you 
intend to introduce. 
 
And so I want to ask you: can you indicate what amount of 
money will be lost to the province of Saskatchewan per a 
percentage reduction in the corporate income tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member asks, I believe, why it’s 
not in the Bill. It’s not . . . with regard to the corporate tax, it 
doesn’t take place until 1989, so we’ll get another chance to 
debate it. 
 
But I’ve indicated to the hon. member and in the tax reform 
paper that all of the corporate taxes are part of a 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2686 
 

package. And let me tell you why they are part of a package. 
Corporate tax revenues . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, 
corporate tax revenues had remained relatively flat over the last 
several years, notwithstanding some rather significant increases 
on corporate capital tax, etc., and on corporate income tax. By 
levelling the playing field with Alberta we will recapture some 
of that. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the corporate capital surcharge will also 
assist in recovery of more money, so that the result of the 
corporate tax reforms that we have proposed, the increase in tax 
revenue on the corporate side in 1988-89 will be $39.6 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I asked you a specific question. 
You have indicated in your budget that you intend to decrease — 
not at the same time, but within your budget — a decrease in the 
corporate income tax from 17 to 15 per cent. That’s 2 percentage 
points, I ask you: what revenue are you giving up to the province 
of Saskatchewan, to the people of Saskatchewan, per percentage 
of reduction in personal . . . corporate income tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the effect of the corporate tax 
reduction to 15 per cent will be $1.1 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is that within a . . . I want to be specific here. I 
don’t think that’s accurate, Mr. Minister, because if you look . . . 
I want to ask, if that for an entire full year, or is it in respect to a 
part of a year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The balance of ’88-89, what the hon. 
member has to realize is that there is some broadening of the 
base as a result of federal tax reform on the corporate side. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, while at the 
same time that you’re increasing the personal income tax on the 
people of this province, is it true that in your budget you’re also 
indicating a resource royalty reduction? And would you indicate 
the amount of the resource, the estimated amount of the resource 
royalty reduction that you are contemplating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well on the royalty credit, 1 per cent is $20 
million. The increase on uranium royalty is $11 million. Increase 
in . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, it’s about $9 million. 
 
But only the opposition does not grasp, because everybody else 
does, that the corporate tax reform in fact generates an additional 
nearly $40 million this year. And it does it, and I’m going to 
have to explain again. I’m going to have to explain to the hon. 
member over and over again, I think, that the additional uranium 
royalty increase, Crown corporations on the corporate capital 
tax, federal tax reform, and the corporate surcharge and all of the 
changes being made on the corporate side are designed to 
increase revenue but also capture revenue that has been flowing 
out of the province because of our tax system, and that’s what 
it’s designed to do, and that’s how we fundamentally get a rather 
significant increase in corporate taxes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask one more question, 

Mr. Minister, in respect to your budget and in respect to your 
taxation, because while you have no hesitation in imposing it on 
the ordinary people of Saskatchewan, I want to know why you 
have included, at a time when the manufacturing and processing 
is under some stress in the province, the repeal of the 
manufacturing and processing tax reduction. You indicated that, 
in the budget, and I want to know, if you’re repealing it, what is 
the savings to the province? And I’d like also to know your 
rationale at a time when the manufacturing and processing is 
under some strain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The difficulty with that manufacturing and 
processing tax reduction . . . And the loss for ’88-89 is about 
400,000; for ’89-90 it would be 5.5 . I’m sorry, increase. The 
reason that we took away the reduction is that the definition of 
manufacturing and processing is, by virtue of our involvement 
with the national tax system, that we use the federal definition of 
manufacturing and processing. And included in the federal 
definition are restaurants, taverns, hotels, bakeries, drug stores, 
and food stores. And so the biggest beneficiary by use of the 
federal definition were these activities — and wholesalers I 
might add — so that it really wasn’t, although it was attempted, 
it really was not going as tax advantage or an advantage to actual 
Saskatchewan manufacturers and processors. The federal 
definition is just extremely wide. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you seem to be 
indicating that you are tying yourself to the federal tax proposals 
and the tax reform, and I’m wanting to ask you one more 
question: have you any agreement with the federal government 
in respect to their proposed after-the-election value added tax, 
and whether or not the province of Saskatchewan will be further 
adding to the burden of the ordinary taxpayer by a commitment 
or an agreement with the federal government to the adherence of 
that policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think, with respect, the idea of a 
value added tax was rejected and several exclusions have already 
been announced by the federal government . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, but what’s being considered now is the 
national sales tax, and I’ve indicated . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Same thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well unfortunately it’s not. I’m not trying to 
prolong the debate, but they are fundamentally different taxes. 
So a national sales tax is being considered. I’ve made it clear to 
the Assembly and the public before that we will take a look at 
the proposals for a national sales tax. Many small businesses, for 
example, have urged the government to join a national sales tax 
so that there is only one sales tax that they are responsible for 
collecting. And certainly business organizations have also 
expressed that view. 
 
We have not committed to any position. We will take a look at 
the proposals when they come from the federal government. And 
if they’re in the best interests of the people of this province and 
acceptable to the people of this province, then I think it would 
only be fair that we give them due consideration. But we’re, I 
believe, a long way away from that, and I suggest to the hon. 
member 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2687 
 

that there maybe some support in much of the small business 
community for only have one tax. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask one specific 
question, if I may, and then we can proceed with the approval of 
the Act. And that refers, if it’s for your convenience, to section 6, 
subsection 2. And I just look at the explanatory notes, Mr. 
Minister, and it indicates that subsection 6(5) provides for: 
 

a 10 per cent provincial tax for the first 200,000 of taxable 
income earned by a credit union; taxable income in excess 
of 200,000 is tax n the general corporate tax rate. 

 
And I just want to ask you: is there any change in the rate or the 
amount that would be collected in respect to the credit unions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There’s no change in the effect. The federal 
government changed . . . made amendments to its Act which 
resulted in a change in the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . primarily. But there’s no change on the 
effect on credit unions or anyone else affected by that provision. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2230) 
 
Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly, Theresa Holizki, chairperson, general 
manager of Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and Pat Moleski, acting 
manager of counselling of Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don’t have 
any questions as such about the particular provisions in the Bill. I 
think that they’re generally satisfied that they’re intended to do 
what the minister has outlined, and that is to make some 
modifications to the plan. 
 
I do want to ask the minister, however, if he can tell us just what 
the actuarial impact will be of the various changes that he 
proposes. I suppose, more particularly, if he can tell us what the 
budgetary implications will be of the changes that are posed by 
this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We estimate the costs of the changes will be 
probably less than $50,000. There is one item that we estimate 
will be the largest one, about $20,000. 
 
We’re changing the eligibility rules so that members can 

continue to contribute to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, even 
though they may be receiving benefits from the Canada Pension 
Plan or the Quebec Pension Plan or death benefits from SPP 
(Saskatchewan Pension Plan). That is the one particular item 
you’re probably familiar, changes made to the Canada Pension 
Plan, and this is brought in in conjunction with that. 
 
But that’s . . . we estimate roughly about $20,000, so the actual 
costs of all the amendments are really quite modest. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Minister, for that 
information. I just have one further concern that I’d like to share 
with you, and that’s the question of tax deductibility. The last 
reference guide I have, or kit for new members for 1987 with 
respect to the pension plan, indicates that, and I quote: 
 

Your personal contribution is deductible when you file 
your income tax return subject to the annual contribution 
limits for registered retirement saving plans. 

 
I’ve had a couple, now three, cases brought to my attention 
within the last number of weeks, where people have received 
communications from Revenue Canada and these people had 
originally thought or were under the impression, subject to the 
information contained in this kit, that they would in fact be 
eligible, that their contributions would be eligible for an income 
tax deduction. 
 
They were surprised to find out that, in fact, the contributions 
were not eligible. And I wonder if you and your officials have 
given any thoughts to clarifying the information that you provide 
to people that are interested in enrolling in the plan so as to make 
it quite clear that when you talk about annual contribution limits, 
that you’re not just talking about dollar amounts, but that you’re 
also talking about interpretations from Revenue Canada. And 
that people, in fact, need to be very clear before they enter into 
an obligation with respect to this plan; they need to be very clear 
as to the interpretation from Revenue Canada, lest they be under 
some misunderstanding as to whether or not their contributions 
will be eligible for income tax deduction. 
 
And I wonder if the minister might comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What I would like to do, if the hon. member 
would agree, is there are really two questions that come about. 
But basically, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan follows the 
eligibility for RRSPs (registered retirement savings plans). 
 
The question of investment income and the deductibility from 
investment income, that’s prohibited under the federal income 
tax. 
 
And the other question is the spousal deduction ability to the 
RRSPs. And I wonder . . . I can get some rather complex 
statements from the . . . answers for the hon. member. I wonder 
if he would accept me forwarding the technical aspects of those 
two areas, which I think are the matters of concern, to give a full 
explanation to the 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2688 
 

member. All I can give him is the assurance that the same rules 
apply with regard to an RRSP deduction as apply to the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate you sending 
over the information. I don’t want to get into the details of 
Revenue Canada rulings, but I guess the . . . and I would agree 
with you that it would appear — and although there is an 
exception that my colleague may raise here, it appears that the 
rules that apply with respect to RRSPs and income tax 
deductions also apply to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And 
excepting that, the fact remains, the fact remains — at least from 
two cases that have been brought to my attention — that this is 
not clear to the people that are enrolling in the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan, and that there’s inadequate information, that it’s 
not being made clear to people that certain kinds of income, 
certain kinds, of income, will in fact will not be eligible for the 
income tax deduction. 
 
The information he puts out talks about annual contribution 
limits. I think most people understand that there are limits within 
the RRSP, but they do not understand that certain kinds of 
incomes might be eligible for a income tax deduction as opposed 
to certain other kinds of income not being eligible. 
 
There is some confusion out there. I have had the case of one 
person who entered into the plan on the assumption that their 
contributions would be tax deductible, found out that in fact they 
were not tax deductible, and has simply withdrawn from the plan 
because they feel the RRSPs are a better alternative in that 
situation. I don’t know why they draw that conclusion, but that’s 
the conclusion that they’ve drawn. 
 
In any event, they’ve withdrawn from the plan. And their feeling 
is, their feeling is that there has been a lack of information at the 
outset, or a lack of clear interpretation for them to enable them to 
make an informed decision as to whether or not this particular 
plan is in their best interests. 
 
And I wonder if I might get your comments on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — When the information went out we 
obviously wanted to keep it as understandable as possible, and 
relating it to the RRSP was the objective. 
 
I agree with the hon. member that there are some technical 
rulings from national revenue which have some impact. I’m 
advised that the new application forms will make that more clear 
as to the specific Revenue Canada rules which have caused some 
concern. We get — as I mentioned, the question of investment 
income is another example, so I can give you assurance that the 
new forms will be more specific. 
 
Secondly, I might advise that there are ongoing discussions with 
Department of National Revenue with regard to modifications 
and adjustments, without giving any assurances — because we 
don’t have any — that there would be modifications in those 
areas. I can assure the hon. member that there are discussions 
with National Revenue as to the effect of those provisions. But 
the new forms will, because I accept your criticism, will be more 

specific that way to try and make sure that the people have the 
accurate information. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could the minister just briefly comment why, 
if there is correspondence between the Saskatchewan plan and 
the RRSPs, why there is not transferral of spousal deduction for 
contributions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve indicated that that’s the problem. 
There are ongoing discussions. We are trying to get the spousal 
deduction. The matching grant is a concern for the national 
government and its effect on the system. But there are 
discussions to try and get that resolved. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if 
the minister can tell us just how many contributors there are to 
the plan at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As of May 31 there were 41,997. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Pages 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to ask only 
a few questions in respect to the general principles of the Bill, 
and let it go. 
 
First of all, I want to ask you: in respect to the amendments that 
you have outlined here in The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, can you indicate what degree of consultation 
took place before the amendments to this Act was brought in? 
What degree of consultation, if any, were brought about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that most of the representatives 
of the resource industries, be it IPAC (Independent Petroleum 
Association of Canada), or Canadian Petroleum Association, 
Saskatchewan Mining Association, and others dealing with the 
resource companies, and I gather some of the smaller resource 
companies — but I don’t have a list, but certainly the 
organizations were consulted. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Obviously the big boys were talked to, but one 
other question. I wonder whether you could indicate whether 
these amendments in respect to the corporate capital tax, whether 
they’re similar to enactments by adjacent provinces like 
Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia? I’m wondering 
whether you’re creating what is termed by your party as a level 
playing-field for this type of tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we should keep in mind that Manitoba, 
Ontario, Quebec, for example, do levy a corporate capital tax on 
federal commercial Crown corporations, so that that is similar. 
What was the other question, I’m sorry, about the surcharge? No 
other 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2689 
 

jurisdiction has the corporate surcharge similar to this. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And that’s my other question in respect to the 
Crown corporations. Is this restricted primarily or exclusively, I 
guess, as the question should be, to resource-based Crown 
corporations, or perhaps you answered it in the previous 
question, to all federal commercial Crown corporations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I indicated, it’s commercial Crowns. It 
would apply to Air Canada, CNR (Canadian National Railway), 
Eldorado in conjunction with the uranium royalty matter as well, 
VIA Rail, Petro-Canada, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What is the projected revenue from all of the 
federal Crown corporations? I notice that you have some 
sizeable Crown corporations included in what you are apparently 
taxing. Is it correct that somewhere in the neighbourhood of $2.4 
million — is that all that you raised with respect tot he Crown 
corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Point three (0.3) in ’88-89, and 3 million in 
’89-90. We do expect that to continue to increase. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One final question then, I’m advised. Can you 
indicate, Mr. Minister, you have no definition of resource 
corporations. “It shall be defined” means a resource corporation 
is defined by regulations, so we don’t know what we’re 
specifically talking about until we see the regulations. And I 
wonder whether the regulations are available and whether they 
could be filed, so that we know what you’re talking about. And 
specifically, does it apply just to non-renewable resources, or 
does it also apply to renewable resource companies like the 
Weyerhaeusers of Tacoma, Washington? 
 
(2245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised non-renewable resources: oil, 
natural gas, uranium, potash and coal, if I can indicate to the 
definitions, the hon. member. Resource corporation and the 
further definition of value of resource sales will be defined in the 
regulations and will be based on the definitions provided in the 
petroleum and natural gas regulations, the freehold oil and gas 
production tax regulations, mineral disposition regulations, and 
the coal disposition regulations. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So I guess, specifically, I don’t know; you may 
have answered it, and I haven’t heard it, but does it apply to 
renewable resource companies vis-a-vis Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Resource, can I run through the list again for 
the hon. member? Non-renewable: oil, natural gas, uranium, 
potash and coal. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Pages 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 88 — An Act to make Certain Changes in the 

Statute Law with respect to the Investment of Moneys  
Held pursuant to Certain Acts 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I just want to begin by making a few comments, and you may 
correct me if I’m wrong, and my comments are based in large 
part on a document that came to our attention. It was prepared, 
we understand, for your office by James P. Marshall Inc. James 
P. Marshall was engaged by your office to consider the matter of 
alternative investment management structures to handle the 
investment management for a number of pension plans which 
are in the public domain, and they examined three alternatives. 
 
And one of the alternatives was the existing arrangement in 
terms of the Finance department. There was some recognition 
that, given the size of the funds now, given the growth in the 
funds into the future, that the investment management function 
in the Department of Finance would need to be upgraded to be 
able to handle the additional demand. 
 
The other alternatives were what they call, I believe, a 
free-standing Crown corporation, another alternative which I 
understand you are pursuing, and I’ll get into that — is for a 
separate business corporation, that is to say, a private 
corporation. 
 
I want to ask you first of all what your concerns were about the 
ability of the Department of Finance to continue to handle the 
investment management of Saskatchewan pension plans as they 
had in the past? Was there some evidence that the Finance 
department was not doing its job in terms of investing the 
pension plan funds adequately and well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As a matter of fact the department, I think, 
by all standards had done an excellent job. 
 
The situation, as our studies indicate, that by about 1990-91 the 
amount of moneys under management will be in the range of 7 
to $9 billion, and the degree of expertise needed to manage that 
we would certainly would have to have certainly a significant 
increase in personnel. 
 
The complexity of the funds under management will grow. For 
example, all government pension plans are investing, for 
example, in realty across Canada, and the ability to monitor that 
is going to have to be increased dramatically as this amount of 
money under management increases. 
 
Thirdly, there is for the client’s point of view, in my view, an 
opportunity for them to perhaps do a little better. We have been 
approached from time to time by Saskatchewan companies 
asking the Department of Finance to manage their pension 
funds. That’s not really a proper role. So that there is that 
perhaps opportunity which will accrue to the benefit of the 
clients. 
 
You indicated that there were three options were really 
considered; there were really four. There’s the status quo; 



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2690 
 

there is a free-standing Crown corporation, if I can use that 
phrase; treasury board Crown corporation or the client-owned 
corporation. The client-owned public corporation or business 
corporation was the one chosen by the clients themselves. And I 
gather, while discussions did go on among the clients for a 
number of months, certainly there were differences of opinion. 
 
I have indicated in this Assembly before, I happen to favour 
personally the Crown corporation, but the majority of clients, 
and certainly the bigger funds, including the teachers, wanted the 
business corporation. So it’s the choice of the clients. It was a 
choice left up to the very client funds, and that’s the choice they 
made. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I have a concern, Mr. Minister, that in 
fact two alternatives were presented, as I understand it, from the 
Marshall document. They raise key questions to be discussed, 
and they say, the second question is: 
 

If you were to consider a change, which of the following 
two alternatives do you feel would best satisfy your 
accounts’ needs: the investment objectives . . . (and they 
state) The two alternative investment management 
structures being considered are an independent Crown 
corporation and a client-owned private corporation. 

 
I wonder how assiduously the people from James P. Marshall, 
and by definition, your office, in fact pursued the question of an 
independent Crown corporation, recognizing that they might 
have been able to give assurances to the various funds about 
their involvement on a Crown corporation board, on the board of 
an independent Crown corporation, so as to assure them about 
their role in terms of decision making, but also to ensure some 
accountability, some accountability to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And you will know that one of the unique features, one of the 
unique features of an independent Crown corporation would be 
the reporting relationship to the Legislative Assembly. In fact the 
Marshall report points out the corporation’s board of directors 
would be accountable to the legislature through a minister. And I 
wonder if that type of unique set-up in corporate structure for a 
Crown corporation had been offered to the various pension funds 
as an alternative, if that had been explained to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Very much so. And I’ve indicated my 
personal preference was to go that route of the Crown 
corporations. It was the clients themselves who over — and 
understand, given the complexity of the issue, these discussions 
have been going on for many, many months — that it was the 
clients themselves that ultimately chose the business 
corporations. 
 
I think we should keep in mind one thing when we talk about 
accountability, that as we have the fully funded pension plans, 
we should remember that we’re no longer accounting for public 
moneys, we’re accounting for clients’ moneys, and the 
accounting has to be back to the pension fund members because 
it is their money. And that’s really where the accountability has 
to lie. 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, the information we have in 
the Marshall report is very sketchy and incomplete. And I 
wonder if you would undertake to provide to this Assembly, to 
the House, the full details of your, what I understand will be 
called a Saskatchewan investment corporation, so that it’s clear 
for all of the public to see just what it is that you’re proposing to 
undertake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me indicate what I’m prepared to give 
with only one condition, and it may be an important one. I am 
prepared . . . we do have . . . all pension funds have signed 
unanimous shareholders agreements, so they’ve all done that 
voluntarily and all of them have signed. I am prepared, if it’s 
agreed by the funds, and I can’t see an objection, to supply to the 
opposition a copy of the unanimous shareholders agreement. I 
have no difficulty with that myself. I’m more than prepared to 
put the request to the funds if that can be made, be made public. 
And the same — well, you’ve got a copy of the Marshall report 
— so I think realistically what would be helpful to the hon. 
member is the copy of the unanimous shareholders’ agreement. 
We should keep in mind that it’s not my shareholders’ 
agreement; it’s the client shareholders’ agreement, but I am 
prepared to put that request, and I certainly have no difficulty 
tabling that, or giving it to the opposition. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let me make a further request to the 
minister then. As we understand it — and you can correct me if 
I’m wrong — there is to be a two-year transition period, roughly. 
During this transition period you, in fact, will own 100 per cent 
of class A shares in that particular corporation, and the class A 
shares carry the right to vote, but carry no right to participate in 
the distribution of the profits or assets. The funds will own class 
B shares, which carries no right to vote, but which participate as 
to dividends and other distributions of profit or assets. 
 
So for a period of two years, even though the Government of 
Saskatchewan, through you, will not benefit in any way — and 
neither should it, the pension fund should — you, in fact, have 
all the voting power when it comes to that particular corporation. 
And given the fact that you have the voting power and are, in 
fact, not answerable to anyone, would you undertake to enter 
into discussions with the various pensions funds to the effect that 
during this two-year transition period you will report to this 
Legislative Assembly as to the affairs of that corporation, so that 
you are, in effect, accountable to someone, because as it stands 
you have 100 per cent of the votes? 
 
It’s your vote that carries the day. You are, in effect, answerable 
to no one and I’m asking you: can you at least, during this 
interim period and until such a time as the participating pension 
funds take over control and the voting power in that particular 
corporation — can you undertake to report to the Legislative 
Assembly as to your activities in that particular investment 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I understand, with all respect to the hon. 
member, I don’t have that sole voting power. Under the 
provisions, the clients themselves are the only ones having the 
vote. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2691 
 

For a period of two years, and it could be less than that, the 
Minister of Finance only has the final say on the board of 
directors for a period of two years; and secondly, on the CEO, in 
conjunction with the funds themselves. So it’s not a blanket 
two-years operation. 
 
It was felt two things: one, that we have so many funds that we 
couldn’t have committees doing much of the leg work and the 
actual detailed start-up of the funds, so we are undertaking that. 
And so all I can say to the hon. member, we do not have the 
voting authority that you’ve indicated; we do not have that 
voting authority. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the board of directors, everybody wants 
to be on the board of directors, and so we’ve had a rather 
complex arrangement negotiated amongst the funds with 
revolving members and what not, and we want to talk to them 
and spend time with them, trying to encourage them — although 
we will not impose this — encourage them to try and appoint 
people who will bring something to the table in terms of 
advantage to the plan. 
 
(2300) 
 
Some, for example, and I say it with respect, want to appoint 
actuaries. Well it would strike me that any pension fund would 
hire the actuaries and not have that as a board position. So we’ve 
got a period of time here of a maximum of two years where 
we’re trying to get it up and running. I do not have that voting 
power. 
 
With regard to the tabling, we should remember that none of the 
legislation takes away requirements of the various statutory 
funds, whatever, to report to this Assembly through the various 
ministers, as they have been doing for a long period of time. 
That continues. And the ability of the opposition to question on 
that is still there. So again, I can’t say much more than that, 
except that I don’t have the voting power that’s imputed to me. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, again I think that 
you’re pointing out the reason for my request. I’m going by 
reports that were provided to you and supposedly set out the 
framework for this corporation by James P. Marshall Inc. I guess 
it points out the dilemma that we’re in, that we’re talking here 
about massive changes in the way that the pension funds . . . how 
their investments will be managed. yet this side of the House has 
no information, no clear information as to exactly what the 
government is doing. And that is the concern that we have, and 
that is why we’re asking for these types of reports and at least 
some accountability to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I would just simply say that if your government and if you 
had undertaken to provide all of this information to the 
Legislative Assembly as it came available, that we would be in a 
better position to judge just whether or not the Bill before us is, 
in fact, the way to go. 
 
I just have one other brief question that I want to . . . or a couple 
of brief questions that I want to ask . . . make some closing 
comments. But with respect to custodial services, have you 
sorted out yet who will provide these and how the costs will be 
determined for that? 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s by agreement that the custodial function 
will remain with Department of Finance till December 31, and 
then, by mutual agreement thereafter, it can be terminated by 
either party after that period of time of 90 days. 
 
I’d just like to go back to the previous point made by the hon. 
member about disclosure. Again, I’ve made the commitment to 
the hon. member that I have no problems myself with filing the 
unanimous shareholders’ agreement. It is signed by each of the 
funds independently. I mean, it’s their document, and I think the 
hon. member would agree with me that I have to get permission 
to do that. 
 
I think the member can take some comfort and, I believe, 
satisfaction in that all of the funds have signed. And again, I can 
give that assurance to the hon. member. They’ve virtually all had 
independent council. I mean, the lawyers have done very well 
out there on this. They’ve had independent legal advice. They’ve 
had their own council — some have shared; others have hired 
their own. So the independent advice they’ve had is quite 
significant, and they’ve had access to whoever they wanted, so I 
can say that to try and give some comfort to the hon. member, 
with the assurance again, I will ask for permission to supply him 
and the opposition with a copy of the unanimous shareholder’s 
agreement. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I have no further questions. I just want to 
close by indicating again our concerns with respect to this 
legislation. We feel that the government, if it had been truly 
concerned about accountability to the Legislative Assembly, 
might have taken a different course in this matter, might have 
come up with something that might have gone some way to meet 
the concerns of the respective pension funds. 
 
And I can respect their concerns about wanting to divorce 
themselves at times, or to sever the relationship with this present 
Minister of Finance, given his record. But we feel that some 
alternative might have been arrived at that would have satisfied 
those funds, but also would’ve satisfied this Legislative 
Assembly’s right to know, and the whole question of 
accountability. 
 
We feel that that question is there. We feel that it’s not a 
question of the individual funds themselves, the individual funds 
themselves simply contracting for service, with this investment 
corporation. You know and I know that as time goes on, that 
those who perform the investment service function will take on 
more and more of a role as an adviser to the various pension 
funds. 
 
And we feel that, given the magnitude of the dollars involved, 
given the fact that in most instances there are public taxpayers’ 
dollars involved, that this Legislative Assembly should continue 
to have some relationship with those funds. However tenuous 
that relationship might be, we feel that relationship should 
continue to exist, and we’re not satisfied with the proposals that 
have come before us. And it is for those reasons, Mr. Chairman, 
that we will be indicating our opposition to this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2692 
 

Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 17 has a house amendment moved 
by the Minister of Finance: 
 

Section 17 of the printed Bill: 
 
strike out section 17 of the printed Bill and substitute the 
following: 
 
17  This Act comes into force on a day to be fixed by  
  proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor, but is  
  retroactive and, on the day this Act is proclaimed, it is 
  deemed to have been in force on and from June 1,  
  1988. 

 
Clause 17 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Before the officials leave, Mr. Chairman, if 
I may, I did not get a chance to introduce them. Immediately 
behind me, Mr. Keith Laxdal, associate deputy minister; David 
McCaslin, associate director investment branch; and Tony 
Koshinsky from the civil law division, Department of Justice. 
 
And I would just like to indicate that the officials — this has 
been a rather complex, long process, and they have served the 
government and the people of this province extremely ably as 
we’ve gone through the development of the investment 
corporation of Saskatchewan, and I would like to thank them. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, it’s not often that I find 
myself concurring in the remarks of the Minister of Finance, but 
in this particular instance, I want to be associated with his 
remarks. 
 
Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Department of Revenue 

and Financial Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Joining with Mr. Wakabayashi is Brian 
Smith, executive director of PEBA (Public Employees Benefit 
Agency), and Gerry Kraus, provincial comptroller. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just simply want to indicate that we 
would have no questions at this time. I think the questions that 
we had were gone over in the last Bill, and our position with 
respect to this Bill would be the same as the previous Bill. 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 

Department of Revenue and Financial Services Act, 1988 
 
Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill 101 — An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 
Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I may, Mr. Chairman, introduce to the 
Assembly, Mr. Russ Moore, director of revenue operations 
branch of the revenue division, Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I intend not to take 
a great deal of time on this short one-page Bill, but I do have one 
or two questions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this short bit of legislation is the legislation 
necessary to establish the environmental handling charge and the 
deposit on the — to this point — the aluminum cans that are 
now for sale in the province, so in that sense it’s a very 
straightforward piece of legislation, but I have one or two 
questions for the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, once this is legislation, could you explain to 
myself and the House then what process is in place for the 
setting of the exact charges. Who, in fact, determines what the 
environmental handling charge will be and what the deposit will 
be? How does that happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s in The Litter Control Act. It’s 
established in The Litter Control Act. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I understand that, Mr. Minister, but I’m talking 
about the value. Currently now we’re working with a 2 cent 
environmental handling and a 5 cent deposit. How are those 
figures arrived at? In which department? Who does it? How does 
it happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Department of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, the Department of the 
Environment sets those and they apply, and revenue and finance 
have nothing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, we just collect. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — You collect. 
 
Mr. Minister, this piece of legislation does nothing, and I’m sure 
as the minister responsible for the finances of our province you 
must have some concern in this. If the fears that have been 
expressed by the brewing industry in this province with the 
introduction of aluminum cans, and if the worst fears come true, 
we may in fact see the demise of the brewing industry in this 
province. 
 
As the Minister of Finance, concerned about revenue and 
finance, have you undertaken any estimates about the loss of 
revenues to the province if that industry, in fact, does disappear 
from our province? 
 
(2315) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m perhaps not as well informed as I would 
like to be, but I would indicate I’m advised that the 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2693 
 

industry average is roughly 20 per cent going to cans. Obviously 
in Saskatchewan, I suppose we were held back for whatever 
reasons for years in the public demand. It’s a new product. It 
obviously has met public acceptance. Where that will be when 
the novelty wears off, I don’t know whether we would be 
different from the rest of the country in that roughly 20 per cent 
usage range. If that’s the case, then the advice I have is that there 
would be minimal adjustment in the brewing industry in this 
province. 
 
We should also keep in mind, when we look at the brewing 
industry, other components, and that’s the ability of small 
breweries to now set up specialized breweries which are starting 
to function in other parts of Canada and the United States — the 
ability of hotels to brew their own, which is creating and will 
create some opportunity. 
 
So I think in fairness to the hon. member, we will certainly . . . 
we are going through a transition and we are going through a 
change. When it settles down, the general view is that perhaps 
there will be more opportunity than there was before. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to take this 
opportunity once again to lobby you as a member of the 
Executive Council and your other colleagues present, to give 
serious consideration to steps that can protect and will protect the 
brewing industry in the province and the jobs that are associated 
with that industry. 
 
And if I may also, Mr. Minister, in terms of the environmental 
handling charge, it’s been reported publicly that the Cosmo 
Industries in Saskatoon had to, from their point of view, turn 
down the opportunity to be part of the collection system on the 
basis that the 2 cent charge, that would accrue to them, they 
didn’t feel was enough to involve them in the project and to 
support them in the project. And so I would lobby you to be with 
your colleagues to be looking at that fee and to ensure that it will 
be sufficient in future to keep people involved. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, I have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move the committee report the Bill, Mr. 
Chairman, and take the opportunity to thank my officials for 
assisting the Assembly this evening. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right, 
Mr. Dave Innes, my deputy minister, and behind me, Ron Davis, 
the executive director of municipal finance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. This is the 

Bill that authorizes the revenue-sharing grants for municipalities, 
and as I pointed out in the committee on estimates, the 
Committee of Finance, it is totally and completely inadequate. 
The minister knows that. 
 
I want to say simply that if the minister had spent as much time 
arguing in his cabinet and in his caucus for the funding that 
municipalities must have, and need to have, to provide the 
services that they have to provide, as he has in trying to push 
unpopular an unnecessary legislation to abolish the ward system 
and force rural family businesses to struggle under seven days a 
week opening, then the municipalities of Saskatchewan would 
have been a lot better served. 
 
Instead of that, Mr. Chairman, the priorities have been all wrong. 
And so we have here, where in 1967 The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act provided $67,126,000 to municipalities, and in 
1989, two years later, provides only $67,040,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, that is simply not good enough. That is 
simply an example of failure by this minister and by this 
government. We had a minister who has been too busy worrying 
about his personal agenda and trying to get even with people — 
who knows who they are out there somewhere —- on municipal 
councils, and neglected totally what should be a very 
fundamental and important role of any minister of Urban Affairs, 
and that is to argue for the necessary funding. 
 
I want to give you an example, Mr. Chairman, of how bad it has 
been. In the last four years of an NDP government between 1978 
and 1981, revenue-sharing grants increased by 109.5 per cent, 
and at the same time inflation increased by only 45.2 per cent — 
I shouldn’t say only, but that’s what it was — a net increase of 
64.3 per cent in real dollars. 
 
What’s happened in the last four years of this Conservative 
government, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A disaster. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — My colleague says it’s a disaster, and I 
say it’s a cruel disaster. Between 1986 and 1989, which is what 
this Bill finally ends up with in 1989, revenue sharing has 
increased by 2.9 per cent. Inflation during that same period has 
roughly been 18.5 per cent, and that means a net decline in real 
dollars of 15.6 per cent. And the minister will stand up and say 
he’s proud of that. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, if this government, and particularly this 
minister, had spent any amount of time at all listening to the 
people in Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 
arguing in the cabinet about the need for funding so that property 
taxes don’t have to go up over and over and over again to the 
point where there’s many people out there can’t afford to pay 
them, we wouldn’t find this kind of sad and sorry statistic which 
I have just indicated to you. 
 
I want to say one more thing, Mr. Chairman. Back in . . . I’m 
reading here a very important press release which was made 
some time ago, and it was made under the name of 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2694 
 

the present Minister of Finance when he was, I believe, the 
president of the Conservative Party, dated in August 28, I 
believe, 1982. And here is what that minister said that the 
Premier said. He said: 
 

Progressive Conservative leader Grant Devine today 
summed up his summer tour saying: 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I’m sorry, the Premier. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Thank you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In those days he was not yet the Premier, 
you see, Mr. Chairman. He was just hoping. But here is what in 
his press statement he issued: 
 

Major towns and cities throughout the province are 
concerned about the lack of provincial funding for 
necessities like water and sewer systems. The provincial 
government is perceived to be spending money foolishly 
on government offices and not on development. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, what a joke that was, and what a reality it 
is today. Here we have a provincial government which in four 
years has reduced, has reduced the amount of funding for 
municipalities in real dollars by 15.6 per cent after inflation, and 
is spending $34,000 a day on empty office space so that it can 
reward its friends who are more interested in taking advantage of 
their so-called privatization at the expense of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer, Mr. Chairman. 
 
That’s the kind of hypocrisy — maybe that’s unparliamentary, I 
won’t use that word. But that’s the kind of misleading approach 
that this Conservative government has taken, and it has resulted 
in a devastating increase in property taxes on Saskatchewan 
citizens year after year under this government’s administration, 
as it has deliberately pushed or shifted the tax load from the load 
of the provincial government and resource industries to that of 
the property taxpayers who are barely finding it possible to keep 
up with that kind of a tax load. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I simply conclude by saying, before I let this Bill 
go by, so I don’t repeat many of the things I said in Committee 
of Finance, that this funding is inadequate. Everybody in the 
municipal world has told the minister and this government that 
it’s inadequate. It’s the basis of the problem that has caused the 
deterioration of infrastructure in our municipalities to the point 
where, in some cases, it’s reaching crisis proportions. 
 
And we have, instead of the minister addressing it, the minister 
saying, we’re going to force the legislation through which will 
not allow you to choose a ward system. We’re going to force 
legislation through which is going to cause a devastating attack 
on rural businesses and in rural communities, which every one of 
those rural members knows about because every one of them has 
been getting letters, copies of some of which I have received and 
which, when we get on to another Bill later tonight, will be read 
into the record so that it is clear what is happening over there 
when you have a government 

that is so arrogant that it refuses to listen to anybody. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re not going to oppose the Bill as such, 
because it does provide the funding to municipalities, but we 
want to put it on the record very clearly that it is inadequate, it 
comes as a result of an incompetent government, it comes as the 
result of a government that has chosen to transfer the tax burden 
to property taxpayers off the rightful place where it ought to be, 
and that’s from places like the resource industries and the 
resource companies of this province. Example of which, in the 
oil industry, this government has rewarded them for their 
political support by over $2 billion in oil royalty holidays, and 
instead has said to taxpayers who own property, pay more. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the minister going to have the same 
officials, or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we’re joined by John 
Edwards, the assistant director of municipal finance. 
 
Page 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I will spare the speech on 
this one — I gave it in second reading — but I have some 
specific questions I want to ask of the minister. And as we 
proceed with the Bill, Mr. Chairman, I think you would probably 
. . . because it’s a long Bill and pages . . . proceed by page and 
then when we see a page where I have some questions, I will so 
indicate. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member has requested that we go by 
page. Is that agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Page 1 agreed to. 
 
Page 2 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I’m looking here at clause 
. . . We agree to clause 3. I’m looking at clause 4 where it refers 
to the appointment of the members of the board, the municipal 
board, and I want to ask the minister what his intentions are here. 
What is the process of appointment, Mr. Minister? Are you 
going to simply name people that you wish, or are you going to 
ask for recommendations from the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association? There’s SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association), other bodies that are involved 
here. What do you intend to do here? We want that on the record 
so they can be somewhat assured and can hold you to that, to 
what you state here in this committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re certainly 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2695 
 

going to appoint the people that will probably have the necessary 
background, as best that can be described in accordance with 
what their duties will be. And it probably won’t be unlike the 
appointments that were made at the Local Government Board 
level and the other levels. We will look for the expertise that’s 
necessary and create the functions, and I don’t see anything 
wrong with that. 
 
(2330) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, will you be consulting with 
SUMA and other organizations of such kind and allow them to 
have some input in this, or are you going to ignore them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say that 
we’ll consult with various organizations so long as it doesn’t 
involve any kind of a conflict or a perceived conflict that could 
exist as a result of certain appointments. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I can recall reading 
clippings and attending a SUMA convention where you 
pretended to consult with SUMA about store hours legislation 
and about the ward system and then ignored everything they 
said. 
 
As well as your consulting, Mr. Minister, can you make a 
commitment that you will also listen to the recommendations 
that are being given to you and hopefully do some follow-up on 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that 
consultation is perhaps something that this government is very 
good at; listening is something that this government is very good 
at. We have done that for six years, but there’s a difference, Mr. 
Chairman, between listening and always agreeing with what 
everybody else says. Certainly at some point in time you have to 
agree to disagree. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The wonderful thing would be that if once 
you would agree, Mr. Minister, rather than ignoring all of the 
advice you get. The one legacy you will leave behind when you 
are no longer in this place or no longer in the cabinet, is that . . . 
which is the universal opinion will be that you are probably the 
minister, of even this government, that cared the least about what 
the opinions of the public or concerned citizens or organization s 
have been out there. Now even with all the competition you’ve 
got from some of your other colleagues, Mr. Minister, you lead 
the way in that category, I’m afraid. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, when you appoint these board members, 
what will be the pay levels, and what will be their per diems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the salaries will be set by 
cabinet and done by order in council. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Sorry . . . Maybe I missed it, Mr. 
Chairman, but did I hear the minister say the amount of the per 
diem and the amount of the pay levels? Obviously he must know 
because this is legislation going through and he’s had months to 
look at it, or is he saying that he still doesn’t know. 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, what I said is, it’s going to 
be established by cabinet. It will be done by order in council, and 
certainly we’re going to look at the existing fee structure and use 
that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I’m certainly quite aware of the fact 
that it has been established in cabinet and will be provided in the 
order in council. That wasn’t my question. My question is: what 
is the fee range, what is the per diem, and what is the pay levels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, because we are combining 
three board and the work-loads will be slightly different, and the 
challenges and everything else that they’re going to be looking at 
will be a little bit different than the existing boards that are in 
place, it may be necessary to establish a new rate. And if that is 
what will happen, we’re looking at all kinds of figures right now. 
Then we’ll have to do that accordingly. 
 
Page 2 agreed to. 
 
Pages 3 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 16 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Could I ask, Mr. Minister, on page 16, 
subclause (7): 
 

In any hearing, appeal, investigation or other proceeding 
before the board, the board is not bound by the technical 
rules of legal evidence. 

 
Why do you want, why do you need this provision in there to 
give this kind of protection to the board? Does this now not give 
the board certain privileges that may be out of line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, that’s an existing provision 
in the LGB (Local Government Board) Act and it’s . . . and 
we’ve carried it forward. It’s a good provision and we’ve left it 
there. 
 
Page 16 agreed to. 
 
Pages 17 to 85 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 89 — An Act respecting certain Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Municipal Board Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to Amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce the rest 
of his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Behind my deputy minister is the assistant 
deputy minister, Keith Schneider; and behind 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2696 
 

me, Jim Anderson, policy analyst. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can assure you, Mr. Chairman that this 
Bill 60 is going to take considerably longer than all of the other 
Bills that the minister has had to deal with here this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And he’s going to have to answer a few 
more questions and justify what he is doing, Mr. Chairman, 
because I think that the public has a right to have his justification 
for what is happening here, on the record. 
 
I want to begin by saying, Mr. Chairman, that one of the points 
that needs to be made about this Bill is that it’s just another 
example of this government’s legacy as being one of 
perpetrating one of the cruellest attacks on family life in the 
history of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We have here a government and a 
minister that is so preoccupied with his own self-interest that the 
interest of the public is no longer concerned; it’s not a 
consideration for this government. Patronage is the guiding 
hand. 
 
Everything that is seen, and you notice in the question periods in 
the House and you notice in the news reports and you notice in 
the appointments that are made of former cabinet ministers and 
former MLAs, that the basic rule, the basic rule that guides this 
government is the one thing of patronage. Reward your friends 
and punish everybody else in the process because there’s 
nothing, or very little left for them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me just give you some examples of the price 
that the people of Saskatchewan have had to pay because of this 
kind of an approach. We have had a children’s dental plan in this 
province that has been destroyed because the government had to 
find enough money that would reward its friends and patronage 
— to pay $34,000 a day in empty office space, space which is 
not being used. 
 
We’ve had the Premier talk about alcohol and drug abuse, about 
the marvellous things that this government intends to do about 
curing the problem, and then almost on the same day introducing 
a liquor control Act in here that’s going to provide the wider 
sales of alcohol and the marketing of alcohol products so that 
it’ll encourage even more drinking. Now that’s an attack on a 
family, Mr. Chairman, that’s a serious attack on a family. 
 
Now in this legislation, we see legislation that will even further 
create an attack on family life with the legislation that’s going to 
cause a domino effect which will eventually cause seven-day 
openings throughout all of 

Saskatchewan. Small business people and family businesses, 
who now can at least get a Sunday off so that they can do the 
things that families enjoy doing and must do, are not going to 
have that opportunity. 
 
And the minister is going to stand up and he’ll say, oh, but that’s 
not going to be true. He’s going to say that the spaces in 
Saskatchewan are so wide that if one community stays open the 
other one won’t be affected. Well the minister obviously is not 
very knowledgeable. 
 
Well he must . . . we talk about and people talk about the Tories 
being 50 years behind. It’s obvious by that statement that this 
minister can remember only the days of the horse and wagon. 
It’s not the horse and wagon day any more. There are roads in 
Saskatchewan — even still after six years of this government -0- 
that cars can travel on, and so the communication is such that 
people can travel very easily. 
 
And so if you have a larger community that’s going to open 
seven days a week, the smaller communities around it are going 
to suffer, and family businesses are going to suffer, and the time 
that they used to have for family living is going to be gone. Now 
that action, Mr. Chairman, from a government who talks about 
families day in and day out, well that rhetoric, Mr. Member from 
Melfort, is not good enough any more. And all the letters and the 
concerns expressed throughout the province of Saskatchewan on 
this issue are showing that people no longer believe you when 
you say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I want to say another thing, Mr. 
Chairman. I was here in this House when the Leader of the 
Opposition was debating the Premier in Executive Council 
estimates — you know, those estimates that some of the media 
forgot existed. And I can recall on e thing that the Premier said, 
because I wrote it down on this paper that night, Mr. Chairman. 
The Premier said, “put power in the hands of the people” — put 
power in the hands of the people. Well I wish he would say that 
to his Minister of Urban Affairs who is going to take away the 
power from the hands of the people. 
 
The Premier says, put power in the hands of the people. And the 
minister of Urban Affairs says urban municipalities will no 
longer have the right to chose the way they’re going to elect their 
councillors and their aldermen. They’re going to take away that 
power from the people who live in our cities. 
 
And the Premier says, yes, yes, bless you, go ahead. Now this is 
a Premier who says one thing in one situation and says another 
thing by his actions in another one. And I say, Mr. Chairman, 
that that’s just not good enough. 
 
But there’s something else here that undermine the credibility of 
the whole government, and that is that no longer can this 
minister and this government be believed by anything they say. 
 
(2345) 
 
I want to refer you, Mr. Chairman, to a letter written to the 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2697 
 

Minister of Urban Affairs by the Tisdale and district chamber of 
commerce. And this letter was written on December 4, 1987, 
when this debate was beginning. And here is what they said: 
 

We are writing to express our displeasure and concern over 
the way the extended store hours issue, i.e., Sunday 
shopping, has been handled by the provincial government. 
It seems to us as though the provincial government has 
taken the easy way out by dumping this issue into the 
hands of local municipal governments who really don’t 
have the authority to handle this issue without the backing 
of the government in regards to enforcing The Urban 
Municipality Act. 

 
And then he went on to say, and this is a very telling comment, 
and I quote: 
 

What concerns us the most is the complete turn-around in 
opinion (the complete turn-around in opinion) that we have 
seen come out of your office since September. At that time 
you expressed that you were definitely for small business 
and shared its concerns. Our opinion has not changed. 
Sunday opening will kill a lot of small businesses and very 
much affect the way of life in our community. 

 
Now what kind of change in opinion were they talking about, 
Mr. Chairman? Let me demonstrate what they’re saying, 
because I want to quote, in order to demonstrate that, from 
comments that this minister made in September 9 of 1987 in this 
House, Hansard, page 2390, on another amendment to The 
Urban Municipality Act. I want you to listen with care, Mr. 
Chairman, what the minister said. Here’s what he said: 
 

. . . I’m pleased to move second reading of this Bill. It’s a Bill 
intended to preserve Sunday as a secular day of rest for 
families and communities in Saskatchewan. It’s also intended 
to ensure religious freedom for merchants and observe an 
alternate day of rest, for those that do observe an alternate day 
of rest. 

 
Then he went to say: 
 

. . . this Act is to strengthen the principle of a common 
pause day. 

 
Then he went on further to say: 
 

. . . a second important purpose of this amendment is to 
provide for a religious exemption clause to satisfy the 
religious freedom guarantees of the charter of rights. 

 
It went on: 
 

And I will add a personal note here (this is a personal note 
of the minister) . . . I’ve been a business man in this 
province for many years, and many of the members present 
know that I feel strongly and support small business 
strongly. But I want to say, however, that I have always 

supported the principle of a weekly day of rest . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, what do we have here? What do we have 
here? A minister who in September of 1987 said one thing, 
makes a complete turn-around and betrays all of those people he 
had given assurance to and brings a Bill into this House and 
rams it down their throat, even though they have protested and 
pleaded and asked that it be deferred so that they can have their 
opinions expressed and that the public can be heard. 
 
And is it any wonder that in light of that, Mr. Chairman, we have 
the district 1 meeting of Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association yesterday demanding of the Premier by letter that 
the get the Minister of Urban Affairs to resign and appoint a 
minister who’s going to be sensitive to their concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, credibility — credibility 
out of touch; a government that has lost complete touch with the 
public of Saskatchewan; that has become so preoccupied with its 
self-interest and its determination to do whatever it wants, in 
spite of what anybody thinks, is the issue. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that kind of arrogance is not soon 
forgotten. That kind of arrogance will not be forgotten even 
when this minister is finally, unceremoniously dumped from his 
position whenever that cabinet shuffle comes, because . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Because, Mr. Chairman, in all of this the 
Premier himself is implicated, because the Premier himself has 
received letters from numerous organizations to which he has 
never responded; from organizations who have asked to meet 
with this Premier, the coalition of church leaders, and business 
people, and working people, who on May 4 asked to meet with 
the Premier and he refused to meet with them; and he sent them 
to meet with the Minister of Urban Affairs who refused to meet 
with them until the day he tabled the Bill. And the first thing he 
said to them when they came into his office is: doesn’t matter 
what you say, I am going to go with the Bill anyway. Too bad, 
folks. 
 
Now that’s the kind of arrogance, Mr. Chairman, that will not be 
forgotten, and because the Premier has defended it and promoted 
it, it doesn’t matter who he puts in that portfolio, the Premier’s 
own credibility is shattered and destroyed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, I ask you to 
tell this House and to tell the public, in light of what you said on 
September of 1987, why have you now made a complete 
reversal and introduced this Bill which contradicts all of those 
assurances which you gave to the people of Saskatchewan which 
prompted the chamber of commerce of Tisdale to write you that 
letter indicating how disappointed that they were? 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2698 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m really disappointed in 
the weak arguments presented by the opposition regarding this 
very important Bill, Bill 60. And the issues, they’re of grave 
concern to taxpayers and the public, and I was hoping that the 
opposition could come up with a better argument, certainly, than 
personal vendettas, or arrogance, or that’s simply not an 
acceptable argument to either condemn myself, as the minister, 
or the Premier. I was hoping that it could be a factual debate. 
The taxpayers are my concern, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The member opposite talked about protection of families, and 
yet we saw the NDP in 1982 allow interest rates to soar — 
people losing their homes; 22 per cent — they did nothing. We 
see them laugh at the dangerous dog legislation contained in Bill 
60 — they think it’s humorous; I don’t. 
 
And with the matter of store hours, they talk about representing 
families, and do they care one bit about the families where moms 
and dads work; the single parent families. Obviously they don’t. 
 
I too, Mr. Chairman, could read letters of support for the 
Chamber. And with regard to the question . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well, by golly, I will read one because the 
member from Moose Jaw — I’ll read it later — the member 
from Moose Jaw . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, to answer the question directly, Mr. Chairman, 
it’s obvious to all but the NDP that the continual court 
challenges — and we had one on Monday, Mr. Chairman, 
another court rejection. Obviously, as much as we tried to 
legislate the existing legislation and change the legislation, we 
found that we simply couldn’t do it. 
 
With regard to the regional meetings at Carnduff, there was one 
at Macklin where my resignation was not asked for, so it tells 
you that there’s a little bit of a problem there, Mr. Chairman, and 
I don’t believe that region 1 represents SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association). 
 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the unfair comments 
that the member made concerning the Premier, you are simply 
not factual, and I wish that you would, if you refer to the Premier 
. . . you can refer to me any way you life, that’s fine, but when 
you refer to the Premier, please have your facts right. What you 
say is simply not fact. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now isn’t that a telling narration, Mr. 
Chairman. I asked the minister a question, and in all of his little 
dissertation, he never addressed it once. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: in view of the fact that in 
September of 1987 you made a firm commitment in this House 
to the public of Saskatchewan that you were in favour of a 
common pause day, why have you now turned around totally 
and betrayed that assurance, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I did address it. I indicated 
that continual court challenges, continual court decisions put us 
in a position where obviously one piece 

of provincial legislation by us, changing it and changing it and 
changing it, leads to more unfairness. Because as we change it, 
Mr. Chairman, the very thing that they’re worried about is 
occurring, and the stores are operating. 
 
So now Regina, as a result of that decision, and by the 
admittance of the city solicitor — I mean, you saw it, same way 
everybody saw it — the city solicitor, with this new legislation, 
will be able to put by-laws in place that will give them what the 
people of Regina want. 
 
Now if the people of Regina want Superstore, and the NDP 
doesn’t want Superstore or Safeways or Bi-Rite, I challenge the 
member from Regina North East, let’s go to your constituency; 
knock on the doors; you tell them that the NDP are going to 
close Superstore and Bi-Rite and Safeways. You go and tell 
them that, and I’ll go to the doors with you while we tell them 
that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if the courts are the 
problem, how in the Heaven’s name do you expect that passing 
it on to the municipality makes a lot more sense with their less 
resources than handling it at the provincial level? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — If that’s the best argument you can bring, 
Mr. Minister, then you shouldn’t bring an argument at all. The 
fact is that there is legislation, that if you would take the 
appropriate time and give people an opportunity to make some 
input which works at the provincial level, there is legislation in 
other provinces. 
 
And the coalition which I referred to earlier has pointed out to 
you, as we have in this House, that there is legislation in 
Manitoba that provides a common pause day. It also provides 
freedom for merchants to choose. Your Bill doesn’t provide 
freedom for merchants to choose. It leaves it to municipal 
option. 
 
That legislation works, Mr. Minister. It has not been challenged 
in the courts. It has not been challenged in the courts because the 
business, the big corporate chain store business in Manitoba 
know that they can’t win. And I simply ask you: why wouldn’t 
you consider that to be an alternative so that it’s done right, 
instead of frittering it away the way you have done, leaving it to 
local option, which is no option? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — There we are, Mr. Chairman, we’ve heard it 
from my supposed critic, and I’m just surprised. Manitoba 
doesn’t have a common pause day, boys. Don’t you understand 
that? — and ladies. Manitoba is open Sundays. Don’t you know 
that? Manitoba is wide open on Sundays, so don’t go telling 
anybody that they’ve got a common pause day — you’re wrong. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member from Moose Jaw, hollering from his 
seat. Go back to the letter, right here, the Moose Jaw Chamber of 
Commerce. Let’s go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2699 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — And, Mr. Chairman, I’m going to quote, 
because it, you know . . . Well I’ll quote, you’ll see why: 
 

The Moose Jaw Chamber of Commerce would like to 
commend you on your recent performance in your 
portfolios. It is time that businesses and cities decided on 
their own how to run their bailiwicks. To this end, the 
Moose Jaw chamber has reiterated its stand on business 
operating hours. The individual operator of any business, 
no matter the type, size, product . . . 

 
And it goes on. So if you want to read letters of support, I can 
read them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, your comment on the 
Manitoba legislation clearly shows that you haven’t even taken 
the time to take a look at what it says, because I have it here in 
my hand. And not only does it provide, Mr. Chairman, a 
common pause day . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. It’s difficult to hear, for 
the minister to hear the questions and for the members to hear 
the answers. I’d ask members to have a bit of decorum in the 
House and allow the member to ask his question and allow the 
minister to answer. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have here, as 
I indicated before I was interrupted, that I have the Manitoba 
legislation. I have taken the time to study it, and it’s a real 
alternative because one of the main things that it does is it 
provides what the members opposite like to use a term all the 
time — it provides at least a level playing field. It provides a 
level playing field so that the small-and independent-business 
community, who is the backbone of the economy in Manitoba as 
they are in Saskatchewan, are able to be on equal footing with 
the superstores and the huge chain stores and department store 
operations, which they won’t be in this province if this 
legislation this minister is forcing through the House passes. 
Because the Manitoba legislation provides that a store, a 
business outlet, with some exceptions, can stay open, but it has 
to have only a certain amount of — something like five or fewer 
employees. 
 
(2400) 
 
Now, that puts — that puts the small-business man on an equal 
footing. Without that kind of protection, Mr. Chairman, the 
small-business person, the family business in Saskatchewan, is 
going to be under threat by the decisions which are not going to 
be made in municipalities, but they’re going to be made in the 
corporate board rooms of Toronto and Montreal and New York. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Chairman, that the minister at least should have 
given some time and some kind of consideration to this 
legislation, and that’s why this Bill should not be in this House 
today. It should be out there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — It should be out there, Mr. Chairman, with 
an all-party committee so that people who are concerned could 
make presentations. Community leaders and church leaders and 
the business community leaders and the consuming public 
should have an opportunity to have a voice. 
 
But in spite of the process of holding this Bill up in this House 
for five weeks when that protest has grown and grown and 
grown, this minister has refused to budget, supported by his 
Premier. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what would have made it so difficult for you 
to do the reasonable thing and stall this legislation so that the 
public could have the hearings. And what would have been 
wrong with having an all-party committee so we would all be 
able to share in a solution, instead of ramming it through the 
House and ramming it down the throats of the people out there 
who say that they don’t want it and that you’re wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ll tell you what’s wrong with an all-party 
committee, Mr. Chairman; they can’t read legislation. My critic 
clearly indicated originally: why don’t we have the same 
provisions as Manitoba where they have a common day of 
pause? They don’t have a common day of pause. 
 
Now Manitoba store hours legislation keeps all stores open, Mr. 
Chairman, and all stores can open, regardless of their size, on 
any day, subject to having four employees. But there is no 
common day of pause — there is no common day of pause, 
which is what you said. So why have an all-party committee if 
you don’t understand that. That’s number one. 
 
Number two, they tried an all-party committee in Ontario. It 
didn’t work. They’re going to try it again and it’s still not going 
to work, probably. And where are they going to get to? There is 
no level playing-field while all that is going on. And not only 
that, not only that, Mr. Chairman, it’s ironic that they’re hanging 
their hat on the Manitoba legislation because we are providing 
the same provision to the municipalities — exactly the same. 
And if they want to limit it to four people, they can. And if they 
want to have the same provision as Manitoba, they can. And so 
what’s wrong with that? 
 
And it’s not in provincial legislation because, Mr. Chairman, and 
to the members opposite, one day when that legislation is 
challenged, and it will be, and the superstores of this world come 
out with a whole brand-new scheme, their legislation won’t 
stand the test of time again. So where are they going to be? 
Scrambling around, I suppose, with all-party committees. I don’t 
know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Tonight, Mr. 
Chairperson, I want to do something that I wager the minister 
has not done himself. And that is, I want to share the results of 
visits I had last Friday in my Sutherland constituency with 
business people. I spent the day, from 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2700 
 

10 o’clock in the morning till 4 o’clock in the evening, going 
door to door in the Sutherland business community asking 
people what they thought of this legislation. 
 
In some 13 businesses that had the owner-manager present when 
I came, 12 of the 13 said that they believe stores should be 
required to close on Sunday. That was 12 of 13 said that. Twelve 
of 13 also indicated, interestingly enough, that the cost of goods 
or services they were providing would increase if they were to 
stay open on Sunday. And that can only mean one thing — that 
that cost would be passed on to the consumers eventually. 
 
And low and behold, 13 out of 13 said that Sunday opening 
would very definitely affect the quality of their family life, or the 
family life of their employees. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairperson, I want to take just a few brief minutes to 
read into the record some of the comments of these business 
people from my visits with them. 
 
One said: 
 

They’re practically doing away with Sunday as a day set 
aside for recreation and worship, Sunday as a family day. 
Everything is too commercialized and this will make it 
only more so (he said). 

 
Another said: 
 

There is now way one community can sit beside another 
without staying open if that other community is open. It’s 
really the very large corporations, the extra-provincial 
corporations, which will benefit from this legislation, not 
small-business people such as myself. 

 
This individual also indicated that if he were forced to stay open 
on Sunday, he would not be able to provide the same knowledge 
. . . level of knowledgeable service for his customers. It would 
mean a step down in the service he’s providing because he’d 
have to hire part-time help who wouldn’t know the operation as 
well as he did. 
 
And most damning of all is this individual indicated he had done 
a survey of retail businesses in his line of business here in the 
province, a buying group of 59 businesses, and of those 59 
businesses surveyed in the buying group on the issue of Sunday 
opening, all of them — all 59, he said — concurred with the 
sentiment that Sunday opening should be opposed. 
 
One individual had a slight qualification; he personally opposed 
Sunday opening for personal, religious reasons, but he felt that 
the government shouldn’t legislate that on everyone. But that 
was one of 59 people in the buying group. A very telling 
commentary on this legislation from a person in the business 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Another said: 
 

My volume won’t increase significantly enough to stay 
open on Sundays, but my costs would increase if I were 
open on Sundays. 

He said: 
 

It’s bad enough as is, working six days a week. I have very 
little time with my family. This legislation will help the big 
to get more powerful (he said). 

 
Another says, just very simply, “It’s a big mistake.” A big 
mistake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Another said: 
 

I’m a family operation. I can’t afford it, (a) in terms of time 
away from my family, or (b) financially. 

 
Another went on to say — this individual indicated that I could 
use his name, Mr. Ben Piggelen of Everything’s Coming Up 
Roses florist on 8th Street in Saskatoon — questioned why there 
. . . He said: 
 

There are 250 million people in Europe, and they close on 
Saturday along about 2 or 3 o’clock in the afternoon. (and 
he said) they get along quite well without Sunday opening, 
and I think we can do without Sunday opening here in 
Saskatchewan as well (he said). 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — To quote him further, he said, “I’m dead 
against it.” 
 
Another individual — this is very interesting, Mr. Chairperson, 
very, very interesting — said that he had conducted an hourly 
sales study with respect to Friday night openings in his store, that 
he had computerized his hourly sales from March till March 
right from his sales tapes. And they showed that if he was open 
Thursday night and served, say 50 customers, that if he was open 
on Friday night, he served only 30. 
 
The point of the survey was, after a year of this survey, was that 
sales never increased. The dollar volume never increased with 
the extra hours he was open. He said: 
 

All we really ended up doing was providing a service for 
our customers. People, customers allocated their time 
differently, but they didn’t allocate their spending any 
differently. 

 
I think the implications for Sunday opening are clear: it’s a 
disaster for small business people. 
 
Another said: 
 

I hope that it will never happen (referring to Sunday 
opening). None of the staff would appreciate it. I’m sure I 
don’t appreciate it. 

 
Another said, “There’s no need for it.” He would never open — 
never open on Sunday, even if it became the going thing. He 
simply does not believe in it. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2701 
 

Another commented: 
 

What they’re doing is throwing small business up in the 
air. Those who can afford it will open, and the rest will be 
left out. 

 
Now those are comments, not from myself, but from 
representative business people in the Sutherland constituency. 
And I think they know far more of what they’re talking about 
than the minister does when he stands up to speak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — In a word, Mr. Chairperson, this legislation 
means fundamental changes for small-business people, for rural 
communities, for our Saskatchewan families, and for 
Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
For small business it means increased costs, it means 
inconvenience for the owners of these small businesses in terms 
of longer hours and less time with their family; it means a 
decrease in service they can provide. And the bottom line for 
Saskatchewan people is that it’s going to cost them more as well. 
 
For rural communities it means rural communities have no local 
choice. They have a loss of business to urban centres and a loss 
of community life that follows on its heels. A loss of population, 
yes, and a loss of jobs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And for Saskatchewan families it means an erosion of family 
life, recreational life, religious life, from the very Premier who is 
so concerned, or professes to be so concerned about family life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well we’ve seen him increase taxes for 
Saskatchewan families. We’ve seen him cut back on health 
services for Saskatchewan families, and now we see him going 
along with his Minister or Urban Affairs on this legislation 
which will dramatically affect family life. So those are some of 
my thoughts, Mr. Chairperson, on the Sunday opening 
dimension of this legislation. 
 
I’d like to conclude by very briefly commenting on the ward 
section of this legislation. This legislation with respect to wards 
really means representation. Fair representation is gone for 
people like senior citizens and people on welfare. 
 
What is at stake with this ward legislation is the ability for 
people to vote for someone they can relate to, someone who can 
relate to their problems and knows and understands them 
firsthand, someone who can represent them and not the interests 
of the rich and the powerful. 
 
And it’s interesting to note in this connection, Mr. Chairperson, 
that this minister sought no consultation, no consultation 
whatsoever, with urban municipalities and small-business people 
on the legislation that he provides tonight. He has only one aim 
and that is to jackhammer the wards out of Saskatchewan urban 
municipalities. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — He has only one aim in eliminating the wards, 
and that is to jackhammer democratic representation out of urban 
municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That is a jackhammer minister, I say, and it is 
directly calculated to get PC apologists elected in urban areas 
because they can’t get elected provincially. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The results of the urban by-elections in 
Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon Eastview prove that 
completely and conclusively, if there was ever any doubt after 
the last provincial election. 
 
And there we see the real reason for this raw power grab. And I 
ask the minister if he will not reconsider this legislation in the 
best interests of Saskatchewan people, even at this late hour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll do battle more on the 
ward with my critic. I’ll just answer with one respect right now 
to some of the member’s remarks. Every alderman now, even in 
the ward system, can indeed come from one ward, because they 
don’t have to live in their wards. So your argument that you just 
presented doesn’t hold any water. Sorry, but we’ll talk more 
about that. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Sutherland indicated . . . his 
opening remarks, well I would wager. Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m 
not a betting man — I guess he is, and I’m sorry to hear that, but 
that’s his privilege if he wants to bet. But you’re losing. And 
you’re all losing. You’re losing with business and you’re losing 
with the consumer. You are going to lose again. I’m sorry to tell 
you that, but you are. 
 
(0015) 
 
And I’ll tell you why. Mr. Chairman, I too visit businesses 
regularly and I know that they’re going to lose with that stand. 
And not only do I visit, Mr. Chairman, with the businesses in my 
constituency, I visit with the businesses throughout the province 
and various chambers. And, you know, I have to agree with the 
family aspect that the member mentioned, but if you think for a 
moment, Mr. Chairman, that more liberal shopping hours don’t 
help moms and dads, double income families, total disregard to 
single parent families, closing of Superstore and Bi-Rite and 
Safeways . . . You won’t say that in the city but you say that out 
in the country, talking out of the side of your mouth. why, why 
do you want to regulate people’s lives? We don’t. We’re going 
to get out of regulating the lives. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the beauty of our amendment — municipalities 
can close the stores if they wish. Stores can close if they choose 
not to open, the business community. And they’re all over the 
lot. I’ve lived with them all my 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2702 
 

life. They’re all over the lot on this issue, Mr. Chairman. That’s 
not new. Some want to open, some don’t want to open. I just 
read the letter from the Moose Jaw chamber. They recognize that 
they’re divided on the issue, but they still say, get out of 
regulating our lives. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, people don’t have to shop if they 
don’t want to. You’re not calling everybody that shops at 
Superstore a heathen, surely, are you? you don’t . . . Some 
people consider that a family activity; they really do, Mr. 
Chairman. And he discovered something new. the business 
community isn’t making money Friday night. Whoopee. Read 
the Leader-Post. They’re not making money in Regina on 
Wednesday night — big headline to that effect. So I say, why are 
they open? Why are they open? Close if you’re not making 
money. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
there they go. Businesses don’t stay open if they’re losing 
money, don’t you know that? We’ll give you the first basic 
lesson in business. If you don’t make money, you close your 
door. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, there is no evidence of increased costs to 
the consumer. There is no evidence of the so-called domino 
effect. And we are using a much broader number and a much 
broader picture than 59 businesses that the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland used. We’re using the actual results that 
are garnered from B.C. and Alberta that have had similar 
legislation — one for eight years, one for three years. None of 
those have occurred in those two provinces. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As a member of 
the Legislative Assembly for Regina I am very embarrassed 
tonight witnessing the performance of the member from Regina 
South in defending this Bill. 
 
It’s one thing, Mr. Chairman, to represent a part of the province 
as an MLA outside of the cities, and bring in a Bill that is 
insidious as this Bill is, and as treacherous as this Bill is. But it’s 
mostly embarrassing for me and the colleagues in the New 
Democratic Party that represent urban areas, and that represent 
areas outside of the urban areas, to have this member get up in 
this House tonight and attack our small-business community, to 
attack families who work in small business, and basically put 
forward a Bill which is attacking the very fabric of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The opposition is really embarrassed with his performance. And 
I’m sure the Premier of this province is going to have some very 
important things to say to him come the next cabinet shuffle. 
 
I’ve heard for a while now, over the last number of weeks in the 
media and in this House, the member for Regina South to try this 
Bill, to try and justify the unjustifiable. He stood in this House 
tonight and on previous occasions, and he has attempted to 
defend the undefendable. And that’s what this Bill 60 is, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
He is obviously an insensitive person; he has not consulted with 
people that have opinions in the community outside of his little 
circle of Tory caucus 

colleagues. He has not consulted with the business people that 
my colleague from Saskatoon just a few moments ago relayed in 
terms of his visits with him. 
 
And what really concerns me, Mr. Chairman, is that this Bill is 
really an attack on democracy itself. We’ve heard the arguments 
with respect to the ward system and what he is doing. And what 
I want to talk to you about tonight is that very briefly, but more 
importantly, I’d like to report to the Assembly tonight a response 
and a result of a survey that I have undertaken in the 
constituency of Regina North West with all of the businesses in 
the constituency. 
 
A questionnaire was dropped off at their place of business and a 
phenomenal response has been received. I have received 37 per 
cent response of all questionnaires dropped off. The normal rate 
is between 5 per cent and 10 per cent in terms of questionnaires 
returned. And, Mr. Chairman, I have had 37 per cent response. 
 
And I want to take a few moments tonight to share with you and 
with the member from Regina South, some of these concerns of 
these business people; some of the concerns that he has 
obviously deflected like water off a duck’s back by saying, if 
they can’t stand the heat, get out of the kitchen, or in his own 
words, close your doors if you’re not making any money. 
 
I want to read some of the comments first on the proposed 
legislation with regard to store hours. And I quote one: 
 

There should be no Sunday shopping except for 
convenience stores and grocery stores if they wish. Sunday 
is a family day. When you’re an independent business 
person who puts in a lot of hours, taking away from family 
time and life-style. We have two children, also added 
expenses in hiring more help. They already put in a lot of 
hours. We don’t need extended hours. The money just isn’t 
here, consumer-wise or employer-wise. 

 
Another one, Mr. Chairman: 
 

I don’t want to see Sunday openings or any more additional 
evenings. What we have is enough for our size of a city. 

 
Another quote: 
 

As owners we are still responsible for our business, even if 
we employ others to work on Sunday. Therefore, that 
would mean seven days a week of being available. We are 
totally against it. 

 
Another quote: 
 

I feel if we have this control for our city rather than 
provincially, it wouldn’t end there. I feel it has been too 
major an issue for too long. 

 
Another quote: 
 

Sunday only gives people more time to shop, not more 
money to shop with, and requires small-business people to 
work the extra hours 

  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2703 
 

themselves. We no longer have time that is really busy any 
more. 

 
Another comment, and I quote: 
 

As being a small business, our expenses would be much 
greater and services far less than is needed. And the service 
would be inadequate as indicated in 3(a), which means if 
you are required to stay open Sundays, will the cost of the 
goods or services you are providing have to increase? (And 
they say) yes, they will. 
 
As it stands now, it would wipe out small and independent 
business which make up a large percentage of the 
employment in this province. Family unity would no longer 
exist as there would be no days off together as a whole 
family. It does not generate more money coming in, just 
spreading it over seven days instead of six, which 
eventually costs the business person and consumer more 
money. 

 
Another quote: 
 

My business would be forced to close its doors. I believe 
Sunday should be a day of worship and a time to spend 
with the family, doing things together as a family. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Another quote, Mr. Chairman: 
 

Overall sales are not increased, just spread over a longer 
period. A common day off . . . businesses open Sunday 
have caused mid-week traffic to almost cease to exist, and 
drain most of the general public’s spending income to the 
point of forcing me to go out of business. 

 
And that’s what this person is saying. They’re still in business, 
but this is going to force him out of business, in his opinion. And 
I have two other comments; they’re very short and to the point. 
And one says, and I quote, “I think it stinks.” And the other one 
says, even in more subtle terms, “It stinks”. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And one even sent me a . . . it’s not really 
pornographic, but it’s a drawing with four or five letters on it. 
And I quote, Mr. Chairman — this may be unparliamentary, but 
I’ll try and read it into the record and withdraw if it is — and it 
says, “To hell with Sunday shopping”. 
 
And that’s what I got from my businesses, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister. And if you think that these people are going to be 
supporting you if you encourage them to go out of business by 
allowing Sunday shopping, then you’re in for a rude awakening, 
and I think you’re dead wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I also want to share with you the precise 

results of this survey. Do you believe most stores should be 
required to close on Sunday? Eighty-seven per cent of my 
respondents said yes; 13 per cent said no. And all of the ones that 
said no were in the food business. 
 
Two, should that be provincially determined or city determined? 
yes, provincially, 68 per cent, and city-wide, 32 per cent. If you 
are required to stay open Sundays, will the cost of the goods or 
services you are providing have to increase? — 73 per cent said 
yes. Would Sunday opening mean more full-time employees? — 
9 per cent said yes; fewer full-time employees? — 30 per cent 
said yes; more part-time employees? — 61 per cent; fewer 
part-time employees? — Mr. Minister, zero per cent. 
 
What this means, if Sunday opening goes ahead under this Bill, 
it’ll also mean a decline in full-time employment and a modest 
increase in terms of part-time employment. And what we’re 
stuck with is a significant drop in career choices for individuals 
who like to make the businesses in my community a career. And 
that’s not a very positive thing. 
 
Will Sunday opening affect the quality of life of your family and 
the families of your employees? — 96 per cent said yes. 
 
And I want to share with you some other startling pieces of 
information. The number of employees that these respondents 
employ, or represent, total 707 people, and that’s broken down 
into 338 full time, and 369 part time. And the ones that are 
opposed to Sunday shopping represent 96 per cent of all those 
employees — 96 per cent, or 679 employees, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now it’s my view, if an ad hoc survey that is undertaken with 
some scientific element to it as this one was, in one constituency 
out of 64 in this province, and one that is not heavily laden with 
businesses, I might add, how do you think the rest of the people 
of the province view this legislation and view the opportunity, as 
you call it, to be open on Sunday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, he calls that a survey — 59 
businesses in his constituency. Quotes all kinds of figures. 
Amazing! I admitted freely, earlier, that businesses are all over 
the lot on this issue. Some want to open; some don’t want to 
open. You don’t have to be a mental giant to figure that out. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, mine goes beyond the constituency of mine. 
Mine goes into the entire city and community. Mine goes into 
other cities. Mine goes into the rural communities. Mine goes 
into the various chambers. Mine goes into the independent 
federation of business, and on and on. 
 
And coupled with that goes my own personal experience, having 
had the distinct privilege of serving as the president of the two 
major retail merchants associations in Regina, one at the 
Northgate Mall and one at the Southland Mall. And I know what 
the small-business people thought about the hours of opening. 
We discussed it regularly. We discussed how unfair the existing 
legislation was to the business community — how unfair 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2704 
 

it was; how unfair it was to families that chose to do that as an 
activity if they so chose to do that. 
 
What about the businesses, Mr. Chairman? I had one, and 
everybody knows that — my amusement park, where on a 
Sunday we were open. Was that bad? I employed 50 students. I 
did it without any help from the NDP government. Just hired 
them on my own — 50 students or so every year, regularly. And 
on Sundays, if a piece of machinery would break down, I needed 
service on a Sunday. And did that mean that I had to close down 
my park because my supplier wasn’t available to me? That I 
couldn’t even buy nuts and bolts if I had to fix a piece of 
machinery? 
 
So along with that issue, we’re looking at the other areas — the 
tourism industry that’s open on Sunday, the communications that 
are open on Sunday, the reporters that work on Sunday, and on 
and on. Transportation. This is the last area and still, Mr. 
Chairman, they miss the point. They still don’t understand. 
 
There is a municipal option to control that, if they don’t want. 
And all of those businesses that you named, all of those 
businesses that you named — they can be protected by the 
municipal legislation because they will have the power, if they 
so choose, to indicate exactly what stores and the size thereof 
will be allowed to open, Mr. Chairman. And, you know, if they 
want to open some and close others, that will be within their 
power. 
 
(0030) 
 
We can’t do that provincially; we can’t describe a convenience 
store in provincial legislation that fits — name a town — 
Wynyard, Saskatchewan. A convenience store that falls into 
Wynyard, that falls into the same category in Prince Albert or in 
Regina or Saskatoon. We can’t do that; they’re different. But 
they can do that at the local level. 
 
So no wonder the provincial legislation is always challenged. 
We can’t control the hours where Saskatoon wants their 
convenience stores to close, while Regina wants their 
convenience stores to stay open 24 hours a day. We can’t control 
that in provincial legislation. 
 
Or, Mr. Chairman, is the NDP suggesting that now, on top of 
closing Superstore, on top of closing Bi-Rite or Pinders drug 
stores, on top of closing Safeway, that now we close every 
convenience store at night as well? I mean, we can’t do that 
provincially. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister has 
indicated that he’s laughing off the responses that I received 
from the businesses in the constituency of Regina North West. I 
just want to add that there’s going to be other colleagues 
standing in this House this evening to indicate what they have 
found in their research, and I’ll bet you a significant amount of 
investment that they will be finding results from their surveys 
that are far different than yours. 
 
But I want to just add a couple of other highlights. We’ve been 
reviewing some of the newspaper headlines, and I see, “Toronto 
rejects Sunday shopping.” And I quote out 

of the June 13 Star-Phoenix: 
 

Instead, councillors voted 30 to 2 to tell the Ontario 
government to shelve its Sunday shopping legislation. 

 
And that’s what the city council in Toronto, Ontario is doing, 
and they’re putting it back to the provincial government because 
they have legislation allowing for Sunday shopping. 
 
“Sunday opening foes told to lobby municipalities.” The 
member has indicated just a few moments ago that it’s up to the 
municipalities. And you’ve indicated that we should start 
lobbying the councillors and the city councils with respect to 
Sunday shopping. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, how can you tell the people of this province 
that they should start lobbying under your new ward system 
where there will likely be 10 councillors at large from Saskatoon 
and Regina both? How do you direct the people of this city to 
call 10 councillors and lobby them with respect to Sunday 
shopping, when if there’s no ward system and it only takes one 
call to talk to your councillor, they’ve now got to make 10 calls? 
 
How much time do you think people have to do this? How 
effective is this going to be, to be calling 10 councillors to 
review or relay your concern with respect to the issue of Sunday 
shopping? Could you explain that tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, he wants to bet too. Why 
don’t you bet your colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland? I told 
you, I don’t bet. 
 
And don’t you ever accuse me of laughing at the business 
community, and don’t mislead the public by making that 
statement that’ll show in Hansard that I laughed at the business 
community. I never laugh at the business community. I’m 
laughing at you and your statements. More people . . . you’re 
comparing Toronto, three times as many people in Toronto or 
so, than in all of Saskatchewan — all of Saskatchewan. How are 
you going to compare that? Next you’re going to compare the 
ward system in Toronto to that in Saskatoon. They’ve got almost 
as many people in one ward in Toronto as the entire city of 
Saskatoon, so let’s get the comparison straight. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . Mr. Chairman, I 
gather I have the floor. It’s always . . . the purpose of entering a 
debate of course, Mr. Chairman, is to attempt to rationalize your 
argument and influence the people on the other side of the 
debate. Now in this situation we’re up against a difficult 
problem, because we have a Minister of Urban Affairs here who 
said in the past: you don’t like my politics as a Liberal; just a 
minute, I’ll change to a Conservative. He says: you don’t like me 
in Regina North; I’ll change to Regina South. You have a 
minister who says: you didn’t like my principles last fall on the 
day of rest; just wait a few months and I’ll change my principles 
the other way around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2705 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — This minister, this minister, Mr. 
Chairman, is supported whole-heartedly by his Executive 
Council, by the Executive Council of this government. They’re 
whole-heartedly behind this minister on this legislation, so it will 
be impossible to appeal to this minister because he has the 
obvious support of the Executive Council and the Premier on 
this issue. 
 
So my remarks, Mr. Chairman, this evening, will be not an 
attempt to influence the Minister of Urban Affairs or the 
Executive Council or any members opposite, because it will be 
impossible. They have dug themselves into the position that 
they’re in now, and they’re not going to change their view. That 
is quite clear from the minister’s stand. 
 
So my comments this evening on Bill 60 will not be directed at 
the minister or the government, but I intend to direct my remarks 
to any of the public that may be watching. Now it’s questionable 
whether there by many of the public watching this evening when 
we’re discussing Bill. No. 60, which is An Act to amend the 
Urban Municipality Act. 
 
I find two very objectionable features about this particular Bill, 
Mr. Chairman. And one of the features is that the small-business 
people of Saskatchewan, whether they live in large or small 
urban centres, will suffer under the implications of this Bill if it 
is enacted. And that’s serious enough concern for me. 
 
But I do want to deal with another aspect of the Bill which I find 
very objectionable, and that has to do with the ward system and 
the government’s attempt in this Bill to do away with the ward 
system and deny the people a choice that they want. 
 
On television, in the city of Saskatoon, we have a phone-in 
television opinion poll where people can phone in at a charge of 
50 cents by SaskTel. And I understand, Mr. Chairman, that they 
have the same phone-in system in Regina. People can phone 
their opinions in. And if there are any people watching this 
television this evening, I want those people to get a pencil ready, 
because I’m going to give them some telephone numbers a little 
later on that they can phone in their opinion if there are any 
people watching. And it’s questionable whether there are at this 
time of day. 
 
With regard to the issue of the ward system, I did some research 
in this area, Mr. Chairman, and I know that you’ll be interested 
in this, from your impartial position. And if you can keep, Mr. 
Chairman, if you can keep the member for Weyburn’s mouth 
shut while I’m on my feet, I promise you, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I promise you I will keep perfectly quiet 
when the member for Weyburn gets up to speak on this 
particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now I realize, Mr. Chairman, that will be 
a difficult task because the mouth of the member 

for Weyburn has a habit of falling open all the time. I don’t 
know whether it’s by accident or by design, but it doesn’t make 
much difference because it doesn’t make much difference 
whether it’s design or accident what he says, it’s got nothing to 
do with the debate that’s before us at this time. 
 
And I think, Mr. Chairman, you can hear the twaddle coming 
from the member from Weyburn right now. And the member 
from Weyburn continues with his irrational twaddle which has 
no influence on the debate here except to interrupt the 
proceedings. And Mr. Chairman, when you want to bring that 
member to order, I can continue with . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I think maybe both sides 
should come to order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I am glad that you called 
for order because it will improve the debate here in the House 
this evening. 
 
I did some research in preparation for this particular debate on 
the ward system. And I went back and I checked the records in 
the city of Saskatoon for 13 years prior to the implementation of 
the ward system — for 13 years preceding 1973 when the ward 
system was implemented. And the information I found out was 
this, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Starting in 1961 going up to 1973, that’s 13 years, and there are 
10 aldermen occupying the aldermanic positions in the city of 
Saskatoon, so that’s 130 aldermanic years, if I may put it in that 
form. And in that 130 aldermanic years, on the west side of the 
river in Saskatoon, 27 aldermanic years were served in that 
period of time, while on the east side of the river, 103 aldermanic 
years were served. So that means if you convert a few 
percentages in that 13 year period preceding the implementation 
of the ward system in Saskatoon in 1973, 25 per cent of the 
aldermen were elected from the west side of the river, and 75 per 
cent of the aldermen were elected from the east side of the river. 
 
Now it is understood in this democratic system, Mr. Chairman, I 
know you understand this, that the democratic system is a very 
fragile system. In order to function properly as it should, it’s 
necessary for people to be involved in the democratic system, 
from all parts of the urban area — in this case, Saskatoon. And 
in order to encourage that kind of participation from people all 
over the city of Saskatoon and other cities, the ward system was 
implemented. Now of course, since that time there have been 
indications that the ward system has been accepted. Necessary 
provisions were made in the legislation that allowed people to 
give their opinion at an appropriate time after the ward system 
was brought into effect, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And in 1979 the city of Saskatoon, by almost 8,000 votes, voted 
to retain the ward system — voted to retain the ward system in 
Saskatoon. In 1982 this was the ward map for the city of 
Saskatoon. The city of Saskatoon has 10 wards. In 1988 the city 
of Saskatoon, in February 15, 1988, had produced a new ward 
map, as was necessary under the legislation. Now the city of 
Saskatoon was 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2706 
 

obviously prepared to go with the ward system that is presently 
in effect in the city of Saskatoon. They went to the trouble and 
expense of preparing a new ward system map, which is some 
trouble and some expense to the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The city of Saskatoon also passed a resolution; the council of 
Saskatoon passed a resolution. I want to read that resolution into 
the record, because it is the considered opinion of the aldermanic 
and mayoralty officers of the city of Saskatoon. And on March 
28, 1988, the resolution was passed by city council as follows: 
 

That this city council indicate to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs and to the Premier its support of the ward system 
and its disapproval of any change to the present system of 
voting. 

 
So that was the resolution passed by the city of Saskatoon on 
March 28, 1988. Thereafter, the city of Saskatoon, on June 21, 
just a very short while later, apparently observed that the 
Government of Saskatchewan had not heard what they said in 
the resolution which they passed and sent to the government and 
sent to the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
(0045) 
 
So they sent another letter and they sent it to the Premier, the 
Leader of the Opposition, the Minister of Urban Affairs, the 
Leader of the Liberal party, and a copy to myself. And in this 
particular letter, which was marked “rush, urgent”, June 21, 
1988, they had this to say: 
 

Re: The 1988 municipal election ward system at large 
(and it’s got the file number). 
 
The council of the city of Saskatoon at its meeting held on 
June 20, 1988, resolved that an urgent letter be sent to the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister of Urban Affairs, 
the Leader of the Opposition, and the Leader of the Liberal 
Party, and all the MLAs representing the city of Saskatoon 
concerning the proposed amendments to the legislation 
dealing with the above matter. 
 
City council wishes to reconfirm its support of the present 
ward system. In addition, the council of the city of 
Saskatoon is of the opinion that the people should at least 
have a local option for the ward system as it presently 
exists. In the event that the current proposed legislation 
proceeds, this council recommends that it not come into 
force for the 1988 municipal election year. It is 
respectfully requested that the views of the city of 
Saskatoon be considered when the proposed legislation is 
reviewed. 

 
And it’s signed by the acting city clerk of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
So the city of Saskatoon conveyed its opinion in an urgent 
manner to the Government of Saskatchewan after they had 
ignored the first request, a resolution of the city council of 
Saskatoon. And it’s quit clear from the headlines that the media 
also was impressed by the action 

of the city council because they had in the Star-Phoenix of June 
21, ’88: “City pleads for retention of ward system.” City pleads 
for retention of the ward system. 
 
And some of the comments here, I know that the minister has 
probably read — and I don’t expect I’ll be able to influence him 
by reading them again, but I’ll put them on the record. In part, it 
says: 
 

Alderman Donna Birkmaier said the government’s decision 
“flies in the face of democracy.” 
 

Now you’ll recognize that Alderman Donna Birkmaier was a 
Progressive Conservative candidate in the city of Saskatoon, the 
constituency of Mayfair, at one time. Aldermen Kate Waygood, 
Pat Robertson, Henry Dayday, all called the five-and-five system 
unworkable — unworkable, Mr. Minister. Now I know you’re 
not impressed by that, but I wanted to put it on the record 
anyway. 
 
Something else happened in Saskatoon not too long ago, which I 
know all members are aware of in this House. We had a 
by-election in Saskatoon Eastview, and I speak from personal 
experience in that by-election. I thought that we had a good 
candidate there and that I would give him a hand in trying 
getting him elected. And I went out and I did some work door to 
door, as they say, at the grass roots, in Saskatoon Eastview 
constituency. 
 
And I know that the minister would not be surprised, but other 
people will be surprised to learn that a great number of people 
commented to me: what is the government doing with our ward 
system; why are they proposing this legislation; who’s telling the 
government they should change; we’re quite satisfied with the 
ward system. And interestingly enough, we won that by-election 
in an overwhelming fashion, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. 
As a matter of fact, the Conservative Party was unable to save 
their deposit in that by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
B: W— hat about in the city of Regina? Just to show that this is 
not just Saskatoon, the city I come from, but the city of Regina 
— in 1977 the city of Regina had a vote on the retention of the 
ward system. By about 9,000 votes the people of Regina voted to 
retain the ward system. In 1988 the city of Regina passed a 
resolution, and it’s reported in the May 10, 1988 Leader-Post: 
 

A resolution from the City of Regina opposing the abolition 
of the ward system is gaining strong support throughout the 
province. 

 
And it names the cities and other areas that are supporting the 
city of Regina in the resolution they passed, which they sent to 
the provincial government. 
 

Support for the resolution has already been expressed by 
councils in Prince Albert, Melville, Weyburn, Moose Jaw, 
Melfort, Yorkton and Saskatoon. 

 
So here we have another resolution, Mr. Chairman, supported by 
all of those cities, for the retention of the 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2707 
 

ward system. 
 
The city of Prince Albert has accepted the ward system 
voluntarily on their own, and wish to retain it, because they 
supported the city of Regina resolution. The city of Moose Jaw 
has . . . A person in Moose Jaw has sufficient names on a 
petition to cause a city-wide vote favouring the ward system at 
the next civic election in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Now what about SUMA? We’re heard some comments about 
SUMA organization, and their comments are quite well known 
in support of the ward system, and in effect telling the 
Government of Saskatchewan to keep their fingers out of the 
ward system. If there’s any decision to be made, it should be 
made at the municipal level. And in this particular article in the 
Star-Phoenix, May 27, ’88: 
 

SUMA head, Don Abel, said after a meeting that his group 
expressed quite plainly (and I quote you, “expressed quite 
plainly”) its belief that cities should be allowed to keep the 
system. 

 
So this is a report on the SUMA organization as well. 
 
Now more recently — and it’s been referred to by another 
member here in the debate this evening — region 1 of SUMA, 
which represents 28 communities in south-eastern 
Saskatchewan, approximately 200,000 people, have passed a 
resolution yesterday directed to exactly the same issue, which 
the minister and his government have stated they plan to ignore. 
 
What about the newspapers? What are they saying? Well the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on March 26, 1988 said, “Vote on 
wards needed.” It says: 
 

The Urban Affairs minister should focus his concerns over 
the effectiveness of the ward system on public opinion. the 
public vote to put the system in place in Saskatchewan’s 
three largest cities is about nine years ago and the public 
should be directly involved if it is to be abolished. 

 
And they go on to say: 
 

There is no apparent ground swell of feeling against the 
wards. 

 
So the minister appears to be simply going by his own view that 
this system of electing urban governments results in 
overspending and inefficiencies. Well to that I say to the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, the credit rating of the city of 
Saskatoon is far superior to the province of Saskatchewan in 
which he’s a cabinet minister, so he shouldn’t make any remarks 
about the efficiency of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
A little later the Star-Phoenix came out with another editorial. It 
was a little more blunt. Apparently the minister didn’t 
understand the first editorial, or perhaps he doesn’t read the 
Star-Phoenix. And on June 2, 1988 the Star-Phoenix had this to 
say: “Re-design or resign.” And it says: 
 

This government, author of some of the most 

ill-considered legislation in the province’s history (and it 
states) . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And it lists them: 
 

. . . the gas-tax-refund scheme, a short-lived tax on used 
cars, abolition of child(ren) dental care, to mention just a 
few examples — has struck again. This time, it’s an assault 
on the ward system. 

 
Urban Affairs minister . . . anti-ward obsession appears to 
have boiled over into an impossible stew which leaves 
urban voters to choose between two equally unworkable 
systems. 
 
(And it mentions the minister’s name) creation of five ward 
representatives and five at-large council members would 
give urban voters the worst of all possible systems. But a 
simple return to an entire at-large system wouldn’t be much 
of an improvement. 

 
And the editorial goes on, but I don’t intend to read any more of 
that particular editorial. 
 
What about business? Well there was a poll taken by the board 
of trade in Saskatoon, and this was in April, 1988 — fairly 
recent poll by the board of trade. And what does the board of 
trade show? Well it shows that 82 per cent voted against the 
modified system that this minister is proposing — 82 per cent of 
the board of trade people that voted, voted against what this 
minister’s proposing. Eighteen per cent voted for what the 
minister is proposing. So here we have the board of trade, what 
the minister says is his sounding-board in the community, that he 
says he knows so well, said 82 per cent against his system of 
electing. 
 
I want to suggest, and I said at the beginning of my remarks, and 
I want to conclude my remarks at this time, I said if there’s 
anybody phoning, if there is anybody phoning wants to . . . is 
watching this evening and wants to phone in, I want to give them 
a couple of numbers to phone. And it won’t cost them anything 
— it won’t cost them the 50 cents that SaskTel charges. It’s 
going to be free. All they’ve got to do is reverse the charges to 
me on these numbers. 
 
And if those people want to call, they should call 787-6572 or 
2287. Let me repeat those numbers, Mr. Chairman. The numbers 
are 787-6572 or 2287. And I want to encourage anyone who 
might be watching at this time of night to phone in and tell us 
what their opinion is. There will be no charge. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that was a pretty . . . I 
won’t be that long, but I have to make just a couple of comments 
in rebuttal to the member from Westmount. And I can 
understand — I was making notes as he was speaking, or 
rambling, whatever — but I really can understand why the NDP 
fears the coalition. He referred 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2708 
 

to my once being a Liberal and now being a Conservative. And I 
really understand that, and I really understand why the NDP 
fears the coalition, because the coalition will again keep you in 
opposition in the next election, for sure. And you’re going to 
lose again. And even your new young leader is struggling in his 
capacity as being number one. Number two, he might have done 
a pretty good job, but number one, he’s struggling . . . he lacks a 
lot of confidence in that role. Maybe, as time goes by, he’s going 
to learn how to be a leader, but it’ll be following the next 
election, and he’ll lose again. 
 
But you know, Mr. Chairman, let’s clarify something one more 
time for the records. I ran in Regina North in 1982 when Regina 
North was a new seat. My home ground of Regina South was 
occupied by an existing Tory member who’d won in 1978. So I 
waited my time and then I went back to my natural stamping 
grounds of Regina South where my five kids grew up, where my 
five kids went to school, where I ran a couple of businesses, 
where I lived for about 18 years and probably had one of the first 
homes in Albert Park. And that’s not as bad as my critic who 
moved into Regina North East from Humboldt, I’ll tell you that. 
At least I was still in my home city. 
 
He talked about store hours, and I will too, for a moment. And 
just to show you a couple of irrational comments that they made: 
in the Maple Creek area, where it’s a tourism industry, they tried 
to close Mondays. They couldn’t do it because it’s a resort town, 
people wanted Mondays open. And yet in Macklin, a little 
further to the north, along the Alberta border, where Provost, 
Alberta, who has the opportunity to open Sundays, doesn’t even 
affect Macklin to the tune that they don’t worry about Sundays. 
They don’t even open Mondays in Macklin, and it’s a thriving, 
hustling community of 1.250 people, Mr. Chairman, and they’re 
not concerned with that. And it all points out that we really do 
care about families. And this is again living proof of that. 
 
Now the resolution on the ward system from Saskatoon . . . and I 
hate to say this all the time but, you know, the member from 
Westmount did not deal with the facts, Mr. Chairman. We didn’t 
ignore the resolution that came; we acknowledged it. Once you 
get the resolution, you know the position of the council. I mean, 
it’s there. And obviously you understand the council’s position. 
They were all elected at wards; why would they want to change, 
you know? But the important thing is, Mr. Chairman, I 
understand that that resolution was only passed six to five. So to 
make it sound like there was no support is not right. 
 
(0100) 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, regarding the ward system, the taxpayers are 
my concern. He mentioned the board of trade survey, which was 
a pretty small survey. And albeit that that survey from Saskatoon 
Board of Trade, small as it was, maybe favoured the ward 
system, but let’s acknowledge what happened in Regina. If he 
wants to compare apples with apples or chambers with 
chambers, the Regina chamber of commerce clearly wants the 
ward system gone. So don’t accuse me of not listening. I listen, 
but the taxpayers are my concern. 

Interestingly enough, Mr. Chairman, a dramatic change by the 
Star-Phoenix. If you read their articles when the NDP imposed 
the ward system against plebiscites not wanting it, when they 
imposed the ward system, the Star-Phoenix was right on the 
other side of the at-large system. And now they’ve changed. And 
yes, they haven’t been too kind to me. You might say that 
they’ve been vicious in carrying the attack. They carried the 
attack more viciously against me than the NDP did. But I’ll 
accept that. 
 
But if you did search through the Star-Phoenix, you do find 
every now and then, if you look, something that does tell you the 
truth. Here’s a headline: “Saskatonians split on the ward 
changes.” Now these are people. These are not aldermen, Mr. 
Chairman, these are the people of Saskatoon. 
 
“My initial reaction is it gives you potentially six aldermen to 
work with instead of one,” the president of an association said. 
And he goes on to compliment this thing. Another who lives in 
Sutherland and who has locked horns with the city hall says that 
the compromise, he thinks, is beautiful because the new system 
will be more democratic. Now I’m quoting Saskatonians, I’m 
not quoting all of them. I can quote the mayor: 
 

“Not everyone in Saskatoon was disappointed at the 
announcement I wait with some interest to see how it will 
work out, “ Mayor Cliff Wright said. “It tends to give each 
side of this controversy something that they say they 
wanted.” 

 
Now let’s move to another city, an untouched city so far with the 
ward system comments. One headline, “Ward changes may help, 
is Spencer’s assessment,” the mayor of Prince Albert. Okay. 
That was what the Prince Albert Daily Herald said. 
 
And then, interestingly enough, an editorial. They weren’t too 
kind at first, but the opening paragraph and the last paragraph, 
later on in time as the debate evolved, is very interesting, Mr. 
Chairman. It starts this way: 
 

When Saskatchewan’s city councils stop stamping their feet 
and holding their breath until they turn blue, they will have 
to deal with the ward system changes. 

 
Then it concludes by saying this: 
 

Actually, the citizens of Prince Albert should thank Klein 
for giving us this rare opportunity to see our elected 
officials make a decision. 

 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, this must be one of the most 
bizarre performances that any minister has ever put on in this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — This minister is not being responsive to the 
questions that are being asked from this side of the Chamber, 
and he’s coming on with explanations that just are absolutely 
incredible. Maybe it’s the hour. But let me try and focus your 
mind on one simple point with respect 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2709 
 

to this ward system, and it refers to Saskatoon. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that almost everybody in Saskatoon 
is unanimously of the view that they don’t know why you’re 
doing what you’re doing. Most of Saskatoon just doesn’t have 
any understanding about why you’re doing what you’re doing 
with this ward system. And the reason is that they’ve had a 
system that’s been in effect for some years now, that everybody 
is relatively happy with. There’s no big outcry in Saskatoon for 
any changes. There’s no complaint that the existing system isn’t 
working well in that city. 
 
It’s not that you’re amending the legislation as an exercise in 
amending the legislation by providing some other options, 
Minister, that has them wondering. What has them wondering is 
simply this. Why is it that the existing system is not even an 
option? Why is it that the existing ward system which has served 
Saskatoon for so long is not even an option? I’d like your answer 
to that, Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member made a 
pretty broad statement, that most of Saskatoon doesn’t want a 
change. Now how does he know that? I mean, you can’t say that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I will. And to answer the question I’ll 
answer it in the same way that I have answered it time after time 
after time in this debate, and I’ll quote the member from 
Westmount. 
 

The British North America Act puts the responsibility for 
creating local government institutions on the provincial 
government. The provincial government should design and 
put into effect the best democratic system of local 
government. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, times changes, and right now everybody is 
demanding efficient governments at our level, at the federal 
level, and at the municipal level. The taxpayers want efficiency, 
and the ward system cannot provide the efficiencies that are 
demanded in this changing time, and even your Saskatonians say 
that in the article that I just quoted from. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The simple answer is to retain the existing 
system as one of the options and let the citizens of Saskatoon, in 
an election in Saskatoon, decide what ward system they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Who are you to tell them that that’s not even 
an option? By what right do you stand here and say that that 
option is out of the question so far as they’re concerned? It’s the 
system they have and it’s the system they want. Leave it with 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it’s ironic. The ward system 
was imposed by the NDP in spite of plebiscites against it, 
imposed arbitrarily — bang, gone, no option, 

no nothing. They just said, here you are. And not a take it or 
leave it — here you are, take it. Interesting. 
 
Now we have given an option, Mr. Chairman, and they lose 
sight of that fact. Now what we’ve done, and what we’ve done is 
we’ve provided a modified ward system. The ward system is still 
in place, modified and mixed with an at-large. 
 
Now I ask you, what’s wrong with that? And following that we 
have given them an option because if they don’t want the 
modified ward system, they do have the option to go into an 
at-large vote. So clearly they’ve got a choice, a choice that the 
NDP did not give them, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I just spoke hurriedly 
before and I want to make a report from the people that matter. 
The people that matter are beginning to call in, Mr. Chairman. I 
walked into the lounge and immediately received 12 calls. I have 
the numbers here: two from Saskatoon, one from Swift Current, 
and nine from Regina. Every one of them said, pull that 
legislation out of there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Chairman 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 
Moose Jaw North to allow the member from Westmount to 
make his comments. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to take any 
more time, however, there’s more results coming in. The 
numbers are 787-6572, 787-2287. I want the people to call in. it 
doesn’t cost them anything. They can reverse the charges to me. 
 
There are three more people called so we’re now up to 15 calls, 
as fast as we can take the numbers in there. And I’ll be back to 
report more, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess Connie must 
have called from Swift Current because the ward system doesn’t 
even bother her out there. So hello Connie, if you’re still 
watching. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, the debate is . . . in spite of the hour, I have 
to admit one thing: the debate is getting a little bit better. At least 
they’re off the personal attack and they’re struggling to make 
some sense. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I have to refer in 
my opening remarks to the fact the minister had indicated that 
the Regina chamber of commerce had endorsed Sunday opening. 
It’s my understanding, Mr. Chairperson, that the Regina 
chamber of commerce has taken no position on both the ward 
issue and the Sunday opening issue. And I want to just set the 
record straight on that. 
 
It is clear to me, Mr. Chairperson, that the legislation with 
respect to Sunday opening clearly shows that that minister and 
the PC government has shown absolutely no 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2710 
 

leadership in the area of Sunday opening, and has no political 
will to do what is right for Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Chairperson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Instead of standing up and taking a stand 
against the eastern corporations, Mr. Chairperson, they’ve chose 
instead to endorse the decisions of corporations located in 
Toronto and New York, Mr. Chairperson. They’ve simply 
endorsed the neo-Conservative agenda that has been emanating 
from the East and abroad, which we discussed at some length in 
the legislature last night, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
Now I want to bring to the minister’s attention the fact that I 
have also talked to many people in my constituency, Regina 
Lakeview, and I have canvassed the businesses in Regina 
Lakeview. And, Mr. Minister, you should be listening to this 
because this constituency is very, very close to yours, Mr. 
Minister. And in particular, let me just read to you some of the 
comments, Mr. Minister, from some of those businesses right 
across the street from you, Mr. Minister, right across the street 
from you. 
 
For example: “Local choice means no choice . . .” And there’s 
the member from Meadow Lake running off at the mouth again 
as he usually does, Mr. Chairperson, unable to say anything 
intelligent with all that fluff between the ears. But nevertheless, 
Mr. Chairperson, I’ll continue with these comments that are 
coming from businesses right across the street from you, Mr. 
Minister, right across the street. 
 

Local choice means no choice as I see it. Municipal 
councils really will have no authority as the large stores do 
as they please any way to the detriment of small business. 
Apart from concerns expressed in 3 and 4, I believe that 
Sunday opening will mean bad news for the smaller centres 
as people will travel to the cities to shop, taking badly 
needed money out of the smaller communities. Our society 
has precious little free time as it is, and I don’t want to see 
our one family day also disappear. 

 
Another individual writes to me, Mr. Chairperson: 
 

Small businesses provide the most employment and 
contribute the most tax dollars to each community in 
relation to big business. They are being run out of business 
and worked to death because all levels of government do 
not have the guts to stand up and do the right thing. 

 
Another one of my constituents, a small-business person, 
indicates: 
 

It’s the same old story. We are a family business competing 
against multinationals who give away more than we can 
make, and most family businesses have a hard time 
competing again them, but who really cares? The 
government supports them because they give better 
discounts. 

 
And it’s signed by “A frustrated owner.” 

And I can go on at length, at length, Mr. Minister. The responses 
I have been getting in from the small-business communities in 
Regina Lakeview are 3:1 against Sunday opening, Mr. Minister, 
3:1. And let me tell you, Mr. Minister, these businesses are right 
down Albert Street, right across the street from you, Mr. 
Minister, right across the street from your constituency. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Minister, as has been demonstrated from the 
member from Saskatoon Westmount, the phones are ringing off 
the hook, people are pouring in to tell you and your government, 
at this late hour, you should pull that Bill, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(0115) 
 
Ms. Simard: — You should pull that Bill. Once more I’m going 
to ask you, Mr. Minister: will you consider pulling that Bill? 
Will you please pull that Bill . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
Pardon? Before I sit down I’m going to list off the numbers 
again for anybody that wants to phone in. They are 787-6572, 
787-2287. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Oh, Mr. Chairman. We’re getting into . . . 
it’s getting late obviously, because . . . I’ll start getting out some 
more letters, I guess. No, I won’t bother. 
 
I freely admit it, that the chambers are all over the place on this 
issue, including my Regina chamber, of which I’ve been a 
member for some, I don’t know, 20 years or 25 years, I can’t 
even remember. 
 
But the Leader-Post clearly indicates the Regina chamber of 
commerce position on the ward system, so let’s get that clear and 
let’s not have any more inaccuracies. Okay? So accept that, 
accept that. 
 
And I say this: the member from Fairview, maybe he’s out 
making a call, but I would ask him to take a survey. I would ask 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview to take a survey, in his 
home town, of Supervalu on a Sunday. I understand that it’s just 
jammed, you can’t even park on their lot. Tell him to take a 
survey and come back with that. See what consumers say. 
 
And getting back to the member from Regina Lakeview, let’s . . . 
she was talking about my constituency, I guess, right across the 
street from me. Well I didn’t have time to list them all, Mr. 
Chairman, but I do have a few, I do have a few. I think that 
they’re open on Sundays. We’ve got D.J.Cinnamons, we’ve got 
A & W, we’ve got Burger King. You’re going to say, they’re 
restaurants. Okay, that’s fine. We got Greko’s, that’s another 
restaurant. We’ve got the Vagabond and the Landmark. Well 
they’re in the hotel business, that’s fair, but we don’t regulate 
them, so they’re open. 
 
But interestingly enough, across the street from my constituency 
office where she’s got this raft of letters, who do we have open 
Sunday? Canadian Tire, Bi-Rite Drugs, and Acme Video. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2711 
 

Minister, you invited me to get involved in this debate and I’m 
happy to do that. Let me say, right off the top, Mr. Minister, that 
in my mind this Bill is a Bill of betrayal and it can be called 
nothing other than that. 
 
People are calling this, Mr. Minister, they’re calling this the 
Superstore Bill. The Superstore Bill because some months ago 
when Superstore thumbed its nose at your government and the 
provincial legislation, you didn’t have the jam to say that in 
Saskatchewan we have a law and we’re going to enforce it. You 
jammed out to big corporate interests, and that’s a mark, a black 
mark, that is consistent with the character of your government in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I too have had a number of pieces 
of correspondence from business people in Moose Jaw. And 
what are some of these family business people saying about your 
proposed legislation? Let me share with you, Mr. Minister, and 
those people who are watching these proceedings tonight and 
read in Hansard some of the reactions from small-business, 
family business people in Moose Jaw. They’re saying things like 
this, and I quote: 
 

Business has declined steadily over the last eight months, 
approximately 10 per cent. Longer hours for less business is 
obviously bad business practice. 

 
One question we should all ask is whose idea is this? Personally 
I don’t believe it is the consumer. My idea is it came out of the 
corporate boardrooms of the East whose population is against it. 
Why us? And I ask, why us, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Another family business person, Mr. Minister, 
writes this about your proposed legislation. It starts with these 
three words, “I hate it”: 
 

I hate it. There is no increase in sales with Sunday opening. 
The weekday business is spread over seven days instead of 
six. Toronto has just vetoed Sunday opening. What can the 
Saskatchewan government be thinking of? 

 
And I share that question with this Assembly, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, earlier this evening you said that if 
businesses are not making money that they can close their doors. 
And what the small-business people say about that ignorant 
sentiment, what they say is this, Mr. minister: 
 

We are now open on Sunday. It has not increased our 
weekly sales nearly enough to offset our increased cost. The 
consumer has no more money to spend if we’re open 24 
hours, seven days a week; however, unless all stores close, 
we cannot. 

And that is what people are saying, Mr. Minister. They’re saying 
if they have to close their doors on Sundays, if they have to close 
when their competition is open, that they’ll end up closing their 
doors, period. And I say that’s shame, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I say that you have no 
understanding of the realities of family business, and family 
business across Saskatchewan has come to know with this Bill 
that the best business minds of the PC Party have gone into 
atrophy, quite frankly, Mr. Minister. 
 
Your government, in the time that you’ve been in office, has not 
known a single balanced budget. Small-business people are 
saying that if they ran their businesses like you guys run the 
government, they would have gone out of business a long time 
ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — What’s the business reality? What’s the business 
reality? Let me show you what another business person says, a 
family business person says about your proposed legislation: 
 

There are only X amount of dollars to be spent. By longer 
hours we increase our overhead with no increased revenue. 
There is more part-time jobs than full-time jobs, and as a 
result, less money is being earned, and in return, less spent. 

 
That’s the reality. Small-business people understand that and 
you don’t, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — In addition to all of this, Mr. Minister, you’ve 
taken a two-faced approach to the service to the public. You say 
this: Superstore will dictate Sunday shopping practices in 
Regina. As a result of that, other stores in Regina will have to 
stay open to survive. As a result of that, Moose Jaw will have to 
stay open to keep their business from going to Regina. As a 
result of that, Assiniboia stores will have to keep open to keep 
their businesses from going to Moose Jaw. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, have you ever considered offering to put 
the same service delivery demands on government? And let me 
share you that sentiment with another business person who write 
this, Mr. Minister: 
 

If retail outlets are all open on Sundays, then I would like to 
see all government offices open to the public on Sundays as 
well. I think that is only fair, don’t you? 

 
I say yes, that’s fair. If you’re going to put that demand on 
small-business people, then why isn’t the same principle true for 
government services to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, this Bill has been a betrayal of 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2712 
 

family business. It is a betrayal of employees who count on just 
one day a week to spend with their families. It’s a betrayal of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In the end, Mr. Minister, in the end, family business in rural 
communities, will either burn out or close down. That’s the 
reality. In order to survive in the small villages and towns across 
the province of Saskatchewan, family businesses, Ma and Pa 
businesses across this province will end up having to stay open 
on Sunday. Many of those businesses without employees — 
they’re run totally by Ma and pa — will have to stay open or go 
out of business. And I say that it is a shame. it is a shame that 
your rural members, your rural members on your side of the 
government, Mr. Minister, have allowed you to manipulate their 
small minds. This is only a catalyst to closing down rural 
Saskatchewan, and that’s a betrayal of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, come the next election, family 
business people, employees, and rural people in Saskatchewan 
will tell you that they’re madder than Hades and they’re not 
going to take it any more. They’re going to turf you birds out, 
and you’re going to be leading the parade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Let me summarize my remarks, Mr. Minister, 
with this comment, yet another comment from a small-business 
person in Moose Jaw who writes about your proposed 
legislation: 
 

Legislation to shift this to the municipal level is a cop-out 
of responsibility by the provincial government. Sunday 
shopping is needed like more hot, dry weather. 

 
And I share that sentiment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Let me conclude, Mr. Minister, with this question 
to you, and I ask you to give a very specific answer to a very 
specific question. And the question is this — listen very 
carefully to this question, Mr. Minister, and I ask you to answer 
it honestly and to follow through on your commitment because 
this question, Mr. Minister, tests your metal; this question tests 
how much you really believe in this Bill. 
 
And I ask you sir; if this Bill passes, will you personally, will 
you personally open your constituency office for service to your 
constituents on Sundays? Mr. Minister, are you going to run 
your constituency office like a Saskatchewan family business? 
Will you make that commitment to your constituents, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: I’ll answer that question first, and I don’t mean 
to embarrass my critic. But Sunday, my critic and I were both 
invited to the YWCA to do some work at a strawberry Sunday 
social. Now I showed at my appointed 

time, 1 o’clock. You were supposed to show at 1:30. I left at 2 
and you still weren’t there. I don’t know if you showed or not. 
But if you want to know if I work Sundays in my capacity both 
as an MLA and as a minister, I do. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you open your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The colleague from Moose Jaw . . . my, my 
but you’re getting excited. Sounds like you’re frightened, and 
you should be frightened. You accuse me of not listening. 
You’re talking about businesses in Moose Jaw. Didn’t you pay 
attention when I read this letter from the Moose Jaw chamber of 
commerce? And I’ll read one more line. The underlying factor 
for Moose Jaw — and you should hang your head in shame 
because you probably won’t be around after the next election — 
the one line: frankly, Moose Jaw is open for business. 
 
Now what’s wrong with that? That’s an old cliché. That’s 
something that this government coined, and Moose Jaw is using 
it. Shame on you for not representing your city when your 
chamber, your very chamber . . . who do you listen to out here? 
 
And in the meantime you accuse us of listening to 
multinationals. What a joke, Mr. Chairman. Bi-Rite Drugs, 
multinational? I don’t think so — local family; I know them. 
Acme Video, multinational? No, I know them as well. What a 
weak opponent. What a weak argument. Your best attack was a 
personal attack against the minister. That’s not acceptable out 
there in the real world. 
 
Talk about a betrayal of rural Saskatchewan; you missed the 
whole point. Do you not understand that Saskatchewan is an 
agricultural-based community? Do you not understand that how 
goes the agricultural community, so goes the business sector out 
there in agriculture? And the billion and a half dollar deficiency 
payment that we were able to get from the federal government 
and shift into the economy last year to assist the small-business 
community out there in rural Saskatchewan, don’t talk to me 
about betrayal. Don’t’ talk to me about protecting families. 
 
Let the interest rates go up to 22 per cent; let them lose their 
homes. The NDP don’t care about families. Let the vicious dogs 
run wild, maim the kids. Do you care? Not a bit. And that’s in 
this Bill and that’s what you’re holding up. Let’s get on with it. 
Let’s pass it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I am prepared to put my record of 
listening to business people from Moose Jaw on the line any 
time, compared to you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Unlike some others in this Assembly, Mr. 
Minister, I do not go to meetings and listen to business people 
tell me that they think this Bill is crap and then walk out and tell 
the media that they were in support of the Bill. 
 
And I tell you, I tell you, Mr. Minister, I have had in my 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2713 
 

office over 100 responses, 100 letters from small-business 
people, from family business people in Moose Jaw, and by a 
ratio of 2:1 they say to me that your Bill stinks, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So I tell you, I am listening to business people in 
Moose Jaw. Now I notice very carefully, Mr. Minister, that you 
avoided my question, and I will ask you this question again. 
 
The question again is very simply this: if this Bill passes — 
listen very carefully, Mr. Minister — if this Bill passes, will you 
personally open your constituency office every Sunday to be of 
service to your constituents? Will you run your constituency 
office in the same way that Saskatchewan family businesses will 
be forced to operate if this Bill carries? Will you open your 
constituency office to service your constituents on Sunday, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Oh, what a joke. If he doesn’t understand that 
MLAs work seven days a week, I don’t know who will. And it 
has nothing to do with opening the office. I mean, don’t you 
accept calls on Sunday at home? I do. Don’t you go out . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
You know, you’re not even making a point. But, Mr. Chairman, 
exactly, exactly what I said. Exactly what I said. Even the Moose 
Jaw chamber, even the Moose Jaw chamber is all over the lot on 
this. But they support one basic principle, Mr. Chairman. The 
basic principle is easy: quite regulating our lives. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, it’s been suggested by a number 
of my colleagues this night in the debate and at other times, that 
this minister will not listen, is stubborn, and in some ways it’s a 
hopeless debate — that we’re not going to change his mind. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I happen to believe there’s hope for anybody. I 
happen to believe that. And I want to offer one more opportunity 
for this minister, one more opportunity for this minister to 
respond to what the people of Saskatchewan are saying. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when I conclude the few remarks that I want to 
make I’ll be asking you once more: will you tonight, even at this 
late hour, will you tonight delay passage of this legislation? Will 
you do what people across this province are asking; and they’re 
asking it even tonight on the phones in our caucus lounge. 
They’re phoning at this moment to ask you if you will delay this 
legislation. 
 
I’m going to ask you that question at the end of my remarks and 
I’m going to do it primarily on behalf of Saskatchewan families. 
 
(0130) 
 
Mr. Minister, for your information, since we announced the 
phone numbers here we have had a total of 37 calls to date on 
two telephones — 37 calls to date. Six of them 

opposed to the position we take, 31 of them in favour of the 
position we take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — For those who wish to express their opinion to 
this minister, I remind you that the phone numbers in the New 
Democratic Party caucus lounge are 787-2287 and 787-6572. 
And please feel free to phone collect. Express your opinion to 
this minister and this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, most of those who have expressed their concern 
with this piece of legislation, if not all of those, have done so on 
the basis of a concern for Saskatchewan families. Mr. Minister, 
that’s the concern I share, and that’s the concern we share on this 
side of the House. 
 
Now in all of this long debate, I think I have heard members on 
your side advance two reasons in regard to the store hour 
question. 
 
An Hon. Member: They used to have amateur hour on CKOM. 
Phone in; here’s the number. That’s what you’re doing — 
amateur hour. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Now there’s the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Chairman. There’s the Minister of Health speaking from his seat, 
waving his arms. Mr. Chairman, could we have some order from 
the Minister of Health, please. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in the course of this debate, I think I have heard 
government members advance two positions in defence of the 
store hours provision of this Bill. The Deputy Premier stands up 
in this House and says, well it’s a difficult issue; it’s a difficult 
issue. Well, agreed, it’s a difficult issue. So what’s the solution 
of this government to handle this difficult issue? Well it’s just to 
wash their hands of it; to say, yes it’s too difficult for us to 
handle, and so we’ll give it to the municipalities. That’s their 
answer to the difficulty question. 
 
The other response I’ve heard from the Minister of Urban 
Affairs again tonight. Now I’ve heard it said, Mr. Chairman, that 
the family who prays together, stays together. And I happen to 
agree with that. I’ve heard it said, Mr. Chairman, that the family 
who plays together, stays together. And I happen to agree with 
that. But tonight, for the very first time, I heard the theory 
advanced by this minister that the family who shops together, 
somehow stays together. That’s this minister’s defence for wide 
open Sunday shopping across Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, is it too much to ask, is it too much to ask 
that one day out of seven should be reserved for those who 
choose to worship? Is it too much to ask that one day out of 
seven should be reserved for family? Is it too much to ask that 
one day out of seven should be reserved for friends and 
neighbours? Is that too much to ask, Mr. Chairman? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I simply want to say tonight, Mr. Chairman, 
that the interests of Saskatchewan families are simply too 
important to sacrifice to the rage of 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2714 
 

consumerism, which this government tends to bless. The 
interests of Saskatchewan families are too important to sacrifice 
to the interests of their corporate friends from eastern Canada. 
And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the interests of Saskatchewan 
families are too important to sacrifice to the ego of this man and 
the plan of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And those who may be watching this debate, I 
invite them, and if they share that point of view, I invite them to 
call in. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question: will you delay passage of this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the night is drawing on, and 
if he wants to have, or if the opposition indeed want to have 
serious debate, let’s do that. Let’s get off that phone kick. I’ve 
been passed a message that said that our phone people made 56 
calls that you’re not reporting. so if we’re playing a game, then 
let’s forget it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, a minister, the church, accusing people, accusing 
moms and dads that both work, accusing single parent families 
that work, of being non-religious because they want to shop on 
Sundays. Of all the arrogance that I’ve ever heard of. Coming 
from a man of the cloth, you should be embarrassed to stand in 
your pulpit on a Sunday and call your people that — that they’re 
non-religious because they want to go and do some shopping. 
And we’re talking about double income workers and single 
parent families — 11 per cent. 
 
Mr. Chairman, municipalities have the right to choose what the 
people across this province want, except with added powers, and 
they can do that in keeping with their choice and in keeping with 
the tradition of their community. Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe 
that this government can be fairer than that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to join 
this debate representing my constituent, the member for Regina 
South, and representing a good number of folks throughout 
Regina North, and indeed across our great province. 
 
What this debate is about is the fundamental future of our 
province, of our small businesses, their fundamental right to 
participate and to compete in a market-place. And the minister 
pokes fun of our plea, our call for some telephone phone-ins. He 
makes light of that; says we’re playing silly games. We are 
simply taking democracy right to the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — What you are saying, Minister . . . I want to deal 
with the ward system first. You are trying to change the ward 
system from one that people in the major cities of Saskatchewan 
favour. We have headlines from Moose Jaw to vote on the ward 
system where they have a petition calling for the city to adopt a 
ward system where each alderman represents a specific part of 
the city. Yet you 

ignore that; you do so at your own peril. 
 
We have another headline, “City pleas for retention of ward 
system,” in which: 
 

The Saskatoon council is going to ask the government 
through an urgent letter, (it says urgent letter,) not to change 
the ward system for the 1988 municipal election in October. 
Council will also reconfirm, through the letter to the 
government and the opposition, its opposition to changes to 
the present ward system. The letter will state that the public 
should have the option of voting by the ward system if it so 
desires. 

 
Then the next headline we’ve got is . . . Minister for Urban 
Affairs — it’s your name, but I’m substituting Minister for 
Urban Affairs . . . “rejects aldermen’s plea to retain ward system 
in the fall.” 
 
The next thing we have is, “Local autonomy under attack,” in an 
article in the Star-Phoenix, June 22 this year. I’m going to read 
three paragraphs for the minister. One is: 
 

Proposals to change the ward system are the heaviest and 
most unfair of the assaults this package of amendments 
makes on local autonomy. But Urban Affairs minister 
(yourself) is still settling old scores from the early ’70s and 
he won’t listen to reason. And the store hours issue isn’t a 
great deal better. 

 
The article goes on: 
 

It all amounts to an image of an overbearing provincial 
government arrogantly reaching out and, in the case of the 
ward system changes in particular, almost vindictively 
dictating the terms of urban living. 

 
This article ends with a paragraph that states: 
 

That is a far cry from the government, first elected in 1982, 
promising a new and improved respect for local autonomy. 
None of this makes a great deal of sense to ordinary urban 
dwellers, but it’s the type of mindless and pointless 
oppression that won’t be forgiven or forgotten. 

 
I happen to agree with that last paragraph totally. 
 
We have some new totals that the minister might be interested 
in, on our call-in. We’ve now had a total of 48 calls — 42 in 
favour of what members of the New Democratic Party 
opposition have been saying; only six against. 
 
I again will, in an effort to allow people to participate in the 
fullest manner, in the manner of public participation, I’m going 
to give the numbers, and I’m going to ask people to call in. 
Please call in. We want to hear, whether you’re for or against it; 
it doesn’t matter which side. Call in. Call collect. 
 
I’m going to give two numbers. Do it, please. Let’s . . . This 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2715 
 

is the final chance to get the Minister of Urban Affairs to hear 
your voice. This is the dying hours, obviously, of this legislature. 
Phone in. The numbers, and you can call collect — 787-6572. 
That’s 787-6572. The second number is 787-2287. 
 
Please call. Feel free to call collect. We want to hear from you. 
We hope that you, Mr. Minister, want to hear from these folks as 
well. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Keep the phones ringing; stop that Bill. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Ring those phones. Stop the Bill. 
 
What this ward system debate, where it stems from, Minister . . . 
You have used the argument that a ward system enables 
councillors to simply spend money just without regard to where 
it’s coming from. But I want to tell you what the real problem is 
in cities like Regina. The real problem is you and your 
government, and let me outline what it is. 
 
There was an original — this is a city of Regina document — an 
original net provincial transfer to the city. They anticipated 
revenues of $24,823,300. Then they found out what you were 
going to do, and this was in this immediate past budget year, you 
gave them a $16,968,500, which was a net loss, Mr. Minister, of 
$7,854,800 to the city of Regina alone — never mind Saskatoon, 
never mind Moose Jaw, never mind Prince Albert, never mind 
North Battleford, never mind the other cities throughout 
Saskatchewan — nearly $8 million, which is a 31.6 per cent 
decrease last year in the funding that you and your government 
gave to the city of Regina. 
 
To maintain the current rate of civic services, the city of Regina 
estimates that to make up that deficit, if they were to simply 
maintain the status quo of employment and so on, would require 
a seven mills or eleven and a half per cent — pardon me, an 
eleven and a half per cent increase in our taxes. Minister, part of 
that comes from things like transit, where you reduced from 
$895,000 the payment to $688,000, $207,000 less money. There 
was no continuation of historical levels of funding for major 
water and sewage; capital projects, the loss in that area alone was 
$1.72 million. 
 
There was expenditure increases that not only the cities have had 
to deal with, Minister, every individual in Saskatchewan has had 
to deal with it . . .(inaudible interjection). . . The member for 
Wascana is saying, wrap it up, wrap it up. Resign your seat, let’s 
have a by-election. We’ll see how we wrap it up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(0145) 
 
Mr. Trew: Your E & H tax increases from 5 per cent o 7 per cent 
cost the city of Regina, for six months only, $1.89 million; the 
gas tax cost them $165,000; expenditure increase for half a year, 
$480,000. That’s what this is all about. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to the shopping issue, where 

the headline in this article says, the Minister for Urban Affairs 
says: “Local communities should decide shopping issues.” Well 
how is it, Mr. Minister, that the local communities, the urban 
governments, the councils, should be making the decision on 
shopping hours, and yet when it comes to the ward system, 
where we’ve had major votes in Saskatoon, Regina, now a call 
for the ward system in Moose Jaw — why is it that on the ward 
system it’s the Minister for Urban Affairs who knows all, who 
can dictate, the little dictator from Regina South, can tell them 
what’s best for them, but in shopping hours, which is a touchy 
issue, you don’t have an opinion, best left to local autonomy. 
 
I just want to remind people, the arguments have been made 
about Sunday shopping. I want to remind folks of the phone 
numbers; they’re still ringing; we’ll have a new total when the 
next speaker gets up. Looks like it’s going to be a very long 
evening for you, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m going to give the phone numbers — 787-2287 and 
787-6572. And again I plead to the people of Saskatchewan, 
anyone who’s watching at this unholy hour, please call. We’re 
here. We want to hear from you. Give us a call; tell us what you 
think of this Bill. Ring those phones. Stop the Bill. Simple as 
that. Ring the phones. Stop the Bill. This is the last chance that 
we have for that. 
 
The point I’m making, Minister, about Sunday shopping and the 
ward system — you can’t have it both ways. On the ward 
system, you know it all; and on Sunday shopping, the 
municipalities know it all. Well which is it? Which is it? It can’t 
be both ways. 
 
I want to commend to the minister and anyone else, an article in 
the June 23 Star-Phoenix. This is an excellent article that sums 
up everything I could possibly say. The headline wraps it up 
even nicer, but it’s a fairly short column written by a Verne 
Clemence. The headline is, “Public relation not Klein’s strong 
suit,” and I recommend that to anybody and everybody as a very 
good article. 
 
Mr. Minister, I feel some benevolence because, as I understand 
it, unless you’ve moved recently you’re still a constituent of 
mine. I feel some benevolence, so I ask you — save some face: 
will you withdraw or stand this Bill? In the name of decency, 
looking after the people of Saskatchewan, will you stand this 
Bill? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, the New Democratic Party supports two very important 
principles that clearly your PC government does not. We support 
the principle of a common day of rest, and we support the 
principle of retaining the ward system. 
 
To permit seven-day-a-week opening in Saskatchewan is to 
over-commercialize our province and to put commerce on 
Sundays ahead of family life. And to abolish the ward system is 
to erode democracy and to cancel a civic election system that has 
been serving the public very well. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, as you’re well aware, the city of Saskatoon 
has asked for the retention of the ward system. Dozens of other 
municipalities have done the same. The 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2716 
 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association has asked for 
the retention of the ward system. 
 
My question to you is very simple, Mr. Minister: can you name 
us one single municipality in the whole province of 
Saskatchewan that supports your 1988 legislation to abolish the 
ward system? And will you, Mr. Minister, if there is such a 
municipality, table that correspondence? And if there’s not a 
municipality, Mr. Minister, then can you tell us what gives you 
the right to run roughshod over every single municipality in this 
province on the ward system issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, would the minister answer my 
question? The minister is sitting in his seat. He’s refusing to 
answer my question. And I think Mr. Chairman, that that clearly 
indicates that there isn’t such a municipality. But if there is one 
or two or three, we’d like to know which municipalities they are, 
because to date we haven’t heard of a single one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Oh, Mr. Chairman. You know, we’ve been 
debating this thing so long . . . It’s interesting that the NDP has 
been fighting this ward system for so long . . . Don’t you realize 
there’s a drought out there? Don’t you realize that our 
agricultural sector is suffering? 
 
They’re laughing at the drought, Mr. Chairman, the NDP laughs 
at the drought that our farmers in Saskatchewan are suffering — 
laughing at it. 
 
The government’s constitutional responsibility, Mr. Chairman 
. . . I’ve said this a hundred times. I’ll rephrase it. Maybe he 
didn’t understand the quote, the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount: the provincial government’s constitutional 
responsibility to provide an effective and democratic institutional 
framework for municipal governments. 
 
As far as a municipality is concerned, if you want an example, 
the city of Moose Jaw, who had every right to go into a ward 
system ever since it was imposed on the larger cities, chose not 
to. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I want to report what I 
have to report to you in the House in a serious manner, because 
it is a serious matter. I didn’t think there would be that many 
people up watching television at this time of night, 2 o’clock in 
the morning. And I gave the two telephone numbers out and I 
asked people to respond. 
 
They responded from Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 
Mossbank, Swift Current, and other places. Their report to me 
was 64 in favour of the position that we’re taking here on this 
side of the House, and eight supporting the position the 
government is taking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: Now I did it to illustrate a point, Mr. 
Chairman, that the people of Saskatchewan do not support this 
government in the action they’re taking. 

I want to keep this on a serious vein, so I’m going to ask the 
people that were phoning in to please do not phone any longer. 
This is a serious matter. We want the government to withdraw 
this legislation, or at least put it off. We have received enough 
telephone calls from people that were up watching the legislative 
broadcast to indicate quite clearly that they were 
overwhelmingly in support of the position that the members on 
this side of the House have taken. 
 
So I would thank the people very much that phoned in, many of 
them paying for the call themselves, from Saskatoon and, as a 
matter of fact, Swift Current. And as a matter of fact, in order to 
verify the results, I had several people from the media in the 
office, and they answered the phones rather than me answering 
them, and they questioned the people that phoned in. 
 
So if the members across the way think that they’re going to say 
to the people of Saskatchewan, we don’t believe you when you 
called in, they’re wrong, because the media was there and they 
took a number of the calls to verify to themselves that they were 
legitimate calls, and they talked to the people. 
 
So I want to report, in conclusion, it was 64 to eight out of 72 
calls overwhelmingly in favour of the position of the minister 
withdrawing his legislation on the ward system, and numerous 
ones also commented that the minister is wrong on his 
legislation about Sunday shopping. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the 
countless thousands that are watching the proceedings and didn’t 
phone in. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to say, Mr. 
Chairman, that I have witnessed one of the more phenomenal 
events of the 13 years I’ve spent in this legislature, this evening. 
If anyone had told me that an opposition, even one as spirited 
and as talented as this one, would start a debate and keep it up in 
a vigorous fashion at this time of night for what is now close to 
three hours, I would have said it’s impossible. What is even . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Has the member called time? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pardon me? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Has the member called the clock? Proceed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know if that’s the chairman’s idea of 
humour or not, but it’s not mine. 
 
Moreover, if anyone had said that you could ask for telephone 
calls at 1 o’clock on a Tuesday night and have the phones 
ringing off the wall, I would have said that’s impossible. And the 
only reason why there wasn’t a lot more phone calls was because 
people were getting busy signals back there. It was apparent. As 
soon as one telephone hung up, someone else phoned. 
 
I want to say very quickly, Mr. Minister, I sent out 700 
questionnaires in my riding. The businesses in my riding are 
very different than the businesses in the member from 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2717 
 

Regina North West. The businesses in my riding tend to be 
professional offices, doctors’ offices, offices from 
interprovincial, international companies. 
 
I got results which were not terribly different, I want to tell you. I 
got results about 2:1, and about 20 per cent of them wrote back. 
It isn’t just small-business people who have to go back and work 
on Sunday, it’s everybody who cares about such people. And 
that appears to exclude you. 
 
Mr. Minister, your Premier has said that you put God first, the 
family second, and the PC Party third. Quite frankly, on Sunday 
shopping, I think you’ve lost sight of the interest of all three of 
those parties. I do not know why you’re doing what you’re 
doing. You’re doing it obviously in opposition to your own best 
interests. 
 
I want to ask you . . . Mr. Minister, I have just one question. In 
light of what’s happened this evening, are you sure you don’t 
want a 10-minute recess for a caucus meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, this has been an 
interesting and, I think, enlightening debate. I stand here and I 
say, with some regret, that from all of the indications from what 
the minister has said, and in the last three-quarters of an hour or 
half an hour, his refusal even to answer the questions which have 
been asked, that it appears that this minister and this government 
are so determined to ignore all of those people of Saskatchewan 
who are saying in every way possible, including the phone calls 
tonight, so determined to impose their legislation against the 
wishes of the vast majority of Saskatchewan people, that it is 
unlikely the government is going to bend and stop this Bill at 
this time. 
 
I say that sincerely in sorrow, because by this stubborn approach 
by this minister and this government, it is the people of 
Saskatchewan who are the losers. They are the losers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A press reporter asked me earlier this evening: with the 
government proceeding the way it is, is the NDP going to be a 
winner? I said that I would have to say that if we are, it’s in 
sorrow, because it’s the people who are going to be the losers, 
and they’re going to remember for a long time. And in the end, 
it’s going to be this Conservative government and this party 
that’s going to be the loser at the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — This debate has brought forward and 
exposed some very important facts, Mr. Chairman. We saw here 
a situation where the Minister of Urban Affairs and his Premier, 
by allowing him to proceed the way he has, have refused to 
stand up for the families of Saskatchewan. The Premier has 
refused to stand up for the families of Saskatchewan. They have 
been abandoned. They have been abandoned because of a 
cynical grab for power by this government, power at the 
municipal level. They’re prepared to sacrifice the needs and the 
interests of the families of Saskatchewan in order to try to 
attempt to grab power at the municipal level. 

(0200) 
 
They have abandoned the family on this issue, as they have on 
many other issues, because they have decided that they want to 
cater to the large corporate sector of this country which is going 
to dominate the business world of this province, when this 
legislation is in place, to the detriment of the small-business 
people and the small family businesses of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, this debate has exposed 
very clearly that this government and this Premier have 
abandoned the small-business community. They have abandoned 
the family business. They have abandoned rural business. This is 
an attack on the very backbone of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
It is the small-business people, the small-business sector that 
provides most of the jobs. It is the small-business sector that 
generates a great portion of the wealth which provides the 
resources which we then, as a province, can pay for the services 
such as health care and education which we must have and we 
must maintain at a high level. 
 
And yet in spite of that, Mr. Chairman, it is these very people, 
these small and family businesses, who have been singled out for 
attack by the Premier and by the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
Inconceivable that that would ever happen by a government that 
goes around and pretends to be the supporter of the business 
community, and particularly small business. 
 
What we see here is a government deliberately taking away the 
rights of urban residents to choose the form of elected council 
that they wish to have, the form by which they elect that council. 
 
That’s not new. This government has introduced legislation in 
this House that sets them up for a gerrymander of provincial 
constituencies. They would go that far in order to try to preserve 
themselves in power so they can continue to hand out their 
patronage and reward their friends at the expense of 
Saskatchewan families, at the expense of the small-business 
community. 
 
And now what they have done, or what they’re attempting to do 
with this legislation, is to set up a gerrymander of municipal 
elections as well. That’s why, Mr. Chairman, that I say what I 
say in sorrow. Here is a government that attacks the local 
autonomy of our municipalities. 
 
The public has spoken loudly. Through every means available 
the public has said that the government should not proceed with 
this Bill. New organizations have been formed around the 
province since the government began to talk about this 
legislation, and these organizations have communicated . . . one 
of these organizations, the coalition against opening on Sundays, 
has communicated with over 48,000 businesses in 
Saskatchewan, and overwhelmingly they have said to the 
government, don’t do it! 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2718 
 

Call an all-party committee of the legislature. Hold hearings all 
across the province. Give the people an opportunity to speak just 
like they spoke on those telephone calls tonight, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And no one, no one is more surprised that 
I, that at this time of night, with this kind of a debate, a comment 
made by one member of this House for people who phoned 
would generate well in excess of 50 phone calls. Who would 
have thought that? 
 
Now if that does not say the strength of the feeling that’s out 
there on this issue, I don’t know what can. And you must have a 
government, Mr. Chairman, that is absolutely blind. Either that, 
or it’s a government that’s so determined to tear down the very 
institutions of this province so that it can satisfy its own private 
agenda, that it’s prepared to ignore that kind of message. 
 
We on this side of the House believe in the rights of people to 
choose. We believe in the democratic process. We believe that 
people in municipalities and our cities should be able to decide 
what kind of electoral system they want. We believe that 
small-business people should have a right of choice, but they 
can’t have a right of choice if you give it to corporate choice 
which is going to run roughshod over the small-business sector 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say to the minister opposite, Mr. 
Minister, you are making a mistake. You have been sent a 
message. In fact, when you consistently refused to listen and to 
hear that message, your resignation has been demanded. And if 
you were honourable in any sense of the word, you would have 
handed your resignation in to the Premier so he could do the 
right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — For all of those people who made those 
phone calls, I say to them thank you for taking part in the 
democratic process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s what democracy is all about. It is 
giving people an opportunity to be heard. I say to those people 
who called, and many others who did not call, this government 
takes away your right to be heard. This government does not 
deserve to remain in power. This government will not be in 
power after the next election because it will be booted out of 
office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if there is 
any more that can be said or needs to be said in this debate. This 
debate has continued for some five weeks, and eve beyond that 
before the Bill was introduced before that. This debate will not 
stop with the passage of this Bill because I say to the minister, 
those organizations 

that have been formed to oppose your stubborn legislation will 
continue. 
 
They will continue and they will do all the work that’s necessary 
to maintain their position on a common pause day. And they will 
in turn, Mr. Minister, stay in position to defeat you when you go 
to the polls at the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I want to say to you that the New 
Democratic Party will stand shoulder to shoulder with them and 
support them in that cause. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now before I sit down, I’m going to just 
serve notice to the minister that we will give him one more 
chance to show that they are not totally rejecting the democratic 
process. I’m going to move an amendment to section 6 of the 
Bill dealing with the ward system. And in that amendment I’m 
going to propose . . . I’m going to give the minister his due. I’m 
going to allow him to have the two options which he proposes: 
the choice of the at-large system, or the choice of the dual 
system, the worst system of all. 
 
But I’m going to ask him, if he really believes, and the House 
Leader, the Deputy Premier, if they really believe in democracy 
as it should be, to allow an amendment which will allow a third 
choice, and that is the choice of the ward system as well and let 
the municipalities make that decision. And we will see how 
those members vote on that amendment, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And so I am going to conclude my remarks and allow the Bill to 
go to clause-by-clause consideration. As I began I will conclude. 
I do that with regret. The New Democratic Party has put up a 
great fight on this Bill along with all the people throughout the 
province who have done the same. But here comes a time when 
the majority can steamroll over the minority. And in this case, 
that’s what this government is doing, and that, in the end, Mr. 
Chairman, will defeat this government so it can never do it 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 6 of the printed 
Bill, moved by the member for Regina North East. Will the 
members take the amendment as read. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I think I would like to read 
the amendment. I’m sorry to take further the time of the House, 
Mr. Chairman, but this amendment is of such importance I think 
it deserves to be put on the record and explain what the 
amendment would do. 
 
It would be an amendment to clause 6 and it would allow the 
right of an urban municipality to be able to choose, by 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2719 
 

plebiscite, a ward system or an at-large system or the dual 
system. I’m not taking away with this amendment anything that 
the minister already wants in this Bill. I’m simply adding the 
option of the ward system which good urban municipalities want 
to have, and they’re asking for it, and should have a right to 
have. And my amendment, Mr. Chairman, is as follows: 
 

Section 6 of the printed Bill: 
 
Amend section 6 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by adding immediately before the words “The council of 
a city” where they appear in the first line of subsection 
25(1) being enacted therein, the following: “Subject to a 
plebiscite resulting in a majority of the eligible electors 
resident in that municipality voting in the affirmative”; 
 
(b) by adding immediately before the words “The council 
of a city” where they appear in the first line of subsection 
25.1(1) being enacted therein the following: “Subject to a 
plebiscite resulting in a majority of the eligible electors 
resident in that municipality voting in the affirmative”; and 
 
(c) by adding immediately after 25.1 being enacted therein 
the following section: 
 
25.2 The council of a city mentioned in section 25 or 25.1 
may (and I would note the word “may”) by by-law, 
following a plebiscite resulting in a majority of the eligible 
electors resident in that municipality voting in the 
affirmative, establish or continue, as the case may be, a full 
ward system of representation in that the city shall be 
divided into that number of wards that equals the number of 
aldermen to be elected to the council of that city at a general 
election. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, no one should be able to argue against that 
amendment — no one should be able to argue against that 
amendment. It is a perfectly reasonable amendment that 
institutes fairness into what is . at least a small element of 
fairness, into what is a very undemocratic and unfair Bill. 
 
With that explanation, Mr. Chairman, I urge the members 
opposite to do the right thing. It is not going to hurt you 
anywhere; in fact it may do you some good. I urge you to 
consider what is right on this issue, ignore your Minister of 
Urban Affairs who has already misled you bad enough, and 
support this amendment. And I so move the amendment, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(0220) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas— 21 

Romanow  Goulet 
Prebble   Hagel 
Rolfes    Pringle 
Lingenfelter  Lyons 
Shillington  Calvert 
Tchorzewski  Lautermilch 
Brockelbank  Trew 
Mitchell   Smart 
Simard    Van Mulligen 
Atkinson   Koenker 
Anguish 

 
Nays — 30 

 
Duncan   Meiklejohn 
McLeod   Pickering 
Andrew   Martin 
Berntson   Toth 
Lane    Johnson 
Taylor    McLaren 
Smith    Hopfner 
Swan    Swenson 
Muirhead   Martens 
Maxwell   Baker 
Hodgins   Gleim 
Gerich    Neudorf 
Hepworth  Gardner 
Hardy    Kopelchuk 
Klein    Britton 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
don’t intend to prolong the House more unduly than it’s been 
already prolonged. I do think that it’s important to put on the 
record the position of the official opposition with respect to the 
question of Sunday hours. I think the arguments with respect to 
public input have been put very eloquently by my colleagues on 
this side of the House, and the fact that this government is 
apparently unwilling or unable or both with respect to listening 
to the public on the question of Sunday closing. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Chairman, what I’d like to move, seconded 
by my colleague, my desk mate, the member from Regina North 
East, is the following amendment: 
 

That section 16 of the printed Bill be amended by deleting all 
of the words after the number “16” and substituting the 
following therefor: 
 
That a selection committee of the legislature be struck to 
receive the input of the public on the whole matter of Sunday 
store hours. 

 
I so move. 
 
(0223) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2720 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow  Atkinson 
Prebble   Anguish 
Rolfes    Goulet 
Lingenfelter  Pringle 
Shillington  Lyons 
Tchorzewski  Calvert 
Thompson  Lautermilch 
Brockelbank  Trew 
Mitchell   Smart 
Simard    Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky  Koenker 
Solomon 
 

— 23 
Nays 

 
Duncan   Meiklejohn 
McLeod   Pickering 
Andrew   Martin 
Berntson   Toth 
Lane    Johnson 
Taylor    McLaren 
Smith    Hopfner 
Swan    Swenson 
Muirhead   Martens 
Maxwell   Baker 
Hodgins   Gleim 
Gerich    Neudorf 
Hepworth  Gardner 
Hardy    Kopelchuk 
Klein    Britton 

— 30 
 
Clause 16 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 17 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member for 
Battleford to allow the proceedings to continue. I’d ask the 
member from Battlefords to allow the proceedings to continue. 
 
House amendment to clause 21 of the printed Bill, moved by the 
Minister of Urban Affairs that: 
 

Section 21 of the printed Bill is amended in the second line 
by striking out (1) . . . 

 
Order! I’d ask the member again from Battleford to allow the 
proceedings to continue. 
 
I’ll read the amendment again. 
 

Section 21 of the printed Bill is amended in the second 
line by striking out “(1) in sections 135.2 to 135.8” and 
substituting “135.1(1) in sections 135.2 and 135.8.” 

 
Clause 21 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 22 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 

Clause 30 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 30 of the 
printed Bill, moved by the . . . Order! I’d ask the Minister of 
Finance to let the proceedings proceed. 
 
Order! Order! Would the Minister of Finance allow the 
proceedings to proceed. 
 
Moved by the Minister of Urban Affairs the amendment to 
section 30 of the printed Bill: 
 

Strike out section 30 of the printed Bill. 
 
Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 31 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. An amendment to section 31 of the 
printed Bill. Moved by the Minister of Urban Affairs that 
sections 31 to 37 of the printed Bill: 
 

Renumber sections 31 to 37 of the printed Bill as sections 
30 to 36 respectively. 

 
Clause 31 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 32 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended, on division. 
 
(0230) 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation 

Act, 1979 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the amendments now be read a 
first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — With leave, I move the Bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2721 
 

Bill No. 84 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of Certain Acts and the Passing of Certain Orders and 
Regulations pursuant to The Government Organization Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the amendments now be read a 
first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move, with leave, the Bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the amendments be now read a 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — With leave, I move the Bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third 
time, with leave, and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 83 — An Act respecting the Operation of All 
Terrain Vehicles 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Ambulance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan  
Pension Plan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 88 — An Act to make Certain Changes in the 
Statute Law with respect to the Investment of Moneys Held 

pursuant to Certain Acts 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the amendments be now read a 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — With leave, I move the Bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Department of  
Revenue and Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 

Department of Revenue and Financial Services Act, 1988 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 101 — An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2722 
 

Sharing Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the Bill now be read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 89 — An Act respecting certain Consequential 
Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Municipal Board Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move that the amendments now be 
read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — With leave, I move the Bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(0245) 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:47 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting Securities in Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 50 — An Act respecting the Control of Distribution and 
the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation Board 
Act 
Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance 

and Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 
Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Small Claims in the Provincial 
Court in Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Federation Act 
Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Act 
Bill No. 91 — an Act respecting certain Consequential 
Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act 
Bill No. 92 — An Act respecting Provincial Emblems and 
Honours 
Bill No. 99 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 
The Small Claims Act 
Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act 
Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation 
Act 
Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance 
(Government Contributory) Act 
Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 
Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Department of Revenue 
and Financial Services Act 
Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Department of 
Revenue and Financial Services Act, 1988 
Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 
Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984 
Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Local Government Election 
Act 
Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation 
Act, 1979 
Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax 
Act 
Bill No. 72 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board 
Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Act 
Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 
Bill No. 83 — An Act respecting the Operation of All Terrain 
Vehicles 
Bill No. 84 — an Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of Certain Acts and 
the Passing of Certain Orders and Regulations pursuant to The 
Government Organization Act 
Bill No. 88 — An Act to make Certain changes in the Statute 
Law with respect to the Investment of Moneys Held pursuant to 
Certain Acts 
Bill No. 89 — An Act respecting the Consequential amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Municipal 
Board Act 
Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Ambulance Act 
Bill No. 101 — An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 
Services Act 
Bill No. 104 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 
of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years 
  



 
June 28, 1988 

 

2723 
 

ending respectively on March 31, 1988 and on March 31, 1989 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:52 a.m. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

French Language in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
motion here I would like to move. And the motion is as follows, 
and it is seconded by my good friend and colleague, the member 
from Redberry: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 
recognition that: 
 
(a) the Legislative Assembly recognizes that the presence of 
English and French speaking Canadians in Saskatchewan 
constitutes a fundamental characteristic of Canada; 
 
(b) the Legislative Assembly wishes to enhance 
opportunities for and promote understanding between 
English and French speaking Canadians; 
 
(c) The Language Act affirms rights in respect of the use 
and status of the French language in Saskatchewan; 
 
(d) The Legislative Assembly wishes to affirm its 
commitment to the effective implementation of those rights 
and in particular to the adoption of statutes and regulations 
of public importance in both English and French; 
 
(e) section 12 of The Language Act provides that the 
Legislative Assembly may, by resolution, direct that the 
rules and procedures of the Assembly shall be made, 
printed and published in French and English. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the member from Melfort, seconded by the member 
for Redberry, with leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Shall the Assembly take the motion as read? Is 
the Assembly ready for the question . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Read it? 
 
Motion reads as follows: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, in 
recognition that: 
 
(a) the Legislative Assembly recognizes that the presence of 
English and French speaking Canadians in Saskatchewan 
constitutes a fundamental characteristic of Canada; 
 
(b) the Legislative Assembly wishes to enhance 
opportunities for and promote understanding between 
English and French speaking 

Canadians; 
 
(c) The Language Act affirms rights in respect of the use 
and status of the French language in Saskatchewan; 
 
(d) the Legislative Assembly wishes to affirm its 
commitment to the effective implementation of those rights 
and in particular to the adoption of statutes and regulations 
of public importance in both English and French; 
 
(e) section 12 of The Language Act provides that the 
Legislative Assembly may, by resolution, direct that the 
rules and procedures of the Assembly shall be made, 
printed and published in French and English; 

 
I beg to inform the Assembly that if there is an error, the error is 
on my part. There’s a concluding paragraph, which I will read to 
the Assembly now, and then we will take the vote. 
 

Directs that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly take 
steps to ensure that, as expeditiously as possible, the Rule 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan are made, printed and published in English 
and French. 
 
And further directs that steps be taken forthwith to put in 
place a system where by debates of the Assembly that occur 
in French are recorded in that language, along with an 
English translation thereof, in Debates and Proceedings. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
and seconded by my colleague the member for Redberry, I 
move: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, by registered mail of such date and time. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I trust that you all have a pleasant summer. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3 a.m. 


