


















































April 21, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 21, 1988 
 
 

731 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — I lay on the Table the following petitions: 
 

By Mr. Goodale — Of the Stephen and Michelene 
Worobetz Foundation, of the city of Saskatoon, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
By Mr. Toth — Of the Full Gospel Bible Institute, of the 
town of Eston, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
By Mr. Neudorf — Of Pastor Walter Boldt, Art Ratzlaff and 
Barry Hertz, of the city of Saskatoon, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 50 adult students from 
the R.J. Davidson Centre which is located in my constituency on 
Franklin Street. They're in the Speaker's gallery this afternoon. 
They're taking the adult basic education program at R.J. 
Davidson. Accompanying the students are two instructors, Bev 
Riffel and Donna O'Shea. 
 
As well, we have two special guests that are not from the school 
but are visiting the R.J. Davidson Centre and other centres in 
Saskatchewan from the country of Ghana. And the two 
individuals are two instructors; they're here on a joint-sponsored 
Canada-Ghana government project. They are Doris Opayam and 
Perpetua Opong. I'd ask all of my colleagues to join with me in 
welcoming them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It always gives me a 
good deal of pleasure when I have people from my constituency 
come into the Assembly. We have the council from the R.M. of 
Lawtonia here to speak with the Minister of Rural Development 
today. I want to introduce the reeve, Mr. Stolson, and their 
secretary, Art Thompson, and Brian Brown, Eldon Seidler, 
Dwaine Deobald and Barry Leisele. I'd like to have the Assembly 
recognize them. They're seated in the government gallery on the 
west side there. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 
you, in your gallery, Mr. Fred Herron, who is the general 
secretary of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, representing 
12,000 teachers in the province of Saskatchewan, of which 
myself and several members are members, and who are involved 
for the responsibility of 200,000 students in Saskatchewan. I ask 
you and all members to join me in welcoming Mr. Herron. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Applications for Rebates of Gas Tax 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to direct a 
question to the Acting Minister of Finance. And, Mr. Minister, it 
deals with the 32 cents a gallon PC gas tax. 
 
Saskatchewan drivers have until the end of the month to send in 
their applications for a rebate on this unfair extraction from the 
drivers of Saskatchewan. Can the minister tell us how many 
applications have been received, and whether or not there have 
been any applications processed to date? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government set up 
this particular system so that the people of Saskatchewan, the 
consumers of Saskatchewan, would not have to pay the tax that 
would otherwise be paid by interprovincial truckers and large 
business factors and that type of thing, and that's what it was 
designed for. 
 
As to exactly how many applications have been processed to 
date, I didn't have that at my fingertips. I will undertake to get 
that. 
 
I think the Minister of Finance has said many times in this House 
that those forms are going to, for the most part, be processed by 
summer students, particularly by university students. 
 
And for the member opposite from Quill Lakes, I could advise 
him that university, for the most part, is still in progress. They're 
writing exams, and probably will be done next week. And at that 
time I suspect that there will be a fair number of these processed, 
or far more than have been to date. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are 
you telling the Saskatchewan drivers who have started paying 
this tax last June, and who may have submitted their application 
as early as February this year, are you indicating to them that they 
shouldn't be looking forward to any cheques, and at the earliest, 
May? I'm asking you: why couldn't you set up a mechanism so 
that they could be processed as they come into the department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister 
of Finance has made it clear on many occasions that we decided 
that we would have students who are otherwise attending 
post-secondary education do the job of processing these. And that 
would therefore accomplish, (a) the fact that we would give 
students a job that . . . I understand the members yesterday in the 
House spent most of their questions asking why we weren't 
providing jobs. We are in fact providing jobs to them. 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

732 
 

So I say that number one, Mr. Speaker. And number two, to the 
hon. member, it's six short years ago when they were in 
government. They had an ad valorem tax of 20 per cent. They 
never employed any students to give money back to the people 
of Saskatchewan because they never gave any back to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, as the 
Estimates will indicate, you've extracted about $73 million in 
respect to fuel tax. And do you realize that about $70 million of 
that you have taken into the government coffers interest-free. 
You have extracted it from the pockets of the people; you have 
taken the loan of a $70 million tax free. 
 
All I'm asking you: don't you think you have an obligation at least 
to keep your commitment and to provide a rebate to the people 
of Saskatchewan? Why couldn't you do it in April so that at least 
they could assist the people to pay your excessively high income 
tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make the point 
again, Mr. Speaker, that when the members opposite were in 
government they had rebates for a variety of things. They never 
had a rebate for gasoline. They had a 40 cent tax on gasoline that 
went right into their pocket and stayed right in their pocket. 
 
Now what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is processing this. We're 
giving it back to the consumers that have purchased it, and at the 
same time we are creating jobs for university and college students 
and technical students so that they will have a job this summer 
which will assist them then in going back to school next year. 
And that seems to me to be perfectly reasonable, Mr. Speaker. 
And to the member opposite, the inconsistency of the member 
opposite, they had rebates for almost everything, Mr. Speaker, 
and those rebates came six months, nine months, 10  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
are you aware that in the province of Saskatchewan you have 
45,000 people unemployed? I ask you: why couldn't you at least 
give consideration to employing some of these people and giving 
back the rebate at a reasonable time to the people of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we indicated that we 
targeted to the students of the colleges of the university and of 
the institutions. I dare say, Mr. Speaker, that if we in fact were to 
follow the view of the hon. member from Quill Lakes and in fact 
made those payments out this month, he would be the first one to 
stand up yelling: the only reason you're doing this is because you 
have a couple of by-elections. So he wants it one way, or he wants 
it the other way, Mr. Speaker. He is inconsistent in 

everything he says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we are doing is reasonable, is practical. It assists the people 
of Saskatchewan; at the same time it assists people who are 
pursuing higher education in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a new question to the acting minister. In 
view of the fact that you have extracted something like $70 
million from the people of Saskatchewan, their pockets, and 
since you've used it for over a year, are you prepared to provide 
interest on that money that you've extracted from the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they spent the first 
year after that program was announced saying it's too complex. 
Now he's going to spend from now on saying complexify it a bit 
more, please. Mr. Speaker, he is continuing to be inconsistent. 
Mr. Speaker, he is continuing to be inconsistent. 
 
I simply say to the hon. member, go back six years ago, with all 
your rebates, and ask the members opposite, ever once did they 
provide interest on a rebate that they provided through a variety 
of programs? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is clearly, no they did 
not. They are being inconsistent today, which is standard for the 
member from Quill Lakes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Refunds from Prescription Drug Plan 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Health and it deals with the ongoing hardship his prescription 
drug plan cuts are causing for Saskatchewan families. I want to 
ask the minister about a Saskatoon woman, Mrs. Nancy Skerrett, 
who suffers from a rare skin disease and who has had 
cancer-related surgery three times in recent years. Mrs. Skerrett 
has an average of $285 a month for medication — that’s what she 
pays — and on 11 occasions since last July she’s submitted her 
receipts to the Department of Health to claim the 80 per cent 
refund. On nine of those 11 occasions it’s taken more than 30 
days to get her refund, and on two of those 11 occasions it’s taken 
more than 60 days to get her refund. 
 
Mr. Minister, aren’t Saskatchewan families suffering enough 
from your prescription drug cuts, not to mention having to deal 
with these long delays to get their refunds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the hon. 
member this question in response. When did the hon. member get 
this information? That’s a very pertinent question, Mr. Speaker, 
given some of the things that have happened in this House in 
recent days, and some of the things that were exposed by my 
colleague, the Deputy Premier, when they were seen to be sitting 
on issues like this that are specific issues. And we don’t make 
light of the   



 
April 21, 1988 

 

733 
 

issues. 
 
I say to the hon. member, if you have a specific concern, which 
she’s expressed here today, bring it us and we’ll deal with the 
individual issue as we have done in many cases. And that’s the 
way it should be done, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly the way it 
should be done. 
 
The hon. member would like to grandstand, and I understand that 
she has a penchant for that kind of grandstanding that goes on. 
But I would say to the member, if you’re really sincere and 
serious about helping the individual concerned, bring it forward 
and we will do what we can to help them out. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, new question. Mr. Minister, this 
lady has contacted you. She wrote the Premier on February 15th 
of this year and sent a copy to you, and you haven’t had the 
courtesy to reply to her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The issue here, Mr. Minister, is not when we ask 
the question in the House; the issue is when you promised to have 
money to people within 30 days, how can you justify these 
lengthy delays? How can you justify this incompetence and this 
insensitivity to sick people in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear  
. . .  Mr. Speaker, I’ll make it very clear to the hon. member: I do 
not accept the facts as she has laid them out here. I do not accept 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the question. Please note, I will 
take notice of the question and come back with the specifics of 
when I replied and what was done in terms of correspondence as 
it relates to this specific issue. I’ll take notice and bring her back 
the answer, and the answer to the House. And once again, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll say to the hon. member . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I’m absolutely astounded that the 
minister would not be aware of this situation. I have a letter in 
my . . . It’s a new question, Mr. Speaker. I have a letter in my 
possession that’s dated February 15. If the minister wishes to see 
it from us, I will make it available for him. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the long delays in refunds to this family are 
bad enough. Mrs. Skerrett also advises us that when she 
contacted your department, a drug plan employee was verbally 
abusive to her. She indicates that she was called a liar and that 
she was sworn at. And I want your personal undertaking, Mr. 
Minister, that you will contact the Skerrett family today — this 
Saskatoon family, today — and find out what the facts are and 
deal with her case and provide her with some satisfaction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

said, I will find out the facts on this particular case and I will 
report back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two things that need to be said here. One, I said in 
my first response about this member and her penchant for 
grandstanding and theatrics; she’s absolutely astounded about 
this and about that. Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member and 
to all of those members over there: be absolutely sure . . . if 
you’re really, truly concerned about individual families, bring 
those cases forward in a reasonable way, not in the way that 
you’re . . . and you’re grandstanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member has 
taken notice and I have allowed him a very brief response, and I 
think he’s made his point. 
 

Contracting of Printing for SIAST 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Education, and it deals with another example, Mr. 
Minister, of how you PCs are wasting the taxpayers’ dollars 
through political patronage. 
 
Since 1986 your government ordered the technical institute at 
Prince Albert to contract out its printing and duplicating forms. 
The contract was set so that it couldn’t go to local firms; instead 
it went directly to a firm called Datacopi, which just happens to 
be owned by the Don Levy family of Saskatoon, who just happen 
to be the owners of the PC Party’s printing company, Mercury 
printers. Mr. Speaker, as a result of this contract, work which 
should have cost $106,000 now costs the province $255,000 a 
year. 
 
Mr. Minister, the taxpayers are asking this question: how can you 
allow this kind of waste, and how can you allow it to continue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in anticipation of 
this question, I talked to the president of Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology as we were aware that the 
hon. member might have some interest in this issue. So I talked 
to the president, and this is what he has advised me of, Mr. 
Speaker, relative to SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), regarding printing and duplicating at 
the campuses. 
 
The policy of the institute is to have its printing — that is to say, 
calendars and brochures and duplicating requirements — met by 
the private sector, In most instances these requirements are met 
by local printing shops in the community where the campus is 
based. In the case of . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the hon. member 
to allow the minister to give his response, which he is trying to 
do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In the case of the Woodland Campus 
where the program delivery methods require that the duplication 
of learning guides occur on a demand — that is to say, one to 20 
copies at a time as opposed to merely the inefficient method, I 
might add, of merely ordering 200 or 2,000 at one time, the 
batch-basis system   



 
April 21, 1988 

 

734 
 

— no local supplier was equipped to provide the service at a 
reasonable rate. As a result, Datacopi Inc. of Regina was awarded 
the contract for the duplicating of learning guides. All printing, 
Mr. Speaker, all printing at Woodland was awarded to local 
printers, and students who use the duplicating material are 
charged 9 cents a page, as I think is quite reasonable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the work we are talking about 
is the work dealing with . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, Would the member indicate 
whether it’s a new question or a supplementary. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very, much, Mr. Speaker. New 
question to the minister. The work we are dealing with here, Mr. 
Minister, is the work that has gone to Datacopi. 
 
This material was tendered in such a fashion that the local 
printers had no option but to refuse it because they could not 
understand the technicalities of the contract. And at this stage, 
Datacopi has not yet met — has not yet met the specifications of 
that contract, Mr. Minister. 
 
That’s why we want to know whether you’re going to . . . are 
willing to repeal it because it’s wasting taxpayers’ money; and, 
in the second instance, it is not — it is not — meeting the 
specifications that that technical institute needs, and it’s costing 
about three days extra in time for turn around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I didn’t quite get a question. There might 
have been one in there, but I didn’t quite gather it, so we’ll go to 
the next question. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I’ll repeat the question for the minister: will 
he stop this waste of taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I ask you: which system 
would have more waste to it, the old batch system where you 
printed 200 or 2,000 copies when you might only need 20, or this 
system that basically prints them as needed? 
 
As I understand this, this is state of the art printing technology. 
In fact, if a professor comes in one morning and decides he wants 
a new paragraph in the instruction manual, they put it into the 
computer and they print it out, addended, without having 2,000 
copies that are obsolete because of that change he wants to make. 
It seems to me that is the more efficient and less wasteful system, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s why they’re doing it. 
 
That campus in Prince Albert that this member continues to kick 
around is a state of the art learning institution. And I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker: is this the kind of issue that’s on the students’ minds in 
this province when it comes to issue? Are these the burning 
issues of the day relative to education in the NDP’s minds? Give 
me a break, Mr. 

Speaker; bring on some real critics in education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Heavy Oil Upgrader at Lloydminster 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Energy. Alberta’s energy minister has said in 
Edmonton that the federal, Alberta, and Saskatchewan 
governments have agreed on a financial aid package worth more 
than $600 million for the Husky heavy oil upgrader in 
Lloydminster. Can the minister confirm that she has committed 
Saskatchewan taxpayers to a portion of the $600 million for 
Husky oil, and can she tell taxpayers the exact amount and form 
of this commitment? Are we talking about loan guarantees, tax 
breaks, or other incentives, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Speaker, despite various reports that have 
been in various mediums this week, unfortunately, I can tell the 
member we do not have an agreement at this point today. Mr. 
Speaker, we had anticipated that perhaps there could be an 
agreement by Thursday, but I must inform the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are a couple of outstanding issues that we 
have not been able to reach an agreement with Husky on. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. 
Madam Minister, your government announced the Husky heavy 
oil upgrader calling it the biggest job creation project in 
Saskatchewan’s history four years ago. You’ve announced it 
time after time, preceding election campaigns federally or 
provincially, preceding and during by-elections. For four years 
the working families of Saskatchewan have been waiting for this 
major industrial project to get started. But four years after 
announcing it with such fanfare, you’re still talking about it in 
the House. The taxpayers in this . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 
hon. member, I’m sure, is getting to a question; I’d ask him to get 
to it as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well my question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister 
is what financial aid package have you offered to the Husky oil 
upgrader, heavy oil upgrader in Lloydminster, and when will the 
construction of this project begin? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Speaker, this government’s record stands, 
and stands well, when it comes to the building of upgraders in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: Mr. Speaker, once again, I will not release 
details of what is in the proposal that went to Husky by the three 
governments, and I will say that we have not reached an 
agreement on that package. If and when we do, that information 
will be released to the member and to the public. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, the Saskatchewan taxpayers want an answer to 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

735 
 

 the question that I put to you in the House the other day, a 
question which you dodged. That question is: why have you 
agreed to a financial aid package for Husky Oil which, we’re 
told, contains huge loan guarantees, which is a debt charge 
against the taxpayers of this province, but you’ve asked for no 
equity position for the taxpayers? Why should Saskatchewan 
taxpayers take all the risk but get none of the benefits of 
ownership from this major industrial project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, until an agreement is reached 
by all the parties involved, there obviously is not an agreed-upon 
package to be laid out. The member across the way is making 
some assumptions, as he did the other night in this House, and I 
had reminded him about going for a helping of crow in 1982, 
1986, and suggested that he really didn’t want a third helping of 
crow before 1990, and that he should have some patience in 
waiting for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the package, when an agreement is reached, will be 
dealt with, with the member and the public knowing at that time. 
Until then, Mr. Speaker, I really don’t think it makes a whole lot 
of good common sense to speculate what may be in there or what 
may not be in there. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question, Mr. Speaker, on the same issue. 
Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, in The Globe and Mail it’s 
reported as saying, and I quote: 
 

The federal, Alberta, and Saskatchewan governments have 
agreed on a financial aid package worth more than $600 
million for the Husky heavy oil upgrader in Lloydminster, 
Alberta, energy minister, Neil Webber, says. 

 
On television last night you said there’d be an announcement. 
Now which is it? Today you’re saying there’s no announcement. 
Which is it? Who is telling the truth, Madam Minister — Mr. 
Webber or yourself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, there is no agreement reached 
at this point in time to date . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Let me 
finish. I listened while you asked the question. 
 
There is no agreement reached, Mr. Speaker, between Husky and 
the three levels of government that are involved. Now if there is 
no agreement reached, details of the package could very well 
change until we do reach an agreement with Husky. So I think 
the member is being premature. As I had stated, perhaps the 
report coming out of Alberta has been premature. 
 

Inventory Appraisal of SIAST 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week I took 
notice of a question from the member from Prince Albert about 
inventory and asset evaluation being done at the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology. The member told 
this House the inventory 

was being conducted by an Ontario firm. This is false, Mr. 
Speaker. It is being done by Sunalta Appraisals of Saskatoon. 
 
The member suggested that SIAST not do this appraisal. Why 
are we doing this appraisal, he asked. Well the question of the 
exact value of SIAST’s assets and the replacement value, Mr. 
Speaker, was raised by the Provincial Auditor and the Provincial 
Comptroller. They asked SIAST to inventory all assets and make 
sure they are listed at fair market value as soon as possible. Is the 
hon. member suggesting that we ought not comply with the 
auditor’s request, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The member also asked about the selection process and cost. 
SIAST contacted all firms in western Canada who do this type of 
work for proposal. There were four firms, and two submitted 
proposals, and Sunalta of Saskatoon was the lowest. The total 
cost is $200,000. 
 
Over and above the auditor’s request, Mr. Speaker, SIAST has 
its own reasons for wanting the appraisal. The new institute 
needed proper value of assets to help in design of the financial 
system. Plus for insurance we needed to know the value of assets, 
Mr. Speaker. And thirdly, SIAST wants to set up an equipment 
fund and a replacement schedule to begin to replace equipment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to take 
this opportunity to lay on the Table the report of the Ombudsman, 
covering the period January 1, 1987 to December 31, 1987. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:— Mr. Speaker, I want to raise with you a 
point of order and ask you to look back on the record and then 
judge accordingly, but yesterday the Minister of Education took 
notice of a question, on page 708 of Hansard, and then proceeded 
to answer the question. Today he stood up in the House and then 
once again referred to the notice and answered the question 
again, and I would request, Mr. Speaker, that you check the 
record and indicate whether that was in the right process here 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I will take note of the member’s point of order 
and take the proper action. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In regards to 
the point of order raised from my colleague from Regina North 
East, I wonder if you would also consider the process by which 
this type of questions have been answered by the Minister of 
Education in the past and other members of cabinet, in which 
they answer at the end of the clock, not allowing other members 
of the House the right to respond with another supplemental. 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

736 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. That of course if a point of order 
that I don’t believe is well taken. The hon. member, if he takes 
note of question period, sometimes it happens by coincidence, as 
it happened today, that it comes at the end. Sometimes it comes 
during the middle, seldom at the beginning. So that point of order 
is not well taken. 
 
I will refer to the member of Regina North East’s point of order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act respecting the Use of the English and 
French Languages in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 
reading of Bill No. 2, An Act respecting the Use of English and 
French in the Legislature of Saskatchewan. The need for this 
legislation arises out of the decision of the Supreme Court of 
Canada in the Mercure case. 
 
The court in that case held that all statutes passed in this 
legislature from the beginning of time are invalid. Obviously that 
places this legislature and the laws that have been passed by this 
legislature, or will be passed in the future by this legislature, in a 
rather untenable position. 
 
In dealing with this important issue, and why we have responded 
with Bill 2, let me first review the history of our province and 
review the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
Prior to becoming provinces, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta formed part of the Northwest Territories. Early 
settlements into that area concentrated initially in the Manitoba 
region and was both, for the most part, was French and English. 
Courts and the legislative process used both languages. Manitoba 
was the first of those to become a province, and that happened in 
1870. 
 
And in the formation of the province of Manitoba in 1870, the 
Parliament of Canada, in passing the Manitoba Act that created 
the province of Manitoba, specifically provided for the use of 
both French and English in the legislature and in the courts of 
Manitoba. The language dispute that we saw in the province of 
Manitoba three of four years ago centred around this fundamental 
question and this particular issue. 
 
And the Supreme Court found that the right to use French in the 
courts, in the legislature, and the statutes of Manitoba, amounted 
to a constitutional right, a right that found its jurisdiction in the 
Manitoba Act, an Act of the Parliament of Canada, specifically 
saying what the law was and the rules would be for the province 
of Manitoba. That is what constitutes a constitutional right to 
language, so found by the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
The area then that made up Saskatchewan and Alberta continued 
on as part of the Northwest Territories. That jurisdiction 
continued to be governed by The North-West 

Territories Act. And as it related to language, Mr. Speaker, 
section 110 of that North-West Territories Act stated as follows: 
 

Either the English or the French language may be used by 
any person in debates of the said council in the proceedings 
before the courts, and both those languages shall be used in 
the recordings and journals of the said council, and the 
ordinance of the said council shall be printed in both 
languages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as time passed and we came to a period in history 
of 1896. The council of the Northwest Territories had ceased to 
use the French language in the council of the Northwest 
Territories and in the courts of the Northwest Territories, and that 
fact is acknowledged by the Supreme Court in the Mercure 
decision. That was because . . . or in effect what had happened, 
Mr. Speaker, is by 1896 in this part of Canada, English had 
become the recognized language, one that was used both in the 
courts and in the legislature. 
 
If we proceed on into history, Mr. Speaker, we come to the year 
1905 when both Saskatchewan and Alberta became provinces 
pursuant to, again, Acts of the Parliament of Canada. And in our 
case we became a province pursuant to The Saskatchewan Act. 
 
If one is to review the debates in parliament at the time of The 
Saskatchewan Act, there were some that sought to include in The 
Saskatchewan Act a clause similar to what is found in the 
Manitoba Act with regards to the rights to the use of both English 
and French in the legislatures and in the courts and in the statutes. 
 
That was not in fact done by the parliament, Mr. Speaker, during 
that debate and what came out of that. And I say to members who 
talk, and to people who talk about the rights and the constitutional 
rights, to reflect upon what I believe to be a very significant and 
important historical fact. 
 
I go further, Mr. Speaker, and refer members to that debate in the 
Parliament of Canada, and refer members specifically to the 
words of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, at that time the prime minister of 
Canada, from Quebec, clearly a champion of the rights of the 
people of Quebec, clearly a great Canadian prime minister. And 
when debating that issue, Mr. Speaker, Sir Wilfrid Laurier said 
the following in relation to the debate about whether or not there 
should be French and English rights in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He said the following: 
 

That having regard to the small French population in the 
Territories, he could not argue in favour of a right to the 
official use of French. 

 
That was stated by Sir Wilfrid Laurier speaking to the issue of 
The Saskatchewan Act in the Parliament of Canada, 1905. He 
went on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That when the courts (referring to the courts of our 
province) shall become provincial, (that) we (speaking 
there and referring to the Parliament of Canada) shall no 
longer have jurisdiction over 

  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

737 
 

them, and therefore the legislature will have the right to deal 
with language in the courts as well as in the legislature. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Act truly reflects that, and 
reflects that it is us who will determine, and who have 
determined, what in fact the law of our province as it relates to 
languages shall be. 
 
In that same debate, the minister of Justice of the time, a Mr. 
Fitzpatrick, went on to say, and I quote: 
 

It would be the law as they will have it in the province after 
this constitutional Act is passed. Then of course, it would 
become subject to the control of the local legislature, and it 
will be a matter to be dealt with by them; and I say 
emphatically . . . that it is my intention. That is, the matter 
as I view it, ought to be dealt with the local legislature. 

 
Mr. Speaker, obviously then the Saskatchewan Act came down, 
clearly denying the rights that we saw granted to Manitoba in 
1870, some 25 years before that . . . 30 years before that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it important to refer to that quote by Sir 
Wilfrid Laurier, that the population in Saskatchewan was too 
small to recognize those rights for them. And I ask people to 
reflect as they talk about rights, to reflect upon the view of the 
prime minister of the time. 
 
Now following . . . leading up to 1905, as I’ve indicated, French 
had fallen into disuse. Following 1905, English became the 
language of this legislature, English became the language of our 
courts, and statutes from the beginning of time of this legislature 
have been passed in one language, the English language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1905 up until a year ago, no individual was 
granted the right to speak French in the courts of law of this 
province. Up until today, Mr. Speaker, no Bills have been 
introduced in this House in both official languages. And up until 
today, Mr. Speaker, or soon, this legislature has not spoken to the 
issue of how we as legislators will govern ourselves in this 
Assembly as it relates to the languages of English and French. 
 
And I ask, Mr. Speaker, why that is — why that is. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think a fair reflection of history, is that when 
we became a province it was assumed by the members that sat in 
our places some 80-some years ago today, it was assumed that 
English was the language of Saskatchewan. That’s not 
necessarily a reflection on them. I think history would record no 
other way than but that was the fact. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the decision of Mercure, the Supreme Court of 
Canada found that the section 110 of The North-West Territories 
Act, that I referred to earlier, while the province had the right to 
revoke it, to repeal it, it had not done so. 
 
I think, again, a study of the history of our province would 

find that the clause, basically, in The Saskatchewan Act said all 
Bills and all laws will continue in force until changed — a 
traditional catch-all clause that we probably see today in the way 
we draft legislation. 
 
In Mercure, the Supreme Court came to the interpretation of the 
construction of that legislation and that language as saying the 
province had the right to do this, but it never specifically did it. 
And of course, that’s a completely different decision, and our 
Court of Appeal had come to ruling that tradition and time had 
basically served the same purpose and served the same course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the loophole that I would suggest from a legislative 
point of view was seized upon by the Supreme Court, that said 
because all those that came to this Assembly before us had not 
specifically passed a law repealing section 110, that section 110 
therefore stayed in place was still valid in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Now I pose the following question to you, Mr. Speaker: 
throughout the last 83 years, why has this issue not been raised 
in this Assembly? I pose to you, Mr. Speaker: was it because 
those that served before us did not believe in rights, or sought to 
deny rights, or were somehow bigoted, as some members of the 
media have described people of this province? 
 
I don’t believe so, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think anyone else 
believes so. The issue never came up here, Mr. Speaker, because 
it was assumed that the language of this province was English. 
And that assumption was passed on through subsequent members 
of this Assembly and became the tradition, the practice, of this 
province. 
 
What has transpired, Mr. Speaker, since 1905 when, in the words 
of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, that he, Laurier, could not argue the right 
to the official use of French because the French population was 
too small — what transpired, Mr. Speaker, is the migration that 
developed in our province following that. 
 
In 1905, when we became a province, we had a population of 
236,000 people. By 1918, following the First World War, that 
population had swelled to 678,000. By 1930 it had swelled even 
further, to 903,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that in-migration from 1905 to 1930 — a very large 
part of that migrated from the European and eastern European 
part of the world. A very, very small part of that, Mr. Speaker, 
was French-speaking. Many of those immigrants from Poland or 
Germany or the Ukraine, or a variety of other countries, Mr. 
Speaker, those people came to this part of the world and settled 
this part of the world and knew neither English or French, Mr. 
Speaker, and had as a mother tongue something totally different. 
And that migration, Mr. Speaker, made up, and today makes up, 
a larger part of our population than even English. 
 
I ask those who talk about rights, Mr. Speaker: what would 
Laurier have said in 1930 with that migration, and would his 
views have changed from his views of 1905? 
 
Twenty-five years later, Mr. Speaker, the population had 
increased almost fourfold. And when we say that it was 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

738 
 

assumed that English was the language of Saskatchewan, of this 
legislature, of our courts, I don’t think it fair in the interpretation 
of history to somehow suggest that the issue never came and 
became an issue in our province and in our country. 
 
One simply has to review history in the time of the conscription 
issue during the First World War, or various other school issues, 
language issues, that dominated the politics of this country for 
well over a hundred years. To somehow suggest that the issue 
never came before this Assembly, I think, is not true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is and can be no doubt that it was assumed by 
all concerned, or virtually all concerned, that English was the 
functioning language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that brings me to the Bill itself. While the court has 
said that all statutes are invalid; that all future statutes must be in 
both languages; that the court should allow both languages to be 
used as well in the legislature and the courts, the Supreme Court 
of Canada in Mercure said two other things. One, it said that we 
can repeal section 110 now, or any time, and make Saskatchewan 
“English only”. We could obviously comply with the judgement 
of Mercure and instantly translate all statutes, and operate totally 
in both languages in this Assembly, in our courts and all statutes, 
Mr. Speaker, or we could do something in between. That’s the 
option the Supreme Court gave us, and that option was because 
of law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Supreme Court said something else very fundamental. I 
said it before, and I wish to emphasize it, Mr. Speaker. The 
Supreme Court said it is for us — for us, the people of 
Saskatchewan, to decide what we will do, Mr. Speaker. It will be 
Saskatchewan that makes this decision, Mr. Speaker. The court 
said that, and that is the way it should be. 
 
In the few short weeks, Mr. Speaker, since the judgement, we 
have worked to design legislation and policies that will respond 
to the legitimate interests of the francophone community and the 
concerns of the province at large. We have consulted 
francophone leaders. We’ve consulted our colleagues in Ottawa 
and in other provinces. We have examined the costs and the 
benefits and the operational implications of implementing 
Mercure. We have searched for a balanced approach that would 
advance the interests of our francophone community and would 
meet our commitments as Canadians, and we believe and we 
think that this Bill represents such an approach. 
 
This Bill has a number of features. In general terms, it repeals 
section 110 of the North-West Territories Act, and replaces it 
with a modern set of rules governing the use of English and 
French in the courts and the legislative process. 
 
Let me turn to the specifics of the Bill. First, the Bill affirms 
certain of the rights found in the existence of Mercure, and 
effectively confirms the effect of section 110 of the North-West 
Territories Act with respect to the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, individuals will be able to use French in the 

courts as a matter of choice. They will not be obligated on any 
participant in any legal proceeding to use one language or the 
other. This right is in addition to what we have already provided 
in criminal trials. In September of 1987, residents of 
Saskatchewan have the right to a full criminal trial in French. 
 
The Bill confirms the status of French in the Legislative 
Assembly. It specifically says that either English or French can 
be used in debate. This reflects a long-standing practice of this 
House. 
 
With respect to the language to be used in records and journals, 
the Bill must, and does, leave that question to the Assembly itself. 
Records and journals may be printed and published in English 
only, but the Assembly is specifically authorized to extend the 
use of French if it so chooses. 
 
The Language Act will also validate all Acts and regulations that 
were enacted in English only. This is an essential step if the 
province is to avoid being thrown into total legal chaos. 
 
In addition, the Bill guarantees the validity of rights arising out 
of those laws. This is a precautionary step to protect the interests 
of ordinary citizens. 
 
The Bill also confirms the special status of the French language 
in relation to statutes and regulations — does not require the 
enactment of a French version of every Bill. Rather, it sets out a 
more flexible and pragmatic approach. 
 
It establishes a mechanism whereby existing statutes and 
regulations will be translated and re-enacted in English and 
French on the direction of cabinet. 
 
We propose to begin with statutes relating to the courts, and 
expect to turn next into the field of education. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is following the logic of the right to due process in our 
court, and because we see education as the real and meaningful 
way to promote the rights of French-speaking people, and the 
rights and the interests of the French language in this province. 
We will call upon francophone leaders, Mr. Speaker, to assist us 
in identifying those laws that are of most concern to the 
francophone community, and have most practical application at 
this point in time. 
 
We have taken this approach for two major reasons. First, the 
task of translating all laws would be daunting. There are over 
7,000 pages of revised statutes of Saskatchewan. There is a 
similar volume of regulations. The cost of translation would 
likely be in the twelve to fifteen million dollar range. Further, we 
needed to create the operational capacity to do the job. 
 
Second, this approach will enable us to identify priorities and 
manage this process to ensure the greatest possible benefit to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We are committed to the ongoing 
process and we will use our authority in a reasonable and 
responsible way. 
 
Statutes and regulations will be enacted in the future and will be 
handled in much the same way, Mr. Speaker. The  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

739 
 

Bill gives cabinet the authority to designate which ones will be 
enacted in both languages. 
 
The Department of Justice has already begun to prepare for this 
undertaking. We will hire necessary staff, and have commitments 
from other governments to provide technical support. We will 
introduce other bilingual Bills in this session, and we will publish 
a list of the first statutes to be translated in the very near future 
through regulations. 
 
Federal government has indicated its willingness to provide 
financial and other assistance. We have acted on that 
undertaking, and are moving to confirm the details of that 
assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the main features of the Bill. It is 
pragmatic and reasonable and reflects the reality of our province. 
It does not deny, but confirms francophone rights in three key 
areas: in the courts, in the Assembly, and in the legislative 
process. It will enable us to move forward in a measured way that 
advances the interests of all people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many have commented on this Bill; many opinions 
have been stated, and much emotion surrounds the issue. There 
are those that would say, change the Bill; that we must have a set 
timetable to translate the statutes; that all future statutes must be 
in both languages. Mr. Speaker, we looked at that option. We 
believe that it would not be the proper way to proceed, and we 
have proceeded this way, Mr. Speaker, and we intend to carry on 
with that process. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those that say that this Bill is contrary to 
the spirit of Meech Lake. Mr. Speaker, I totally disagree. Mr. 
Speaker, I would say to those that raise that issue: think of the 
situation that the Meech Lake accord — or in the event that the 
Meech Lake accord had not passed or had not been agreed to by 
all 10 provinces and the Prime Minister. Suppose we found 
ourselves only with the situation that we had following the 
constitutional accord of 1981, and Meech Lake had never taken 
place, or Meech Lake had have broken apart at the time the 10 
premiers and the Prime Minister sat down together at Meech 
Lake. Had that event of Meech Lake not taken place, Mr. 
Speaker, I dare say you would not have seen, in this House today, 
Bill 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 2 and the response to the French-speaking 
community of our province is because of Meech Lake, and the 
decision to proceed this way is because of Meech Lake, Mr. 
Speaker, not because of the Supreme Court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our response, as I said, is because of Meech Lake. 
And let me look and address Meech Lake and ask what we, as 
people of this province, see or sense about Meech Lake. One, we 
acknowledge that Canada is a bilingual country. We accept that 
as a fact, Mr. Speaker, and we accept that as a principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that the federal government 
provides government services totally in both  

languages. Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that different 
provinces provide different bilingual dimensions to their 
respective provinces. The services the bilingual dimension has 
provided in Quebec is different to what is provided in British 
Columbia. What is provided in New Brunswick is different to 
what is provided in Nova Scotia. What is provided in Manitoba 
is provided different to what is provided in Alberta. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s reason for that, and we must recognize 
that as a reality of this country. There are both constitutional 
reasons, and there are population reasons, and there are historical 
reasons as to why that is a fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that we as Canadians, and all 
Canadians, must move towards a time when that gap or those 
differences can be narrowed, when the meaning of bilingualism 
to Canadians perhaps has more of a meaning than it has today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to improve for the francophone 
community in this province, the courts, the criminal court, 
quasi-criminal court, the civil court, in the legislature, and in the 
motions that we will provide for, and, I hope, agree to by all 
parties, for translation of speeches in French in this legislature. 
 
In the statutes, Mr. Speaker, we will move and are committed to 
move forward today, the rest of this year, and into the future with 
that, and in the area of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members, and I ask all Canadians: do 
French-speaking minorities have more rights today in 
Saskatchewan than they had a year ago? Do French-speaking 
minorities have more rights today than they had in 1905 when Sir 
Wilfrid Laurier, the prime minister of the day, passed into force 
The Saskatchewan Act? Mr. Speaker, by any judgement I say 
they do, and anybody prepared to look at history, Mr. Speaker, 
must also acknowledge that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, and the impact of this Bill, must be 
kept in perspective. Ultimately the viability of the French 
language in Saskatchewan will not turn on whether laws are 
printed in French; it will not turn on whether French can be 
spoken in our courts. Those rights are important, Mr. Speaker, 
and we have recognized them, that there are more central 
considerations. 
 
The key to moving forward, to better understand the two 
linguistic groups in this country, Mr. Speaker, is not through law 
but through education. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we must look 
at those trends that are taking place in our province today. And 
it’s something that we are proud of, and I think something that 
other people in other parts of the country might be well to be 
cognizant of. 
 
Let me, Mr. Speaker, read some of those statistics: in 1982-83, 
the number of students going to French-language schools for 
Fransaskois was 480 students. That has increased to a high, in 
1985, of 1,241, and it’s currently at 1,103. In 1982-83, students 
in immersion bilingualism for anglophones, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 
that was 1,952 students. Today it is 7,681 as of ’86-87. If you go 
to core French, Mr. Speaker, in 1982-83, core French being K to 
12 system that would take at least  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

740 
 

one class in French — in 1982 that number was 46,493; today it 
is 72,692. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the span of 1982-83 to 1986-87, there are 31,000 
more students in Saskatchewan studying in a more intense way, 
Mr. Speaker, elements of the French language. And I would 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to all people of our 
province and all people of our country, that if you are going to 
find an answer to the language question that has dogged our 
country for 100 or so years, you will find that answer, Mr. 
Speaker, in our children, and you will find that answer more 
likely in the field of education. 
 
As it relates, Mr. Speaker, to the cost of this program, that 
obviously provides us with a dilemma here in Saskatchewan. 
Given some difficult economic times, it’s very difficult for us, or 
any of us in this House, to justify expenditures on translation of 
statutes that few, if any, people now read, let alone would read in 
both languages, to the preference of other priorities that many can 
list on a daily basis. 
 
We are at this present time, Mr. Speaker, trying to design with 
the federal government a framework agreement that will allow 
the federal government to assist us in this, and also to deal with 
some other issues related to it. 
 
Let me say this though, Mr. Speaker, and I think important as 
members of the legislature when we talk about our rights and 
what we are. Mr. Speaker, this right belongs to this Assembly, 
and we must guard those rights as to what this Assembly can or 
cannot do. And, Mr. Speaker, we should not simply ask another 
government to step in and pay for all of this for us, or that 
somehow, I suggest, diminishes the rights that we have been 
entrusted with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all Canadians, even those who accept nothing 
short of the constitutional entrenchment of French language in 
our province and all other provinces, on the one hand, or those 
that today yet deny the principle of a bilingual country — I ask 
both of those groups for tolerance, for understanding, and to be 
reasonable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we are permitted to look into the future, Mr. Speaker, what you 
see today in existence, in an infant stage perhaps in Canada, in a 
much more developed state in many other parts of the world, is 
the advent of technology and the impact that that technology will 
have on this language issue. Mr. Speaker, it might not be more 
than three years, or perhaps longer; then you will have 
functioning computers that will be able to translate the written 
document from English to French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some have witnessed that type of operation, and 
legitimate suggestions by credible academics that have worked 
in this field, and are now working in this field, who suggest that 
within the scope of five years computer programs and systems 
will be in place that would translate all the statutes of this 
province and all the regulations of this province in one afternoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think in that regard, whether that comes to 
pass now or in the near term or 10 years from now, Mr. Speaker, 
I think it does speak to the issue in a  

way that it has never been spoken to before. Mr. Speaker, I 
suspect that technology will ultimately provide the solutions that 
have escaped the lawyers and the laws and the courts for a 
hundred years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me close by saying this. I asked people for 
understanding and for tolerance. The Premier has stated it, I 
think, many times, in the most direct way, of what we ask for. 
Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge the bilingual nature of this 
country, and we are proud to be Canadians. Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to move forward, and we must move forward as we have 
the physical capacity. And that political capacity, Mr. Speaker, 
means that we must also have the support and reflect the views 
of the majority of the people of our province. While that is not 
necessarily the only gauge, Mr. Speaker, it is an important gauge 
for any person serving in this Assembly, and must be cognizant 
of that. 
 
But in the end, Mr. Speaker, and the point that is so often missed 
out in this debate, is what we do, we must do it as Saskatchewan’s 
. . . we must do it as the people of our province, because the issue 
is a Saskatchewan issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask all members: give consideration to history, give 
consideration as to what the reflections of the people are, give 
consideration to the rights of the francophones of our province. 
Mr. Speaker, this is reasonable, this is responsible, this is moving 
forward. With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 
No. 2. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
listened with some care to the minister’s relatively lengthy 
speech on the subject, and I want to make a few brief comments. 
I may say that I look forward to reviewing the minister’s remarks 
and considering them, and in a few moments, having made a few 
comments, I’ll be asking for leave to adjourn this. 
 
I think I might say, initially, that there has been some confusion 
within government ranks, among government members, about 
what their policy is. We’ve had the unfortunate example of 
contradictory statements being made by the Premier, by the 
Minister of Justice, and that’s led to some confusion. We had the 
Premier quoted at length in the national media, and then we were 
told by the Minister of Justice that the news story was wrong and, 
as I recall it, he attacked the reporter who gave the story. Then 
we had the Premier’s staff correcting the Minister of Justice and 
telling us that the Minister of Justice was wrong and the national 
news story was right, and then we had the Premier saying that the 
reporter had misunderstood the story all along. And that’s caused 
some confusion among government members, Mr. Speaker, and 
understandably, among Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister went on for some length about the 
history of this province, occasionally bordering on an accurate 
interpretation — occasionally bordering on an  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

741 
 

accurate interpretation, but not often. Out of his lengthy 
discussion of the Saskatchewan history, he drew the conclusion 
that English had become the language of this province; that is, 
Saskatchewan’s language, and he drew the conclusion that this 
province is a unilingual English province. And that’s the 
conclusion he drew from his view of Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not, I think, an accurate rendition of 
Saskatchewan’s history, and that is not Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, as is the case with 
much of Canada, is a multicultural province. We have people 
from all lands, each of whom have made their contribution. 
 
If I can be forgiven for taking a personal example, my family 
came to Canada almost 200 years ago — almost 100 years ago, 
from Ireland, and obviously English was the language of that. My 
wife, however, her grandparents came from Ukraine. She spoke 
Ukrainian, and that’s the only language she spoke until she was 
a child. On the Canadian census form where it asks the question: 
what is your first language? Defined as the language first spoken 
and still spoken, my wife answers that, Ukrainian. 
 
I would very much like my children to speak English and French, 
both our national languages, but I would very much like my 
children to speak Ukrainian and to have a grasp and 
understanding of the rich Ukrainian culture, which I barely 
understand and have barely been acquainted with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . and I think that’s true of many 
Saskatchewan people. I think my colleague from Regina North 
East will forgive me if I say that his experience was much the 
same as my wife’s. I think it’s fair to say he began speaking 
Polish, learned to speak English when he got out of the house and 
began to reach into the larger community. It’s a very common 
experience. Probably the member from Saskatoon Nutana . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — South. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — South, I’m sorry . . . would make exactly the 
same comment about the German language. And I’m sure my 
colleague wants his children to appreciate the rich German 
culture that is available to us. But those cultures are not going to 
be possible to preserve them unless there is underlying it a basis 
of a language. If we lose the language, we will, within a few 
generations, lose the culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s worth while asking ourself why Father Mercure 
brought the action he did. I don’t think it was because he objected 
to paying a speeding ticket that must have . . . Unless he was 
going at quite a rate of speed, it would have certainly cost him 
less than a hundred dollars to pay. I don’t think it had anything 
to do with his guilt or innocence. I don’t think he did it simply 
because he was a difficult person and tried to make trouble. 
 
I suspect that that cleric, the man of the cloth, as is so often, I 
think, the case with clergymen, felt a responsibility not just for 
the religious life of his community, but felt a larger responsibility 
to preserve and enhance the community itself, and the 
community’s life. 
 

He was seeking to preserve a small minority culture which is 
seriously threatened with extinction. The people and their 
children will be here, but the cultural community will not. 
 
And thus he brought it, not because he couldn’t deal with the 
ticket — I don’t think that’s the case; I suspect he was bilingual 
— he brought it to try to preserve his culture and his language, 
just as I and my wife want to preserve the Ukrainian culture, and 
my colleague from Regina North East wants to preserve for his 
children the Polish culture, and as my colleague from Regina 
South wants to preserve the Germanic culture for him and for his 
children. And I could go on around the caucus. 
 
I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I went on at great length about 
the various cultures. I want to mention another one in a minute. I 
want to say that over the years Saskatchewan and Canada have 
been enriched by those coming from a rich variety of lands. The 
first Canadians were, of course, the aboriginal people, and they 
developed their own rich culture. There is much we could learn 
from them and have not. They at least, Mr. Speaker, lived in 
harmony with their environment. If we could learn that from 
them, generations untold might continue to enjoy the earth. 
 
I wish them luck in preserving their culture; they still have it. But 
the experience of European and Asian cultures has been that 
without the language, the culture does not survive very long. 
 
They were followed . . . the aboriginal people were followed by 
— after a great length of time — by people from France into what 
was then New France, and from people from England into the 
territories controlled by the Hudson’s Bay Company. 
 
Eventually those people were joined by people from western, 
northern Europe, and, in this century, by people from eastern 
Europe. Now, Mr. Speaker, we see people coming, not from 
Europe but from Africa. The immigrants of the 1980s tend to 
come from Africa, from Asia, from Latin America. 
 
Whether it’s the 1880s or the 1980s, they came for several 
reasons: for hope, for opportunity, for tolerance, and to escape 
oppressive regimes, whether that be in the old country or in the 
newer countries of Asia and Africa and South America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these people will be proud of their citizenship 
in this country, will make a rich contribution but they will feel 
that if something of their culture, whether it be South American 
or African or Asian, they will feel that this province will be richer 
if something of their culture is preserved. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to be very difficult to do if they’re 
not able to preserve something of their language. And that, I 
think, Mr. Speaker, is why Father Mercure took the position he 
did, not because he didn’t want to pay the speeding ticket but 
because his community was an embattled community and he saw 
the cultural life of that community disappearing unless its rights 
were respected. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

742 
 

The government opposite’s failure to understand the 
multicultural nature of this province, Mr. Speaker, is regrettable. 
But what is even more regrettable is its complete lack of 
consultation. And it has been completely lacking, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Minister of Justice made some arguments in the House 
today. It’s noteworthy that he didn’t have the nerve to try those 
arguments on the French-speaking community who were 
affected. 
 
Meetings, Mr. Speaker, were infrequent, usually after decisions 
had been announced, and always one-sided in the sense that the 
community affected made their argument, but there was neither 
discussion . . . the government for their part neither listened nor 
responded. A government’s failure to consult is inadequate, and 
it’s not enough. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, does not resolve the rights and needs of 
the francophone community, and it doesn’t resolve the needs of 
the other cultural communities in this province. The government 
opposite has talked about making Saskatchewan bilingual in law. 
I say, Mr. Minister, that given this government’s treatment of 
minorities — and I could name a fair number of them — given 
this government’s treatment of minorities, I doubt any minority 
wants their rights to depend on the whim of this cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in no Canadian province is multiculturalism more 
evident that it is here in Saskatchewan. Unfortunately this 
government has no appreciation of that, has no appreciation of 
what cultural minorities need to survive, and don’t have the nerve 
or the courage to place their position before them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said in the beginning that I wanted to consider the 
minister’s comments in the light of the Bill. I therefore beg leave 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1530) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday you were going to send me over some annual reports 
from the rural development corporations. They’ve failed to arrive 
here, and I’m sure it was just by error in the context of what we 
were talking about yesterday, and I was wondering if you could 
in fact provide me with a couple of annual reports so we can track 
a little more closely what’s happening with the rural development 
corporations in the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, while your officials are looking for those, I would 
like to turn to your plans for youth employment,  

summer employment, within your department. And I am 
wondering what plans you have for hiring students during the 
summer months in the department of rural affairs — or Rural 
Development, pardon me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is that we have five 
summer students, three out in the district offices will be working 
with the district field people, one in planning, and one in bridges. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, how that 
compares with other years? Could you give me the number of 
students you’ve hired in the summer of 1987, 1986, 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It’s the same as last year. We’re not sure 
about the year before. We can maybe find out, have to go back to 
the offices and find out. But it was the same number as last year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well the figure that I’m really interested in, 
Mr. Minister, would be the summer of 1986. And I don’t want to 
have someone sent back to the office to get that figure, but if 
maybe someone could make a phone call, if that information is 
available. I can understand that you would have the same number 
of students this year as last year because the funding, which I 
assume you get from the Public Service Commission, is exactly 
the same this year as it was last year. However, I believe for 1986 
that sum may have been higher. 
 
I know that under the Opportunities ’86 program there was some 
$10.5 million provided, and I know that you don’t use that 
funding for your particular program in hiring students. I believe, 
and correct me if I’m wrong, you use funding that’s provided in 
these estimates under the Public Service Commission, and so I 
would appreciate if you could give me the figure for the summer 
of 1986, the actual number of students you hired in that year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To answer two of your questions: one, 
reports. We phoned over to the department and they’re sending 
over a copy of the reports and they’re phoning . . . make a phone 
call to see how many was in 1986. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The member’s asking for us to do research. If 
you . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Should have done it in question period. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well question period is very accurate. If you 
want to take your socks off and count on your toes, the member 
from Bengough-Milestone, you’d more than welcome to do that. 
I think that people that would be watching today would find that 
very, very entertaining. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t have to take off my shoes and 
socks. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I beg your pardon . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Oh, I can hardly believe that. I can hardly believe that. Would 
you like to rise and participate in the estimates? Or is it the 
member from Regina South there  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

743 
 

would like to participate in the estimates? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Can I ask the members just to 
. . . Order, please. Can I ask the members just to . . . (inaudible) 
. . . with us and allow the member to participate, continue on and 
debate, or the committee. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, it’s very difficult to 
concentrate on all the research and all the information you have 
here when the members opposite continue to chirp and yap from 
their seats. I’m a very sensitive kind of guy and it hurts my 
feelings and I have a hard time concentrating. You’d be aware of 
that, I’m sure, so I thank you for calling them to order. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you if there isn’t some way in which 
your department couldn’t employ more students for the summer 
months, and whether or not there’s been any consideration by 
your officials as to specialized projects that may be on the verge 
of being outside of the mandate of your particular department, 
but nevertheless working with your department to do some of the 
many necessary things that are required for rural Saskatchewan 
during a time of great changes in the rural part of our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, the 
running of the department is sort of a responsibility. Beyond that, 
we have done things. We have set up, as the member knows, 
RDCs (rural development corporation). There’s the economic 
development committees that’s paid for through the Department 
of Rural Development. R.M.’s — we fund them in many 
different ways through unconditional grants that they do . . . they 
hire students or people, not necessarily students, employees out 
there for the summer months. It’s extra employment. Those kinds 
of things, I believe, are how we do the extra types of funding or 
extra type of curricular work that creates jobs. 
 
One other area that may be of interest to the area is that, I believe, 
last year 98 per cent of all the road construction and contracts 
were done by Saskatchewan contractors, and those were hired by 
the R.M.’s out there. So I guess a bouquet off to the R.M.’s of 
Saskatchewan to make sure we keep jobs in Saskatchewan, also 
keeping the local people working, which is really, really 
important in a small community. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m talking more about 
directly within your department. Do you acknowledge that in fact 
these five students that you’re going to be hiring for the summer 
months — the money that goes to pay them actually comes 
through the Public Service Commission under vote 33, item 6? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Correct. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, what is the dollar amount 
that’s been approved for your department out of that vote 33? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It’s in the neighbourhood between — 
there’s a variance, depends on the amount of exact expenses — 
between 30 and $35,000. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could you maybe tell us a little bit about  

the process, as to how your department gets 30 to $35,000 out of 
that particular budget item? Is there a negotiation process? Does 
the Public Service Commission tell you that you have to take five 
students, or do you request a number of students in some kind of 
work plan and they approve or negotiate with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Usually early in, like in December and 
November of 1987, for 1988, we do an estimate of what we’re 
going to need for summer employment out there, extra help. We 
submit it to Public Service Commission — the amount of dollars 
we’ll need, the amount of employees we will need — and about 
February, which usually we get confirmation of it, so we can go 
ahead and do the hiring process to fill those positions. So that’s 
the process it goes through. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What was the actual amount and number of 
positions you requested from the Public Service Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We got exactly what we applied for. We 
asked for five, with the funding necessary for them, and it ranges 
between 30 and $35,000. Depends, you know, if they stay an 
extra couple weeks or whatever the case may be, and there’s a 
variance there, but it’ll run between . . . We asked for five 
employees for the summer months, we give them the lengths of 
time we needed them for, and we got the money and the 
allocations of the employees. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well it seems like a very small sum, and I can’t 
understand why your department couldn’t employ more people 
in rural Saskatchewan during the course of the summer months 
when there are literally thousands of students in the job market, 
have a great deal of difficulty finding jobs, and incidentally, 
taking the maximum amount of what you said, $35,000 
approximately, that you’ll be utilizing to hire summer students 
out of a budget item that amounts to $4,321,500. 
 
Where do all these students go to in terms of allocation amongst 
the departments? It seems to me that you’re getting the short end 
of the stick by only having five students at a dollar amount of 
$35,000 when there’s available to government departments and 
agencies in excess of 4.3 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we asked for what we 
needed to do the seasonal work that’s done by the Department of 
Rural Development. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, we do fund otherwise. We give the 
R.M.’s, unconditionally, in excess of 17 millions of dollars. But 
they do in fact hire many people during the summer, not all 
students, but some would be students and some would be folks 
in the area that need jobs. That’s how we do it. 
 
We do it other ways, too. We bring in a regravel program that 
created a large number of jobs, helps all the R.M. roads out there 
in regards to maintaining the quality of roads. We have worked 
with the R.M.’s and certainly to their credit we have most . . . 
nearly all of the contracts being done by Saskatchewan people 
creating a lot of jobs. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

744 
 

We put out a total of over 48 millions of dollars to R.M.’s during 
the year. Most of it’s spent during the summer months creating 
jobs and building roads — certainly creating a lot of 
opportunities, both for students coming out of university and for 
high school students going to go back to work . . . to school in 
the fall, and especially for summer employment, and it’s been a 
. . .  
 
I believe it’s a very major initiative out there, one of the most 
major initiatives there is as far as employment goes because it’s 
almost totally that 48 millions of dollars is spent in the summer 
months creating jobs and employment and repairing and fixing 
roads. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that you’re stuck 
in low gear . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I can appreciate that 
you have to be stuck in low gear because of some of those roads 
as the member from Saskatoon South says. But I mean that 
you’re stuck in low gear in that there’s no new thinking coming 
from you. You’re talking about programs that have been there for 
year after year after year. 
 
And I acknowledge that students are hired in some of those other 
programs in the other branches within your department, but 
you’re getting a very unfair share of the $4.3 million that’s 
available through the Public Service Commission when your 
department only gets $35,000 of that amount. 
 
And the minister can’t be saying to us today that everything that 
needs to be done is being done in rural Saskatchewan. Many of 
these students are children and young people who come from 
rural areas, and I think they appreciate the opportunity, in many 
cases, to go back home to their home communities during the 
summer to find the employment that they require. And it would 
seem to me, Mr. Minister, that there’s something wrong that you 
would only request such a small, minuscule fraction of a $4.3 
million budget, when there’s so much can be done in rural 
Saskatchewan. And are you telling me today, Mr. Minister, you 
cannot think of any more new directions that you could use in 
your department so that students could be back into the rural 
communities during the summer months and have some 
respectable employment through your department in the rural 
areas, so that you could utilize a fair share of the portion of that 
$4.3 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now 
Herman, you be nice. 
 
Okay, I’d just like to answer some of the comments that the 
member from The Battlefords made in regards to no new ideas 
and nothing new within Rural Development in the way of jobs, 
in the way of . . . of way we handled the whole road systems. 
 
(1545) 
 
If he had been at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention when I announced a complete 
revitalization or reallocation of all the roads in Saskatchewan, we 
called it road rationalization. We have worked with every R.M. 
out there in regards to not only  

rebuilding, or looking at the restructuring of roads in rural 
Saskatchewan, to the upgrading of roads in rural Saskatchewan, 
to the redesignation of roads in rural Saskatchewan; but we also 
looked at how they interconnect with other municipalities, how 
they get from their . . . to their delivery points, to their service 
centres. 
 
We’ve done a great deal of work with them. We’ve brought in 
the new program and I think if anybody had been at the SARM 
convention, it was pretty well received. I think most, if not all, of 
the R.M.’s were in total agreement with it. We had one R.M. in 
this morning. I met with them this morning from Lawtonia, and 
I think they were introduced here into the legislature. Where they 
went into the road rationalization program. They had four miles 
that they felt should be put into a different type of an area and 
reallocated in. We looked at it; they were right; we made the . . . 
we’re going to make the change that’s necessary. We’ve done a 
great deal out there in regards to roads and road rationalization. 
 
We’ve also brought in the RDCs, the rural development 
corporation concept, which will create and has created a number 
of jobs out there. We hope they’ll create a great number of jobs 
out there and keep our young people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
What our focus has been, and I feel very strongly about it, is that 
we have allocated moneys such as the regravel program of $7.1 
million, which is a new program put into place. We put it in on a 
one-year base, decided to go back and let the R.M.’s use the $7.1 
million to gravel the roads and to maintain the road status they 
have. They’ll hire people out there, they’ll hire a great number of 
people out there. So it’ll be an R.M. decision, a local decision. 
They’ll hire local people, government’s to help do the funding — 
50 per cent of the funding, by the way there — to create jobs and 
also to maintain our road system. 
 
So although we don’t maybe directly go into the little fund you 
talk . . . the $4 million that’s in that fund that’s being used for 
students that need it . . . maybe a lot of the urban students that 
really could use a lot of that funding. 
 
We have decided that we have $48 million, of which 7.1 is for 
regravelling. We believe the R.M.’s will use that very wisely and 
create one lot of jobs out there. So maybe not directly, as you say, 
we didn’t take it all out of the funding because I believe some 
urban centres can use some of that. We have $48 million out there 
to spend in job creation and maintaining road systems, and I 
believe that will create jobs in itself. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well a couple of points, Mr. Minister. You 
alluded in your opening comments to the fact that if I had been 
at the SARM convention — I don’t know that you keep 
attendance on where I go to and where I don’t, but I was at the 
SARM convention, and I heard the very good speech that you 
delivered to the SARM delegates at that time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read it? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Read it? Well whatever, I thought it was a good 
speech that he had given to the SARM convention. So I’d 
appreciate if you don’t make reference to where I  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

745 
 

was, or where I wasn’t, because you obviously don’t know where 
I was and where I wasn’t, so I wanted to correct you on that. 
 
In terms of the urban centres needing this funding, I would 
maintain to you, Mr. Minister, that what you’re doing is trying to 
put another nail in the coffin of rural Saskatchewan. Many of the 
students that’ll be working in urban centres are from rural areas 
of the province, and in fact, if I was in your department, I’d be 
going after the Public Service Commission to try and get one 
student for every rural municipality in the province of 
Saskatchewan, which could fall within that budget. And so that a 
local student could go back home to a local area and do some 
meaningful work along with the rural municipality, get some 
knowledge as to what the problems are, get that information back 
into your department and your officials, to have an understanding 
from a young person’s perspective as to what is happening in 
rural Saskatchewan. In fact it would take a good portion of the 
budget, but it would be technically possible to do that. 
 
And so although we can appreciate the high unemployment rates 
in urban Saskatchewan, it wouldn’t be as high in urban 
Saskatchewan if people had jobs to keep them in the rural 
communities, in the rural areas of the province of Saskatchewan. 
The unemployment problems wouldn’t be nearly as bad. 
 
So I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you’re saying that you’ve let 
this money lie so that it can go to urban centres, can you tell me 
which departments then in fact get the lion’s share of the $4.3 
million that’s allocated by the Public Service Commission? 
Surely your officials know that because they’ve had 
communication with the Public Service Commission on the 
summer youth employment program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we could chase this 
around for a long time, but I believe students get all the jobs. 
That’s how it was designed, the program was designed. 
 
I just believe sincerely that rural municipalities hire a large 
number of people, either through contracting of building roads or 
bridges or maintenance. They also hire a large number of people 
in regards to the general maintenance such as clearing right of 
ways, putting up signs, and all that. Those are mostly and almost 
totally summer employment. 
 
I don’t have a breakdown of the number of jobs, but it would be, 
you know, literally in the thousands of jobs per year. And I 
believe that’s where it should be. They’ll make the decision; 
they’ll hire local people. They’ll know who they want; they’ll 
know the people that’s in need and how they best do it. I trust 
those R.M.’s out there, and I think that that’s where it should be. 
 
We’ve done . . . like I said, there’s $48 million that we spend in 
rural Saskatchewan in regards to grants or funding. They will 
spend it wisely and they will create a lot of jobs. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well the $48 million you keep referring to is 
year after year being reduced. And when times are  

getting tighter economically, there’s going to be less summer 
employment for students in rural areas of Saskatchewan. And we 
can leave this point. 
 
I’d like to know whether or not you’ve got the employment 
figures for 1986 yet, which I’d asked you for — someone had 
phoned back to the office on — and I would say that I think that 
you’re being short-changed out of this pool of funding. 
 
Granted, there are these other things that you’ve done and other 
things you can do, but you could do so much more than to have 
five summer students in the Department of Rural Development. 
There’s many, many things that could be taking new directions 
that you could be providing during the summer months to employ 
students. And I would ask, Mr. Minister, if you have that 1986 
figure yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just for your information there, in 1986 . . . 
1988 when I told you there was . . . I believe I said five. There’s 
five from Public Service Commission, and we also are going to 
be hiring three through the department to fill some part-time 
positions, so there is a total of eight would be through . . . for 
1988 summer employment. 
 
In 1986 we had a total number of 14; five of which was with the 
road planning and Transportation department, of which now is 
being done by consultants. We don’t do that any more. Under the 
R.M., the R.M.’s hire their own now, and so they are now, I 
understand, hiring students as well into there. So our best guess 
is that those same five that we hired there for that particular 
department we don’t have any longer, is now being hired by the 
private consultant. 
 
And we had two other positions which were actually full-time 
positions but we decided to bring on some part-time students who 
were taking that type of a course, to put them into that to give 
them some summer employment, which were filled when they 
went back to school, with permanent positions. So really, we had 
about the same number. We had seven filling the same positions 
we got now, which got eight this year, and we had two that filled 
positions that were really permanent positions, but we used part 
time so they get some training before they went back to school, 
and we got five that sort of been . . . that we don’t have that 
portion of the department any longer. That’s now being done by 
private consultants. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, have you had representations 
made to you by small store owners in rural Saskatchewan 
concerning the whole Sunday opening issue in the cities, where 
they feel they’re losing a large portion of their business because 
of larger centres remaining open on Sunday and people coming 
in on their day of rest or the Lord’s day or whatever you want to 
refer to it as? They just aren’t shopping in their home 
communities any more because of the superstores and whatever 
you have opening on Sunday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To answer the member’s question, yes, I’ve 
had some, certainly, some letters in regards to the Sunday 
openings or Sunday closings. Most really small  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

746 
 

towns and especially the ones, the smaller towns close to the city 
of Regina, were concerned about it. Even the city of Moose Jaw, 
I’m sure, had some concerns about it. It’s an ongoing problem. 
 
If you look in, and even in rural Saskatchewan — and I can think 
of the towns that I know — about half of the town has stayed 
open for quite a few years. In fact in the town I was thinking of, 
my own town where I come from, Hudson Bay, one of the 
grocery stores — in fact both of them for a while — up town 
stayed open; in fact all three did for a while, stayed open on 
Sunday. They had for quite a few years, and one still does. 
 
It hasn’t affected a great deal, I don’t believe, in regards to 
whether they shop in town or out of town. People do travel 
further now; there’s no doubt about it. Coming from Hudson Bay, 
I know many folks travel to Tisdale to shop — and that’s 72 miles 
away — not because of necessarily . . . they don’t even have 
Sunday opening. So it isn’t because of that; they just travel. 
There’s a little more service there; there’s a mall there. They do 
travel. So I guess any time you have service available to those, 
they will travel to that. 
 
But certainly rural Saskatchewan have some concern in regards 
to people shopping out of their towns, but they’ve been doing it 
for a long time. And as our services deteriorate, and certainly 
they have, the availability of a much wider variety of products — 
whether it’s on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, or if it’s any other day 
of the week — they travel there to get them. 
 
When you look at your medical centres now, in many ways, 
around Regina or Yorkton or Saskatoon, they travel in there for 
a lot of their medical needs. And even if you have a local family 
practitioner, usually you’re referred to one of the other centres. 
 
So yes, there’s a concern. There’s a concern all the way through 
the whole system, not only with the shopping but our services 
that we get. And I don’t believe that, no matter whether we have 
Sunday shopping or don’t, they will travel from out of your town; 
they have been in the past, and certainly they will in the future. 
 
Our services that people need or look for, you usually find them 
in the bigger centres, and they’ve travelled to them. And like I 
said, they have for the last quite a few years. And I don’t believe 
you can stop a trend, because the people of today look for that 
variety of things that they may not have available, even in their 
small town. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
questions, Mr. Minister, that I want to address to you. First of all, 
I wonder if you could provide me with information in respect to 
the 299 R.M.’s across the province. Would you have the, say, the 
1987-88 annual amount of taxes that were collected by the . . . at 
a local level by the R.M.’s? Would you have that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Probably. As the member knows, we take 
it off of their financial statements, and we don’t get their financial 
statements until well after the year end. So we just have . . . we 
have ’85 put together; it’s completed. We’re working on . . . in 
1986 you . . . I think you probably  

know how that works, and it’s ’87 would be . . . we’re just getting 
them in now as the year is completed so . . . And we have to pull 
it together; they don’t give us any breakdown. We have to take it 
from their financial statements they file with us. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, as you know, a good portion of the 
operating revenue for the R.M.’s is local taxation, and I’m 
surprised that you at least didn’t give me the information that you 
had for ‘85. I would have thought you would have been a little 
more current than that. 
 
But having not answered the question, I want to ask you whether 
or not you have done a survey of the R.M.’s across the province 
to determine the amount of tax . . . property tax arrears — 
cumulative amount for the past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well the member would have the 1986-87 
annual report. I’ll read off of there. But in regards to — and again, 
we only have 1985; we have nothing beyond 1985, in figures, but 
in 1985 there was, in municipal tax levies, $241,000-plus. The 
arrears at that time was $24,800. Wait a minute . . . I’m sorry, 
I’m reading it wrong to you, I apologize . . . $241,102,000 in total 
levies; there was $24,894,000 in tax arrears in 1985, which was 
about 10.3 per cent. 
 
Go back to 1981. As you well know, in 1981 there was 5 per cent; 
in 1982 it was 5 per cent. So it gives you an idea of what there 
was. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I would have thought that you would be 
up on it a little bit more, Mr. Minister, because, as you indicated, 
in ’85 there’s 10.3 per cent in arrears. And what I’m asking you 
today: are you aware of the magnitude of the concern of tax 
arrears throughout the R.M.’s, because certainly, in talking to 
many of the R.M . They indicate that they have a very serious 
problem, that the tax arrears has increased significantly. 
 
And I’m asking you: have you monitored and are you aware of 
the magnitude of it? And you say you go back to 1985. Surely 
you would be on top of it; surely you know the desperate 
situations of the R.M.’s; surely you know the desperate situation 
of the farmers. So I’m asking you: have you done a survey? Are 
you knowledgeable? Do you care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As the member is aware, we have advisers 
out there that stops at pretty well all the R.M. offices. There is a 
few that have, certainly, tax arrears. Most of the taxes this year, 
they’re telling us, are paid up even in excess of what it has been 
in the previous years, and some R.M.’s are as much as 98 per cent 
collected. That was as of the year end. There is very few that was 
under 90 per cent. 
 
So we probably will have an improvement in that 10 per cent in 
arrears status. So our best guess is that it’s probably better now 
than it was even in 1985 in regards to paying of the taxes. The 
R.M. taxpayers are actually coming in to pay up their taxes, sort 
of making it as a preference maybe now. Anyway, whatever the 
trend is, it has been more to  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

747 
 

paying it this year than it has in the past few years, and we believe 
that when the report gets in for 1987 it will probably be . . . the 
arrears will be less overall than they were in 1985. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Do you have anything other than a guess to 
substantiate that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well the only thing that we’d have would 
be that our advisers have dropped in at just about every R.M. 
office in the province . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Well I have, too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — So have I. The member says he has, too. So 
have I. I have been to many, many R.M.’s . . . I’ve talked to just 
about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . In regards to how many 
R.M.’s you talked to, I have talked to, I would literally say, just 
about every R.M. in this province since the first of the year — 
either a councillor or the administrator or the reeve of every R.M. 
in this province since the first of the year. And I have asked each 
one of them how their tax collection was. 
 
So if you want to talk about just talking to them — but more than 
that we have advisers that go out there, they drop in all the R.M. 
offices where there may have been some arrears before, to talk to 
them. They say the state of most of the R.M.’s is good or better 
than it has been in the past few years, and we feel very optimistic 
about it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well you can feel very optimistic, but you didn’t 
give me any categorical information. I mean, do you have 
statistics? Surely you come in here knowing your portfolio. But 
you can’t do it because that’s not the word that we get, is that 
there are substantial number of arrears, significant arrears. 
 
I’d like to ask you whether or not you have any survey in respect 
to the — in the past year, of the land — the total acreage of land 
that was sold in fact for the tax arrears? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I heard him say, the member say, give 
me a guess. I suppose I can do that. But we have a . . . First of all, 
the R.M.’s haven’t raised it with us as a concern. I would, I guess, 
would say there’s very, very few quarter sections of land or any 
acres of land that’s been taken back because of tax arrears, 
certainly not that has been drawn to our attention. I would think 
there’s very, very few out there. 
 
Like I said, I’ve spoken to most of the R.M.’s in this province 
and their concern has not been the repossession of land through 
tax arrears. There may be the odd one out there, but that’s pretty 
far and few between. I would think that the concern they would 
have was, some of the farmers who’s had some trouble trying to 
pay their taxes, not necessarily going into the tax collection 
system. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Do you know how many farmers throughout the 
R.M.’s have received tax, not tax notices, but notices of tax 
arrears that proceedings have been commenced? Do you have 
any idea? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t require them to 
report that to us, and so we wouldn’t have any of that  

information. I couldn’t give the hon. Member any answer to that 
question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I want to ask you . . . indicate in closing 
this up that you summed it up properly, that you have no 
knowledge of it. You don’t know the state of the problem that 
exists out there; that’s fairly obvious. At least the details you 
don’t know, and I thought you would come prepared to indicate 
that, because it has been raised as a concern to our caucus. 
 
I want to indicate that one of the things that has precipitated more 
arrears and difficulty for R.M.’s, and for urbans as well, is the 
property improvement grant, which your government saw fit to 
destroy, and which many rural people sat on their hands as it was 
extracted from the people of Saskatchewan — some $83 million 
in tax rebate, and a very significant incentive to pay taxes early. 
That has gone. 
 
I turn also to another area, and I know the R.M.’s have raised this 
as a resolution, Mr. Minister, and that is their concern in respect 
to the . . . as I think the resolution . . . I don’t have it before me, 
but I’ll paraphrase it: they raise some concerns into the expanding 
number of Hutterite colonies throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I wanted to ask you whether you’re aware of that resolution, and 
whether your department has in any way reviewed it with the 
R.M., and what disposition you made in respect to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In answer to the member’s question, there 
was no resolution at SARM this year in regards to Hutterites. 
Also, just to bring him up to date on what there is out there, 
there’s been three new colonies established, to bring it to a total 
of 47 in the province. 
 
We have had meetings with both the Hutterite colonies, with 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and with 
SARM. In fact, we had a meeting here just about less than a 
month ago, discussing with them and the Hutterite colonies how 
we could best work out, for both sides, to the benefit of both 
SARM, SSTA and the Hutterite colonies themselves. The 
decision at that time was to discuss each and every one that 
comes up and to work out a fair and equitable solution to the 
problem, if it is a problem in an area. And that’s here it’s been 
left at as of right now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well have you set up a committee to deal with 
this? Are you going to be bringing in a report, or are you just 
chatting again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — well as the member probably knows, back 
in the early ’60s there was a Hutterite liaison committee set up, 
and it’s just a working committee that works with problems of 
the area. 
 
We’ve even gone further than that on the last discussion, and with 
SARM. We’ve asked them to work at the local level to resolve 
it, and with SARM and the municipalities. We believe that’s 
where it should be, and that’s the people that have to live in the 
area who are friends and neighbours, and so we’ve asked them to 
work it out that way. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

748 
 

(1615) 
 
And I believe that SARM and the Hutterite colonies have agreed 
in principle to that, and we’ll have to see where it goes from here. 
But as far as the committee itself, it was established back under 
the former administration a long time ago, over 20 years ago, 25 
years ago. It’s been there and it’s just a working committee. 
There’s really no report on it, it just works; it meets if there’s a 
problem, they discuss it. As you know, who is all on it, there’s 
the Hutterite colony, SARM, SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association), people from the department, R.M.’s 
involved. That’s how it’s worked. We’ve just extended it a little 
more, saying, let’s work it right at a local level and see if we can 
resolve it first before it comes to this committee. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You had indicated that you had a committee in 
place and it’s been in place since 1960, but then you have a 
resolution being raised, so obviously there’s concern beyond the 
solution of the committee. There’s no doubt that there was a 
resolution by the rural municipalities in respect to . . . indicating 
some problem in this area. Are you not aware of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The member said there was a resolution. I 
spent the entire time at the SARM convention. There was no 
resolution in regards to the Hutterite colonies. At the same time 
. . . Three years ago there was a resolution at the SARM 
convention. It was defeated by the SARM delegates, so therefore 
it doesn’t become a resolution any more. It’s a defeated 
resolution. 
 
I think the way we have it set up is a fair way to do it, it is the 
right way to do it. It is working with the local people and the 
Hutterite colonies themselves to establish what will benefit the 
area and how it’s best for all concerned. If you take it beyond that 
and have government intervention and government pushing 
somebody, it never will work. It never has and never will. I 
believe it’s got to go back to where the people themselves, who 
have to live there, who have to reside there, who have to work 
there make those decisions. And we’re prepared to be the liaison 
to help facilitate that, and that’s where we’d like to see it stay at. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well is there any position that you take in respect 
that if you get an area that can’t provide some solution to needed 
expansion by Hutterite colonies, that your government . . . Hands 
off! Is that the policy that you’re saying, that it’s solely and 
exclusively left up to the local R.M.’s to make the decisions. I 
want to be clear on this, because in some parts of the province 
they’ve had court actions, as you know, in respect to it, and just 
so I’m clear, I want to know the position of your department. Is 
that your position that you keep hands off; that there is no basic 
protection; that it’s going to be left up primarily and exclusively 
to the whims of local R.M.’s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, when you had that court case, with 
all due respect, was when your administration was in power, and 
that’s when it happened. 
 
I believe . . . As you probably know, I chair the committee, the 
Hutterite liaison committee, when we meet, so I sit at  

all the meetings. We have said that we will work as a conciliator, 
that we will work to resolve an issue. 
 
We believe, in this province and in this country, that the buyer 
has a right to buy, the seller has the right to sell, provided it meets 
the rules and criteria that is set out within either the province or 
the municipalities. And if they abide by the rules of this province 
and of this country, then those rights should be there, always 
should be there, so we’re not going to impose somebody else’s 
will on what is their right. 
 
So we’re saying, if you’re the buyer you have the right to buy, 
and if you’re the seller you have the right to sell, provided you 
abide by the laws of this province or the by-laws of the 
community. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well you indicated that there is a set of criteria. 
Are those in place, those criteria? Are there guide-lines, and can 
you indicate the nature of the criteria that you’re operating under 
at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we can pursue this as 
long as the member wants, but the development and planning 
by-laws of a community, or the by-laws of the R.M . when I say 
community I mean it could be a district planning and by-laws 
that’s set up, or it could be an R.M. by-laws. That’s what I meant 
by the criteria that’s there. It’s already set out. It applies to 
everybody in that R.M. and it applies to everybody in the 
province. 
 
So those are the rules we have to abide by. There’s no special 
rules for one or the other; it’s the same for everybody. And that’s 
what it has to be, and it always has been. It has been under your 
administration; it has to be under this administration; it will be 
under administrations to come. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Just before we close off, Mr. Minister, I would 
like to turn to an item in the Estimates, looking at subvote 19, 
payments to Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
I note that under all the program services that are listed, the fifth 
highest expenditure you have, under program services to the 
property management corporation . . . And we all know this is for 
rental payments for facilities to the property management 
corporation. 
 
I would like for the minister to itemize for us today: what 
facilities and/or services are provided for the $516,000 that your 
department has to pay each year — in this particular year, I 
should say — to the property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, as the member knows, the rent that’s 
charged is the rent it costs to . . . whatever it costs to operate the 
facilities. And it’s for accommodation and mail and photographic 
services and anything else as it relates to the direct operation or 
the cost of that department. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, all I want to know is: what 
facilities do you rent for $516,000 for the Department of Rural 
Development? Can you tell me honestly in this House that you 
authorized the expenditure of $516,000  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

749 
 

and don’t know what facilities you’re getting for that, or what 
services you may be getting for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well if the member likes, I could read off 
a whole list of offices. He’s aware that we have six regional 
offices around the province. We have the head office . . . or the 
department located here in the Walter Scott Building. We have 
all the ferry houses and where the ferry operators live around the 
province. We have . . . Well that’s basically what it entails. 
 
We have, in Regina, the Walter Scott Building — you’re aware 
of it — there’s a big floor and a half over there. In Yorkton we 
have space in there for engineering staff. I believe there’s about 
10 or 12 people work out of Yorkton. 
 
We have at Weyburn the same thing; we have at Swift Current 
the same thing; we have Saskatoon; we have Prince Albert; we 
have North Battleford; we have Riverhurst, Lemsford, Lancer, 
Estuary . . . (inaudible) . . . Cumberland House and Paynton. 
Those are all areas that we have rented space in, and that totals 
up to — I don’t know how many thousands of square feet — but 
a great number. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well that was my next question. Mr. Minister, 
is — how many square feet do you rent from the property 
management corporation, and what is the dollar cost per square 
foot for the payments that you make to the property management 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well the office space that has existed over 
here in the Walter Scott Building for many years under one 
department or the . . . or under one government or the other — I 
believe they’ve been there for a large number of years — there’s 
1,550 square metres and I believe that would be about 15,500 
square feet. Now I believe there’s about 10 square feet to a square 
metre. 
 
In Yorkton we have 148 square metres, so that’s about 1,500 
square feet — about the same in Weyburn, about 209 square 
metres in Swift Current, which is about 2,000 square feet, about 
3,000 square feet in Saskatoon, 1,500 square feet in Prince 
Albert, and then another 300 square feet in another building. And 
in North Battleford we have about 2,000 square feet, and then the 
spaces for where the ferry . . . the house is and the . . . and all the 
ferry ones, most of them run around 1,000 square feet per house, 
and that’s just . . . it says 92.9 square metres and 91 point 
something, but in that neighbourhood of square footage. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, could the minister tell us what the cost is 
per square foot? Is there a dollar amount on each facility that you 
rent from the property management corporation? If you have that, 
I would appreciate that information. Or is there just a blanket 
charge that’s given to you on a square footage basis. And if it is 
a blanket charge, could you tell us what the cost is per square 
foot? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I don’t have a breakdown of the 
square footage charge. But the minister for property management 
will be up here in a little while and you can certainly ask him; 
he’ll have the information that’s necessary. We have . . . all I 
have with us today is the breakdown of the square metres or 
square feet. 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Well what are — I ask you these questions — 
what are the total square feet that you rent? Question number one. 
Question number two is: what is the dollar amount per square 
foot? I can hardly believe that you as minister would authorize 
an expenditure of over half a million dollars and not know what 
the cost is per square foot. How do you expect the people of 
Saskatchewan to believe that they’re getting good value for their 
money if you as minister in charge of this department are renting 
space and don’t know yourself whether you’re getting good value 
for your money because you don’t know what the cost is per 
square foot? 
 
Thirdly, could you table the documents you referred to in terms 
of the facilities you rent and the square footage in each of those 
facilities, and if it has it on the document, the dollar amount for 
each of those facilities? Then maybe we can figure out the cost 
per square foot, if you can’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well just so the member understands, I 
don’t think it’s been a policy of this House over the many, many 
years to — or ever — to disclose — even under your 
administration, I believe it would be fair to say that you never 
once disclosed the dollar per square foot of rental space. You 
know a lot of that space was rented many years ago by the former 
administration. It continues on. 
 
I’m not even prepared to give that kind of information. You’re 
certainly . . . some of you that were involved at the time may be 
aware of what the rental cost was. The Walter Scott Building, as 
you know, is an older building; it’s been there for a long time. 
You know the — you are aware probably of all the costs in a lot 
of those contracts long existing. We don’t . . . It just isn’t a 
policy, and we’re just not going to disclose it; you can ask the 
minister responsible for property management. 
 
In regards to the list of where all the rental space is located, we’ll 
certainly get one made up and send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well if I’m not mistaken, I’m not even sure that 
property management comes before the Committee of Finance 
because it’s a Crown corporation. 
 
In any event, Mr. Minister, it’s your expenditure. You’re 
spending in excess of half a million dollars and can’t tell us 
whether you’re getting good value for your money invested — 
taxpayers’ money that you’re investing, taxpayers’ money that 
you’re paying out in rent — and you can’t tell us what the cost is 
per square foot. You can’t tell us what the cost is per building, so 
we could figure it out on a cost per square foot, and you can’t 
give us the total overall figures. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: what is the total square footage rented 
from the property management corporation by the Department of 
Rural Development under your authority as minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well we can get it totalled up and send it 
to you. But in regards to whether we can, or whether we know 
how much it is, it’s whether we want to give you the information, 
or intend to give the  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

750 
 

information out, or whether we know the information. Those are 
two different questions altogether. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve got to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The information . . . That’s right. The 
member from Quill Lakes says, we got to know. Yes, we do 
know what the cost is, and many of those contracts were signed 
when their administration was in place. 
 
They are, in fact, confidential, and they could distort the whole 
retail . . . or rental business in the province, and therefore . . . You 
well know that. It’s been a tradition of this House not to disclose 
it, and we’re not prepared to do so. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I believe it’s been a policy of previous 
governments and this government not to disclose if a private 
sector interest is involved, so that there’s no confidentiality 
betrayed in terms of tipping the hand on what the competitive 
rate is, and so that the government gets a good deal. 
 
Are you saying that the property management corporation 
doesn’t own any of the buildings that are being leased to you or 
rented to you? Are you saying that the property management 
corporation goes out, with the inability of you to do it, to go out 
and rent all these facilities? Surely to goodness property 
management corporation owns some of the properties which you 
in turn lease or rent from them. If that’s the case, it is the right of 
the people of Saskatchewan to know what the financial dealings 
are between government departments and Crown corporations. 
 
Can you give us your assurance this afternoon that you will in 
fact give us a breakdown of all the properties that you rent, what 
the square footage is in those properties, and what the amount is 
that you pay per square foot for the facilities you rent or lease 
from property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — What I said is: I’ll send you a list of the 
places that are being leased by the Rural Development 
department. We’ll send that over. We’ll have one made up and 
sent to you. The square footage . . . or the price paid per square 
foot or how the rate is structured or set out by the property 
management corporation is not going to be disclosed. It hasn’t 
been previously by other administrations, and we’re not prepared 
to do it now. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m beginning to get a glimpse 
of what’s happening to us with respect to your costs, your 
property costs. We know that they’ve gone up substantially. We 
know that they’re half empty. We know that you’re renting hotels 
which are neither finished nor used. 
 
We know, Mr. Minister, that you’re wasting enormous amounts 
of money, but I’m beginning to understand how these estimates 
are going to work. I understand the minister to say that you pay 
whatever they send you, that if they were to send you a bill for 
three times that size,  

your department would have gleefully agreed to it. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation there is one vote for $6,762,700. My guess is that’s 
all the minister’s going to want to talk about is that one subvote. 
 
Mr. Minister, the costs — the functions which used to be supplied 
by supply and services went up 21 per cent when you transferred 
it to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. Over 
the last year the amount paid by various departments has gone up 
by another 18 per cent. 
 
Now you’re going to sit there, Mr. Minister, and you’re going to 
tell us you don’t know, and what’s more, it’s none of your 
business. That’s not an unfair summary of what you just finished 
saying: that I don’t know, but if I did, it would be none of your 
business. 
 
Mr. Minister, when the property costs go up as dramatically as 
they have — 21 per cent last year, 18 per cent this year — we 
have a right to know, and the public have a right to know how 
you’re frittering away their money. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I do legal work, which is not likely, but let’s 
supposing I were to do legal work for your department. Is it your 
position that whatever bill I send you, you’ll pay? If it were $500, 
you’d sign on the bottom line; if it were $1,500, you’d sign on 
the bottom line — you don’t ask any detail about bills you’re 
asked to pay? I don’t believe that is your position. I hope it is not. 
Mind you, given the way this government’s being run, I suppose 
it wouldn’t be astounding. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, your subvote is not in the vote to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation; it’s here. It is 
you that has to give us the details. You have to tell us why the 
amount being spent has gone up by 20 per cent — and it has. It’s 
a little better than that, about 22 per cent. Mr. Minister, you’ve 
got to tell us why it went up, and you’ve got to tell us what this 
$500,000 is for. Because if you can’t, we can think of other uses 
for it. That would just about, as I recall it, cover the cost of 
deprivatizing the dental plan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you can’t justify the $500, let’s sent it over 
to the Minister of Health to get ourselves our dental plan back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, I heard him 
say that the spaces, rental spaces in . . . in government rental 
spaces are half empty. I think that’s been discussed here many 
times in this House. You know, they were stating something like 
$34,000 a day being wasted on rental space, and we found out 
that’s seven times what the real figure was, and so we know that 
not to be true. 
 
And saying, half empty — you know, that’s pretty . . . I think a 
pretty rough statement to make in regards to anywheres close to 
being the truth. In regards to asking about, would he do any legal 
work for the department — I doubt very much if we would ask 
him to do that. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

751 
 

In regards to the property management Crown, the allocation of 
space, the leasing of space — as I’ve said earlier, that we’re not 
prepared to disclose the amount of rent paid or lease paid on any 
of the spaces there. It hasn’t been a custom of this House. We 
will send you over the list of all the spaces that are rented for your 
. . . so you’ll know where they are and what they are. But if you 
have any further questions in regards to the property management 
Crown, I ask you to take it up either in Crown Corporations — 
or which you’ll have two chances — and in this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that’s not true, and I’m 
surprised someone who has spent six years here, as you have, 
doesn’t know that. That will not work. When we get to the 
property management corporation, he’s going to — he or she; he, 
I guess — will want to talk about this one vote which they have 
for six million bucks. He’s not going to . . . the minister is not 
going to give us information about your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, the full $500,000 does not relate to leased space. 
That’s all of the services you get from the property management 
corporation, and we want to know (a) the breakdown for that; and 
we want to know why it’s increased by 20 per cent. And you owe 
us that explanation, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to tell you that when I asked the Minister of Finance for 
that explanation in his estimates, I got it. I didn’t get this 
nonsense about, well I don’t know, and if I do I wouldn’t tell you. 
Mr. Minister, you’re not being paid the very generous salary that 
you are paid as a minister of the Crown to come here and say: I 
don’t know, and if I do I wouldn’t tell you. You are here to 
represent your department, to answer legitimate questions, and 
an expenditure of half a million dollars is a legitimate question. 
 
If you do not want to disclose the leased rate on a per footage 
basis, that’s traditional that we do not disclose the leased rate on 
a per foot basis. But that’s not what we’re asking. We’re asking 
you for a breakdown . . . (a) a breakdown; and (b) why did it 
increase by 20 per cent? You owe us that, or you ought to take 
the subvote . . . or you ought to take the money out of your 
department. If you can’t explain it, we’ll take it out and we’ll let 
this go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well personally, in regards to — again, 
back to the leased rental space, he has . . . As the member well 
knows, most places in this, that government uses, is both owned 
by the property management Crown or is rented by the property 
management Crown in regards to re-leasing or allocating out to 
different departments and other Crowns — I don’t know about 
other Crowns — other departments. So therefore it’s a mixture 
of leases, and in most departments that’s to be true. 
 
If he has any questions in regards to that, I ask him to ask the 
minister responsible for the Crown management . . . the property 
management Crown, because he’s the elected member who’s 
responsible for the proper expenditure of the moneys, and I’m 
sure that’s being carried out. 
 

So if you ask him, that’s the job of the property management 
Crown, to make sure that the money is well spent. There’s 
capable, qualified people there. The minister in charge, without 
disclosing any particular details — because if you disclose 
details, as I said earlier — and it isn’t the custom of this House 
to do that; we’re just not prepared to. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not been the custom 
of this government, Mr. Minister, but it has been the custom of 
all previous governments and every other government in Canada 
to attempt to make some passing semblance at justifying your 
expenditures. 
 
Mr. Minister, when this used to come before the government, 
before the Assembly, as the estimates for the department of 
supply and services — and all you’ve done is to take the 
department of supply and services and make a Crown corporation 
out of it; it’s nothing more than that — we used to get a 
breakdown and all of the detail we requested, with one exception, 
the portion which related to leased space — we did not get the 
rate per foot. But that’s all that was denied to us up until two 
years ago. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The situation’s different now. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the member from The Battlefords says 
that the situation’s different. I’ll tell you what’s different. What’s 
different is that you’re wasting an enormous amount of money in 
here, and you want to sit there like a fence post and not talk about 
it. That’s what’s different. 
 
Mr. Minister, we will not ask you the rate per foot; we won’t ask 
you that. But you owe us everything else, and you certainly owe 
us an explanation as to why it increased by 20 per cent. As I say, 
I asked the Minister of Justice those questions and I got them, 
and I don’t know what makes you think that you’re some sort of 
an exception. You owe us that information, Mr. Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They don’t know it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well if you don’t know it, we’ll adjourn the 
estimates. We’ll go on to the Department of Science and 
Technology and, you never know, we just might strike a minister 
who knows something about their department. It likely won’t 
happen, but there’s always a chance that somewhere there is 
lurking within the treasury benches opposite, a minister who 
cares about the job they’re supposed to be doing. 
 
I ask you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from 
Regina Wascana feels offended at that comment. Mr. Member, 
you haven’t sat over here and tried to get information from these 
people, information which is legitimate, which we have a right 
to. And you haven’t sat there and faced the minister who has said, 
I don’t know, but if I do, I wouldn’t tell you. And that’s what he 
said. And that’s not an adequate answer in the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I can give him, you know, some 
breakdowns of, in general, of the expenses, and that’s what I 
think he was asking for. It may be what he’s been getting or what 
he requires: office accommodations,  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

752 
 

janitorial services, lights, all the heating, all the stuff that goes 
there, is about $460,000 a year; the mail, which is interoffice and 
Canada Post, is $50,000; and photographic, whatever, pictures or 
whatever else they take for annual reports and all the other stuff 
is about $6,000 a year. So that’s the breakdown of the money you 
were asking me for. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well you owe us a breakdown of that figure 
on office accommodation as well, Mr. Minister. Now I don’t 
believe for a moment you haven’t got it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I asked you to give us a breakdown of the 
figure for office accommodation, and we are not asking for the 
rate per foot, the per foot base rate for the leases. We’re not 
asking for that, but you owe us a breakdown on the rest of it. And 
if there’s not something that you’re ashamed of, then why don’t 
you give it to us and we’ll get on to the next item. 
 
You also, Mr. Minister, owe us an explanation for why there’s a 
20 per cent increase. There has been. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I’ve given you a breakdown of office 
rental, accommodations, including janitorial services and your 
lights and the renovations. There’s always some . . . you know, 
there’s always upkeep on any office space; there’s always an 
upkeep over year over year, no matter where you’re at and all 
over the . . . scattered around the province. 
 
I could send you a list. I’ll send you over a list of the spaces and 
the square footage or square metres, which I said I would do for 
you. I’d get a new one made up. But I could send you this one; 
it’s just tore a little. 
 
But the overall . . . you know, but that’s a breakdown of it so, you 
know, except for exact details, which I said we’re not prepared 
to disclose, you’ve got . . . you know what the office 
accommodation and janitorial services and lights and repairs and 
general upkeep of office space, and there’s a lot of it around the 
province. You also know what the mailing costs and that, and 
you also know what the rest, the photographic services and that 
is. So I’ll send this over to you. 
 
I don’t know how much better I can break it down then for you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: Am I to understand then from the minister’s 
remarks that he has budgeted $6,000 for photos in the coming 
year? Could he give us some explanation of that? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As the member should know, it’s a real 
variety of things. It’s mostly in the engineering department, in 
the field. They take pictures of, say, bridges that’s either washed 
out or need to be repaired. They take pictures of the topography 
so they know where they’d be building a road or how it looked 
like when they’re designing it during the winter months. They 
take pictures of roads, and where there’s maybe some 
controversy or where they’re looking at designing a road through 
an area where there’s hills or that. Most of that is . . .  

some of it’s aerial photos. There’s even the odd aerial photo taken 
to give them a broader view of what it looks like. 
 
That’s where they would spend the money. It’s also spent out 
within the field services, looking at and working with R.M.’s. 
They’ve got to have something to look at as they go back to 
design it during the winter months. And that’s sort of a picture of 
what they’re doing, and it sort of gives them a visual view of it. 
So that’s what that money is for. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister 
a further question in respect to the space that is allocated to his 
department, or his department is renting through property 
management. Can you give us a breakdown as to the amount that 
is government-owned space and the amount which is private 
space? 
 
Obviously you indicated the Walter Scott Building was 
government-owned, so what I want to do is the breakdown of the 
two classifications — that which is leased privately from the 
private sector and that which is owned by the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As the member should well know, that’s 
handled through the property management Crown, and they’re 
all over the province . . . There’s a lot . . . We wouldn’t know 
which is privately owned, which is Crown-owned. 
 
The only thing I can guess, we haven’t moved space . . . I 
understand we’ve been in all those offices for a good number of 
years, so I would assume it’s still owned . . . or whoever had it 
before, whether it was the government or whether it was a private 
sector, still owned by the same people. That’s an assumption of 
mine, but I would think that’s a fairly close analysis of the way it 
would be. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well you don’t know what you’re getting then. 
That’s what you’re saying. You’re trying to fudge it because you 
know what there is — there is a rip-off going in respect to 
property management. That’s what’s happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There is a basic, I say a basic rip-off, because 
some of this is government-owned space. And what I want to 
know is: in respect to the privately rented, free enterprise space 
that you’ve rented, do you know as a fact whether property 
management is charging precisely what they are obtaining it for 
from the private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I would have no way of knowing, as the 
member well knows, that . . . Like I said, it’s space that’s been 
rented for years. I assume it’s still owned by the same persons or 
persons or company that owned it before, probably at the time 
rented by the former administration. 
 
How the property management Crown continues to rent from 
them, all we know is what we pay and how it’s allocated to us. 
You know, that’s all we’d have, all the information we’d have, 
and all we need. We don’t need to really know. That’s their job 
— the property management Crown — to know who they lease 
it from,  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

753 
 

and the type of building that’s needed to meet the required needs 
of our department. So we wouldn’t have no idea who they are 
rented from now, nor do we want to know. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well what additional space are you including, or 
renting, additional to the previous year? Can you give us the 
breakdown, at least the number of square feet that you’re adding 
to the space that your department had the previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To the best of my knowledge, none. It’s the 
same space as the previous year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well can you indicate to me why you’re paying 
20 per cent more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well certainly, as I said earlier, there’s 
office renovations that go on, there’s been, you know . . . that’s 
basically where most of it would come from. I don’t know 
exactly what it is, except to say that probably some would be 
power, some would be extra in power; some may be extra in taxes 
in communities where the taxes went up; some may well be in 
regards to renovations of offices — that’s where they would be. 
 
And if you have any further questions, again I would ask you to 
. . .  
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well you keep saying that, oh, there’s 
renovations. Do you know the amount of renovations that your 
space knows . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’re paying, he’s 
paying for it. You aren’t answering. I mean, he can’t answer, I 
know, but we don’t need the Deputy Premier to interfere. 
 
Because there’s a rip-off here as clearly as we’re standing here. 
What they have here is a slush fund that is being built up under 
the disguise of the property management corporation — clearly 
— and the minister is a part and parcel of the scam that’s ripping 
the public off. 
 
Now this is . . . just imagine, the minister stands up in this House 
and he says, ho, there is property that was rented before by the 
other administration — he knows all that. You ask him, well, how 
much of it is government space, owned by the government. Oh, 
he says, I don’t know that. Well what about the Walter . . . let’s 
go through the individual pieces of information. Do you know 
where your department is spread? Do you know where your 
department is housed? 
 
And I’m asking you, Mr. Minister — you have to come clean 
here — what is the 20 per cent increase that you’re charging the 
people of Saskatchewan? Give us a breakdown of the increase, 
because we have a right to know. He stands up in this House and 
says, it’s exactly the same amount of space as previously. That’s 
what he said. Now he stands up and says, well these are old 
leases, they were in place before. But here we have a 20 per cent 
increase this year, and a previous . . . How much was it the 
previous year? — 19 per cent? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 23 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — 23 per cent. An increase in the office rental  

of over 43 per cent in two years, and this minister stands there 
and says, well it’s renovations. Well I’ll tell you, you must have 
them lined with gold bathtubs or something, because a 43 per 
cent increase — 43 per cent increase. 
 
I wonder if the minister could indicate with any more detail why 
there has been that massive increase if in fact you are having 
exactly the same space. One explanation of it is that you’re 
packing it away in the property management, putting a little sock 
aside so that when come along with election, you’re going to 
have this here fund that you’re going to be able to draw on. Well 
I’ll tell you the people of Saskatchewan are going to be informed 
that there is a rip-off taking place here in respect to it, because if 
a minister can’t in fact, answer a question that there is a 43 per 
cent increase on the cost of the same amount of space, I’ll tell 
you that’s a disgrace that a minister cannot stand in this House 
and clearly justify why there is a 43 per cent increase for exactly 
the same space. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, I give you 
another chance to come clean. Don’t take any information from 
the Deputy Premier, just stand up and be a decent man. Stand up 
and give the information. Tell them that you’re taking it to the 
walls, that they can come along, the Deputy Premier and the 
property management, because they want to build up a fund 
there, a secret fund. That’s what they’re doing, and they’re raping 
the public in paying 43 per cent increase in the same property. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . how much is it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — $39 million increase. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A $39 million increase in the cost of the same 
space. That’s what’s happening here — 39 million, 43 per cent 
increase for exactly the same space. And the minister stands there 
and says, it has to be renovations. Can you believe it? 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister: Mr. Minister, come clean. Don’t 
be a party to this scam on the public, on the treasury, on the 
taxpayers of this province. I ask you, Mr. Minister, how do you 
account for a 43 per cent increase in light of the fact that you have 
exactly the same space rented? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, you know, just to clarify some of the 
points . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a rip-off. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — And I heard the member from Quill Lake 
saying, it’s a rip-off. 
 
Do you know how they used to do it, Mr. Chairman? Mr. 
Chairman, when they had the departments over there, they never 
showed any charges for the cost of operating a building. They 
didn’t show that; they didn’t show it against a department. They 
showed it over some other  
  



 
April 21, 1988 

 

754 
 

place. What we’ve done is taken and put it back where it 
honestly, really is. So that’s number one, that’s number one. So 
the honesty part is right there — they’d put it in another 
department. 
 
Second of all, office space, even in this building, was never 
shown before. They never showed the office space for the 
minister in this building, which is shown. So there has been other 
things done that wasn’t done before, and it is now being showed 
in a proper way. And the member can go on and say, come on 
and be honest — that’s being honest — and sometimes maybe, 
ask the questions that aren’t quite in that frame of mind. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the single, I think the single 
most serious embarrassment you people have now is your empty 
office space; I think that’s a fair statement. 
 
Mr. Minister, along with such triumphs as the abolition of the 
dental plan and the abolition of the drug plan, along with those 
triumphs, standing with it, is the extra office space, Mr. Minister, 
which you’re not using. The fact that you’ve rented a hotel, 
which is not completed, and there’s nobody in it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ask him if he has any space in it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes. What portion of the hotel did you rent, 
and do you spend any time in anything but the bar of the hotel? 
 
Mr. Minister, you owe us an explanation for your 21 per cent 
increase in your expenditures. I want to know, Mr. Minister . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and if the member from Wascana is 
going to enlighten us, I’d be pleased to hear from him on his feet. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the bridges are costing you 21 per cent more, if 
the office space which you hold in small communities is costing 
you 21 per cent more, Mr. Minister, then you owe us an 
explanation. You say, Mr. Minister, you’ve got exactly the same 
office space, the same bridges, the same everything. If that is the 
case, why is it costing us 21 per cent more? 
 
Mr. Minister, I get the impression with you, as I get the 
impression with so many other ministers, that you came here 
ill-prepared, without the detail or the . . . without the detail to get 
and give us the answers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Souris-Cannington wants to know who’s doing our 
research. Mr. Minister, I’d like to know who’s assisting you in 
getting ready for these estimates. You come here without the 
information which we richly deserve. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to make . . . well I see I’ve offended the 
member from Maple Creek. Now isn’t that a tragedy. When the 
member from Maple Creek, who happens to sit on the treasury 
benches, comes before the Legislative Assembly, I want to give 
her fair warning that we will ask you the same questions, and I 
hope you are a good deal readier for it than this minister is. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to, just for a moment, just talk about where 
the figure of 39 million or 43 per cent came from. Mr. Minister, 
the last estimates we had for the department  

of supply and services were that they were going to spend 93 
million. The figure now, if you add up all these figures is 132. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Million. That’s 39 million; that’s 43 per 
cent, by my calculations. In two years, with the same space, 
you’re spending 43 per cent more. It’s $41 million. It is a lot of 
money. That’s a great deal of money, which you don’t want us to 
. . . which you don’t want to account for. You want to simply say, 
Mr. Minister, as you’ve been saying here: I don’t know, but if I 
knew I wouldn’t tell you. 
 
Mr. Minister, you enjoy a very generous salary and some 
generous benefits from the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. They 
expect a little something in return. One of the things you’re 
supposed to do in return, Mr. Minister, is to come here and give 
us information to which we’re entitled. We’re certainly entitled 
to know why these exorbitant increases have taken place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I really get the feeling that you came here without 
the information. I’m going to, with permission, call it 5 o’clock. 
I’m going to give you a chance to go back and come back here at 
7 o’clock with this information and give it to us. So I’m going to 
call it 5 o’clock, Mr. Minister, and I genuinely hope you come 
back at seven with some information and some answers because 
for 39 million bucks you owe us something. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — One minute to go, Mr. Chairman. I just 
want to say one thing. I take offence by the member from Regina 
Centre when he was insinuating that I would go down and be 
drinking in any parlour in this province. That is not a practice of 
mine, and that is a direct slur on me. I take tremendous offence 
to that, and I would ask that when you get up next time that you 
apologize for that, because I take offence to that. 
 
Second, if you talk about how things go in the province — and 
I’ve got a little letter here I’d like to read, after supper, to you 
how Manitoba is handling  
 
Mr. Shillington: — I do want to respond to your complaint that 
I said you were down in the bar. I merely said, Mr. Minister, the 
qualities of your answers here suggest that you spent all your 
time in the bar. I didn’t actually say you were there. If you can 
do a little better than that, Mr. Minister, if you can give us some 
sober, reasonable answers and come back at seven with them. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


