


















































March 30, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 30, 1988 
 
 

227 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you, and to my colleagues in this 
Assembly, some students from St. Angela Merici School in my 
constituency, situated in the Speaker’s gallery - grade 3, 4, 5, and 
6 students, about 78 in number. I would also like to introduce three 
teachers which are with them: Laurie Ruhr, Lil Schroeder and Reg 
Becker. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the students after question period 
to answer any questions that they have with regard to government 
or with regard to perhaps lack of answers we have in question 
period. I look forward to getting pictures taken with them as well. 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming them to this 
Assembly this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It gives me pleasure, as well, to introduce 
guests I have from my constituency. Sitting in my gallery I have 
the honour of having with us here this afternoon the Chief of 
Standing Buffalo Indian Reservation, Chief Melvin Isnana; 
members of his band council, Stella Isnana, Harvey Yuzicappi and 
Lloyd Isnana. I am very pleased to have them here. I had the 
opportunity to meet with them at 11 o’clock and later on to have 
lunch together. They have had a tour of the building and now 
they’re here to watch question period, and I’m absolutely certain 
they were more than impressed. I ask all hon. members to please 
welcome them in the normal way. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Family Relationships in Regina Elphinstone 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, 
and it has to do with a speech which you delivered last night at 
your Elphinstone PC nominating convention saying many things 
of interest, but one of the things of which you’re quoted as saying 
in the Leader-Post today is as follows: 
 
While the family structure and sense of caring remains strong in 
rural Saskatchewan, it seems to break down in city ridings like 
Regina Elphinstone, Devine said during his address. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in our judgements this is a shameful address 
because the reality is that the people in Regina Elphinstone, the 
families there, have a commitment to families just as strong as it is 
in rural Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romanow: — What they see is no commitment by your 
government to their families when you take away the prescription 
drug plan, the dental plan, take away their jobs, attack the 
unfortunate and the poor. You owe these people an apology, Mr. 
Premier. Will you apologize and retract those comments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I do with the hon. members 
had joined us last night at the meeting and they could have heard 
the whole presentation. I will say, Mr. Speaker, that I will be glad 
to, and will take the opportunity after question period to provide a 
little bit more detail with respect to families, and wit respect to 
fairness, and with respect to the whole question of buying votes in 
Elphinstone that the NDP are caught in, and they look so sad. In 
fact it’s an embarrassment to the entire province, Mr. Speaker, and 
the people of Elphinstone are coming forward and saying that to 
me . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will just say to the people of Elphinstone, I 
know that they feel badly that a political party would be caught 
buying votes, and I can only apologize for all members of the 
legislature that a political party would get into something like that. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I do know that the concern for crime, 
the concern for drugs, and the concern about families and 
life-styles is a major concern in Elphinstone, represented by the 
NDP. It’s quite clear, Mr. Speaker, and I’m glad to put our views 
up against their views on the family any day of the week, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 
Premier. Nobody on this side of the House needs a lecture from 
you, sir, or your government about family, given the record of 
your government in the last five years. Nobody does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We can talk about family in that sense, but my 
question to you, sir, is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Please allow the hon. member to 
ask his question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this. In 
your remarks as quoted by the Leader-Post, is you’ve identified all 
of the families of Regina Elphinstone, a blanket condemnation of 
the people of Elphinstone as having no caring for their families. I 
say that is wrong. I say to the Premier: you are the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan; will you do the right thing and retract 
that kind of blanket condemnation and apologize to the senior 
citizens and the families who are struggling to make a go of it in 
Elphinstone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

228 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP will not weasel out 
of this one. You are caught on this one, and you’ve been blowing 
through your teeth. You’ve been talking through your teeth on this 
one, and you tried to get out from under buying votes, and you’ve 
tried to get out from under your lack of stand for families, and you 
can misquote the newspaper or you can misquote all kinds of 
things, and you can try to weasel your way out from under it, but 
you’re not going to get away with it. 
 
The people and the province of Saskatchewan are going to know 
the truth about what went . . . happened and on in your 
nomination, your views about families and the concerns that you 
have. And I’m going to go on, Mr. Speaker, today - I won’t in 
question period - but I’m going to go on and talk about your views 
of families low income families, and what you do to them; your 
views about rural and urban families and how you look after them; 
how you foreclose on them; how you take their homes; how you 
take your farms. Mr. Speaker, by the end of this afternoon the 
whole province is going to know what the NDP really does with 
families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Call for By-Elections 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
He has all of us just quaking in our shoes waiting to hear this great 
speech that he’s going to deliver. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is very 
clear. Nine months ago today your Progressive Conservative 
member from Saskatoon Eastview resigned - nine months ago 
today. You’ve given this province and this legislature so many 
excuses, ranging from family to explaining the uranium and the 
potash, before calling the by-election, and still no by-election, sir. 
 
Now that Elphinstone has been nominated, nine months in 
Saskatoon Eastview, what in the world is holding you up? If you 
think you’re so right, why don’t you call the by-election and call it 
today in both of those ridings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, see how quickly he changes 
his tune. See how quickly he goes from the ethics and the moral 
and the family questions to the by-election questions, Mr. Speaker, 
as if that would justify everything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he will not get away with this. This will haunt him 
for weeks and months and years, Mr. Speaker, because you 
cannot, you cannot get away with buying votes of people who are 
poor in this province, whether they’re in Elphinstone or whether 
you used to do it in Shaunavon or whether you used to do it 
Humboldt or wherever you used to do it. 
 
People in this province know that there are principles associated 
with democracy, and this side of the House is going to stand up for 
them, Mr. Speaker. And I will make sure that he is the first to 
know when there’s an opportunity to participate in a by-election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. I 
think most of us on this side are prepared to be judged on our 
morals and ethics, but not by the Premier. We’ll be judged by the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, not by the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Look, Mr. Premier, if you say - this is my 
question to you - if you say, as all of your members have been 
saying for all of these days, that the Speech from the Throne is the 
blueprint for families and the blueprint for economic development, 
if your budget of tomorrow, you have confidence in that, if you 
say all those things and you mean what you’re saying and say 
what you mean, then why don’t you call those by-elections today 
and fight them on the basis of your record and the Speech from the 
Throne and the budget? Why not do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, he will be the first to dodge all 
around it. And when Manitoba NDP lose and I say to him, that’s 
on the basis of free trade, he’ll say it has nothing to do with free 
trade. He’ll be all over the place. When a whole province rejects 
the NDP on their stand on free trade and I level that at him, do you 
know what he will say? It had nothing to do with it. 
 
So I mean, you can’t have it both ways, my friend. You go back to 
the issues, come right back to the issues again and again about 
families, about ethics, and about morality and about buying 
people’s votes. And if the NDP are going to sit in this legislature 
and they’re going to smile through their teeth and say, we can buy 
the votes as long as the people . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. I think hon. members on 
both sides of the House are obviously in a good mood today. 
Would you please allow the questioner and the minister answering 
to make their remarks without constant interruption. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a final question to the Premier in 
this area. I said to the Premier that we won’t be judged by his 
standards of dodging based on that last answer any more than we 
will be by his standards of morality and ethics. And some would 
say, Mr. Speaker, not me, that the Premier’s refusal to call a 
by-election for nine months might reflect that he’s a spineless 
political playboy, but I definitely won’t say that. I have more 
political sense than to say that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: if you won’t take the test of the 
by-elections based on the Speech from the Throne or the budget 
speech, if you have no confidence in those, if you have no 
confidence in your record to defend it, if you have no confidence 
or respect for the people of Elphinstone - you can malign them in 
any way you want - if none of that will bring you to your senses, if 
none of that will bring some decency to your office, sir, then do 
you have any decency for this institution, the legislature and the 
voters? Nine months without a voice to  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

229 
 
 

speak up for them on jobs and health and education - how about 
some respect and integrity for this institution? Call those 
by-elections; don’t keep hiding behind the rhetoric; call them now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, again I remind the public, see 
how he’s moved off the topic of buying votes; see how he’s 
moved off the topic of families and ethics and morality, and the 
people in Shaunavon . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, you can always tell when the 
opposition is some troubled, they ask for an election. After ’82 
they asked for elections, and after ’86 they asked for elections. 
Then when they finally got elections - and they can call us all the 
things they like, Mr. Speaker. After the elections and they lose, 
Mr. Speaker, then they come back and say, well we need another 
election just to prove our point. We will have by-elections in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and you can say all the things you like 
about them. 
 
My point to the Leader of the Opposition is this: your record and 
your principles with respect to how you vote, how you encourage 
people to vote, the examples you set for young people - all those 
things are going to be evident, and the people of Saskatchewan 
will know them only too well, Mr. Speaker. And they will be able 
to judge for themselves for years and years and years to come, not 
just for months to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Racist Comments in Government Publication 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, one of the most disappointing and discouraging aspects 
of our society is the promotion of racism. Mr. Premier, again I am 
disappointed - no, I am thoroughly appalled, insulted, and 
disgusted with your government’s actions in this regard yesterday. 
 
I opened a widely circulated magazine and found a Saskatchewan 
government ad which links a famous Indian leader with American 
crooks and criminals like Al Capone and Butch Cassidy. Why are 
you, why are you allowing your government to provide such racist 
and offensive material? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the 
question. I have not seen an ad that described Butch Cassidy or an 
American cowboy or a North American Indian. I will just take 
notice. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will provide that information to the 
Premier, but this morning, Mr. Speaker, The Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations sent your government a letter which 
expressed a complete and utter rejection of such an outrageous 
linking of a famous Dakota Indian leader, Tatanka  

Yotanka, with criminals. Many descendants of the Dakota nation 
live in Saskatchewan. They want an apology. Will the Premier 
apologize? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have said I will take 
notice. There are all kinds of heroes, Mr. Speaker, that have been 
North American people that have been native and/or American or 
Canadian, and I cannot respond any more until I see the magazine. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, a final question. For the record, the 
Premier wants the name of the magazine. It’s in the Canadian 
Geographic. 
 
But the final question, Mr. Speaker. This ad was used to promote 
tourism in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, last year you 
slashed Indian economic development by 66 per cent, yet you 
increased Saskatchewan advertising dollars to promote racism. 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, why will you increase expenditures on 
promoting racism and not increase funding to improve the 
economic well-being of Indian families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If you want to get on economic 
development, my friend, we’ll talk about economic development 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
This party stands for the continuation of mining in northern 
Saskatchewan, uranium mining, which means an awful lot of jobs, 
and exploration in northern Saskatchewan, which means jobs for 
hundreds and hundreds of people. Please let it be on the record 
that the NDP, which is your party - your party - is to close the 
mines down and not provide those jobs. 
 
One of the major economic opportunities for northern 
Saskatchewan, we will maintain. In fact, we’re putting together a 
joint venture with SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation) and Eldorado Nuclear to expand and have a head 
office here in this country, in this province, in Saskatchewan, to 
provide those kinds of opportunities, and you’re against it. 
 
You should know something about northern Saskatchewan and the 
opportunities that are there in mining. And you want to close them 
down, and we want to open them. 
 
So you want to talk about tourism and you want to talk about 
economic development, you want to talk about expansion - I’d be 
glad to review that in as much detail as you want to look at. 
 

Sale of Saskatchewan Minerals 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the minister of privatization 
and it has to do with economic development and it deals with what 
you termed a good deal for Saskatchewan people, and that’s the 
sale of Saskatchewan Minerals. 
 
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

230 
 
 

In 1982, Mr. Minister, the assets of Saskatchewan Minerals were 
pegged at $23 million, not including inventory. Even your own 
annual report from 1986 pegs the worth of the assets as much as 
$30 million, including inventory, yet you sold that corporation for 
less than $16 million. 
 
Can you explain to the people of this province how that’s a good 
deal, and will you know table the independent appraisal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, certainly in looking into these 
deals we had third-party evaluations of the properties and they 
were . . . the sale is in excess of those. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I don’t think it’s 
acceptable for a member to speak constantly from his desk while 
the minister is trying to answer the question. I’m sure he realizes 
it; he’s been here in this House a long time, and I’m sure he’ll 
want to let the minister continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I said we had a third-party evaluation, 
and the sale price is in excess of that evaluation, which I think was 
a fair evaluation. As my seat mate had mentioned, you’re dealing 
with book values entirely, and I think the people on the other side 
would be well-advised to do a little more homework before they 
try and mislead the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this topic I just want to draw to the attention of 
this House an attempt to mislead the other day, where the 
opposition critic - this is very important as to what the discussion 
is, Mr. Speaker - the opposition critic was criticizing Dickenson 
Mines, saying that they’d been in Saskatchewan, in the uranium 
business, operating mines and closing them down. It was not 
Dickenson Mines; that happened to be Denison Mines, and I think 
they should apologize to the people of Chaplin for that kind of 
misleading. 
 
And today we see it again . . . (inaudible) . . . When we have an 
independent appraisal which the sale was in excess of that. And I 
will . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The minister knows not what he talks of. The 
minister knows not what he talks of. Check the record, Mr. 
Minister. I have a supplementary. 
 
Mr. Minister, it looks as though you have sold a Saskatchewan 
asset by reducing the price of that asset by at least $10 million, if 
not more. And you told the news media, Mr. Minister, that some 
of this money would be used to reduce your huge, massive deficit. 
Any one can see that this is a quick and dirty sale to get you some 
quick cash. With a $3.4 billion deficit, $16 million won’t go very 
far. in fact that will probably pay about 18 days’ interest, and 
Saskatchewan people will be left without an asset that has paid 
over $50 million to the people of this province to pay for health 
and education. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t this like selling off the best quarter  

section? And every farmer in this province knows that that’s a bad 
business deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it never ceases to amaze me 
the misinformation that that critic tries to put out into the air waves 
of Saskatchewan - completely misinformed. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that we had, and I say 
again, a third-party, independent appraisal which indicated that the 
value we’re getting in this sale, and will be tabled in this House - I 
gave that commitment to the Leader of the Opposition the other 
day - will be tabled in this House, and it will indicate that the sale 
was in excess of that evaluation. 
 
The member opposite chooses to ignore - chooses to ignore - the 
possibility for diversification, new products. She chooses to ignore 
that the new deal with Sask Minerals with Kam-Kotia at Chaplin 
has an employee profit-sharing component to it. She chooses to 
ignore those. She prefers to come into this house, misquoting, 
naming companies that never were in Saskatchewan, and also 
using the wrong figures to indicate that the deal was not well put 
together. 
 
I tell you, and I stand in this House and say that this deal has 
brought money into this province from other provinces, which 
indicates to me a sense of growth and development, an optimistic 
viewpoint by others towards this province. It’s money that’s 
brought in here which is going to allow diversification and growth. 
And I stand on that and I say to the member opposite: before you 
get up and start trying to mislead and confuse the public of 
Saskatchewan again, please do your homework. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. My personal integrity is not on 
the line here. What’s at state here is your sell-out of Saskatchewan, 
that’s what’s at stake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, if we weren’t talking about 
a legacy to our children, your business sense would be laughable. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week you went to Carrot River and Chaplin to 
consult with the employees about the closure of three plants . . . or 
the sale of three plants in this province. Yet the prospectus filed by 
Premier Cdn in December of last year identified the company’s 
intention to purchase the Carrot River operation for $3.9 million, 
not the 3.4 your received. Can you explain the discrepancy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that the 
member opposite talks about the consultation meeting that we held 
out in Chaplin, Saskatchewan, because I’d like to elaborate on 
that, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I went out to Chaplin. I went to meet 
with the  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

231 
 
 

employees and I went to meet with the people of the town, but the 
party opposite chose to make it a political forum. 
 
I went into a town meeting, Mr. Speaker. I had more press there 
than at a press conference. And were the people of Chaplin 
allowed to ask questions to me? No. The critic opposite was there 
giving here political philosophy, spouting off about things. Not 
only her; her seat mate from Moose Jaw South was there. And that 
wasn’t enough. They brought the NDP federal candidate from 
Moose Jaw, turning a public meeting . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I went there to talk to the people of Chaplin, 
to the mayor of Chaplin, to the farmers who worked in the sodium 
sulphate mine, to those people. And what did these people do? 
They had a forum here to debate the political issues of this 
province. They went there and they stole the time from the people 
of Chaplin, and I think they should apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Why did you wait until last 
week to consult with the people involved in Saskatchewan 
Minerals when Premier Cdn was announcing its intentions to 
purchase the peat moss operation as early as December of 1987. 
Are shareholders in Quebec entitled to more information than 
Saskatchewan workers and Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I went to Carrot River. I think 
we had a very good meeting there. We combined the two of them 
because the NDP weren’t there to try and grandstand. I sat down 
there and talked to the workers and the people of the town. I think 
we had a very productive meeting and a good consultation. 
 
Also when I was announcing at the press conference in here, their 
member, the member from Carrot River, was right there with the 
workers and the people of the town explaining the deal, and I 
believe that’s the kind of consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a bit, because she raised the point 
about book value. And just to illustrate this point: I imagine the 
book value of the land, the land bank land, in Saskatchewan that 
they bought is at $400 an acre, and we know what it would sell for 
today. So I think that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. I’d just like to remind the 
minister that that question was asked four questions ago, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to go back. I want to go back to 
Premier Cdn Enterprises Ltd. of Quebec, and I want to ask  

you this, I want to ask you this: why were shareholders in Quebec, 
In December of 1987, aware of your sale of a Saskatchewan peat 
bog to a Quebec company before Saskatchewan taxpayers and 
Saskatchewan workers knew? How is that consultation when you 
have promised this province time and time again that you - you, 
Mr. Minister - would consult with the people of this province 
before any sale of the public’s assets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know, again, where the critic 
opposite is getting her information because the sale was not 
completed until just about three days ago - that’s when the sale 
was completed - so what she knows about people in Quebec six 
months ago I have no idea. I know, I know that the deal was 
completed about three days ago in Saskatchewan, and I know that 
I was in Carrot River consulting with the employees and the 
people of that town prior to the close of any deal - I know that. 
Now what she knows about Quebec, I have no idea. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Faculty Strike at the University of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have taken 
the liberty of providing the member of the Legislative Assembly 
for Prince Albert, the advanced education critic, a copy of my 
statement. 
 
I would like to make a short statement, Mr. Speaker, with respect 
to the strike by faculty at the University of Saskatchewan. Let me 
begin by reviewing the situation to date. 
 
The previous contract came to an end on June 30 last year. 
Negotiations for a new contract have been under way since that 
time. Last Friday the faculty association gained a strike mandate 
by a slim majority from its members and the strike began 
immediately on Monday of this week. Final exams, Mr. Speaker, 
will begin at the end of next week and in some cases exams are 
already in progress. The university administration asked for the 
assistance of a conciliator, and Mr. Sterling Gilmore has been 
appointed, and Mr. Gilmore is currently meeting with both sides 
and negotiations are continuing. 
 
In the interim, the university has put in place a contingency plan to 
try to keep classes going and to try to maintain the schedule of 
exams. While this has met with partial success, Mr. Speaker, the 
university is unable to guarantee that all students will be able to 
write their exams. I want to make it clear today, Mr. Speaker, that 
students being unable to write their exams on time is unacceptable. 
 
Our government’s commitment to our students and to their future 
is absolute and unshakeable. We are talking here about the most 
important event in the academic lives of 18,000 young people. 
Beyond the anxiety and the stress that is self-evident, there are 
practical considerations as well. Many students stand to lose 
summer jobs if they’re late getting away. Others graduating face 
the possibility of jeopardizing opportunities for new careers. And 
still others face  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

232 
 
 

deadlines for training at other universities. Above all there’s the 
uncertainty, the worry, and the anguish of not knowing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is a difficult time for parents, too - parents who have 
encouraged and supported very often through the years of these 
young students. These parents fear for their children’s future and 
now they don’t know if their sons and daughters will complete 
their courses. 
 
I talked earlier this week with representatives of the faculty, the 
administration, and the students. I asked both faculty and 
administration to find a way either to conclude the negotiations or, 
failing that, to call off the strike at least until the exams are over. 
Today I advised both parties that whatever happens, the exams 
must proceed on schedule, and that means must be found in the 
next few days to ensure that. 
 
I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by assuring faculty that I sympathize 
with their desire to conduct contract negotiations freely and 
without hindrance. The issue here is one of timing and the impact 
of job action on the lives of some vulnerable young people. I am 
hopeful that this request will lead to at least a temporary 
postponement of the strike, and preferably to a successful outcome 
of the negotiations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would first of all 
like to thank the minister for providing me with the ministerial 
statement prior to making the address. It gave me a minute or two 
to collect my thoughts and I hope to be able to express them to 
him at this time very cogently. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have addressed the issue, partially at least. 
You’ve addressed the issue from the point of view of students. I’m 
appreciative of that. I think that it’s the 16 to 18,000 students at the 
University of Saskatchewan whose academic year is at stake here, 
and that certainly must be underlined. 
 
The issue that you didn’t address in your statement that I had 
asked earlier was the underlying cause for this particular impasse, 
and I submit to you that the underlying cause has been the steady 
and continual underfunding of the university. We know now that 
the staff-to-student ratio has decreased. There has been an increase 
of 50 per cent in students since about 1980, whereas there has not 
been an increase in staff, and the equality of education is very 
much at stake, Mr. Minister. The students are aware of that and so 
is the staff. 
 
So I would ask, and I has asked you, Mr. Minister, that in addition 
to this, that you provide the information as soon as possible, 
preferably even today if possible, to the administration, so that 
they can go ahead and know exactly what’s in the budget - I’m 
expecting that you have provided in the budget - so that they can 
go ahead with their negotiations. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Program to Encourage Use of Seat Belts 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as minister responsible 
for the auto fund, and I’m both pleased and proud to announce in 
the House today a new program to help protect the lives and health 
of Saskatchewan motorists and passengers. Beginning on April 2, 
1988, a comprehensive program to encourage drivers and 
passengers to use their seat belts will begin. I’m pleased to tell the 
members of this house that since 1986, seat belt usage has 
increased to 72 per cent from 60 per cent. This we all should be 
proud of, but we must not stop here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, simply put, seat belts save lives. It could be the life 
of a child, a spouse, and a loved one. The chances of serious injury 
or losing a loved one in a vehicle accident can so easily be reduced 
by buckling up. 
 
I see this program as a real step in the direction of protecting the 
future of Saskatchewan motorists. Mr. Speaker, we owe this to our 
children, our youth and our families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me just make a very brief 
comment on the minister’s statement. It is not of any surprise to 
the members on this side of the House that seat belts do indeed 
save lives. That is a statement that was made several years ago 
when it was the former government, the New Democratic 
Government, that introduced a legislation which has saved all 
these lives. And I think for the record, Mr. Speaker, and the record 
will show that each and every one of those members opposite, 
including the member who just spoke, voted against that. 
 
Now I’m pleased, I’m pleased - yes, it’s right, Mr. Minister - I’m 
pleased that there has been such a major conversion. It is nice to 
know that even those dinosaur-like people on that side of the 
House will from time to time admit that they have made a mistake. 
If only they would do the same with regard to the destruction and 
the havoc that they have caused on our health care programs and 
our education system, I think, Mr. Speaker, this province would be 
far better off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like you to review the 
remarks from the hon. member that has just spoken. He had 
pointed out that each and every one of us on this side of the House 
had stood and voted and spoke against seat belts in this province. I 
think that you will find that there were many, or most of us, 99 per 
cent of us, were not, on this side of this Assembly, or in opposition 
at that particular time, that did not vote or speak against that seat 
belt legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I have listened to 
the member’s point of order with care, and I believe that he has 
made his point and we’ll move on to  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

233 
 
 

the next order of business. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this 
opportunity to say a few words in support of the Speech from the 
Throne, and the mover and the seconder. 
 
I also want to say to all Saskatchewan people who may be 
watching this proceeding today in the legislature, to listen very 
carefully to what I’m about to say with respect to democracy, with 
respect to families, about decency and fairness, and about the 
many challenges and, indeed, the alternatives that we face today in 
the legislature and in society. 
 
The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, is about families. And 
many people in the province are worried about what threatens 
families today - what are the dangers; what do we need to do, 
particularly in this legislature; what are the temptations; what are 
the rules; what are the guile-lines that we’re going to provide our 
children with respect to fairness, with respect to decency, with 
respect to principles that hold families together? That, Mr. Speaker 
is the essence of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
This Speech from the Throne is about families and communities in 
a province built around family values, and about the respect that 
family members have for themselves and each other. The family is 
the corner-stone of this country, and sound families are the 
corner-stones of this government. 
 
We had a prime minister from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 
late Hon. John George Diefenbaker. Mr. Diefenbaker understood 
Saskatchewan families, he understood pioneers, he understood 
them rural and urban, and he put forward a significant Bill of 
Rights in this country. And the first paragraph of his Bill of 
Rights, if I can paraphrase, said this: this country is founded upon 
the principles that acknowledge the supremacy of God, the dignity 
of man, and the role of the family in a nation of free men and free 
women. 
 
That man was from Saskatchewan. That was the prime minister of 
Canada, the only prime minister we have had in this country, and 
he talked about values. He had the courage to say that this country 
is founded upon the principles that acknowledge the supremacy of 
God and the dignity of man and the role of the family in a nation 
of free men and free women. And it meant rural and urban, it 
meant youth and senior, it meant poor and wealthy, it meant all 
religions, it meant all races and it meant fairness and decency and 
respect, and it meant ethical. 
 

The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, talks about our 
priorities, it talks about health and education and agriculture and 
employment opportunities - jobs. That’s what it’s all about. And it 
also talks about building communities for strong families and 
protecting families, which is the essence of this legislature as far as 
I am concerned - rules for fairness, rules for decency, and rules to 
protect families, and indeed individuals. 
 
I’m not going to reiterate everything that was in the Speech from 
the Throne, but I want to touch on four or five things and then I 
want to comment on the alternatives and some of the challenges 
that we face. 
 
On those four issue, I want to say, in health care, clearly nobody 
can deny that we have practically doubled the funding going into 
health care in this province since we took office - from 
$700-and-some million to over $1.2 billion. There has never been 
a stronger commitment to honest, straightforward, fundamental, 
scientific medicare than we see today in this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have taken it on, Mr. Speaker, and we are defending it and we 
are building on it and we are spending indeed one-third of our 
entire budget on health care - for seniors, for the youth, for 
children. And we are building hospitals, we’re building nursing 
home capacity like it’s never been built before. In new technology, 
we removed extra billing for seniors and for people all across this 
province. 
 
We spend almost $1,200 per man, woman, and child. We spend it. 
That’s the largest, if not the second largest, in the entire nation and 
in the history of this country and indeed the history of 
Saskatchewan - total commitment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say . . . just add this. And we have 
such a commitment to medicare and health care in this province 
that we have the courage to fix it where it needs to be fixed. And 
they’ll raise the issue, well for Heaven’s sake, you’re charging 
people now differently than you did before with respect to drugs 
and prescription drugs, and you shouldn’t have touched that. 
 
I have yet to meet a health care professional who didn’t say we 
shouldn’t examine that. Almost a hundred million dollars a year 
on free prescription drugs, and the number one challenge we have 
in society is drug abuse and crime that goes with it, and we’re 
going to turn out a hundred million dollars a year on free 
prescription drugs. Have the courage to face it and get a hold of it - 
that’s honesty with respect to health care. And we have, and we’re 
proud of it, and we’re going to do more. And that’s part and parcel 
of an entire task force that we’re going to have on health care. 
 
So I mention it, Mr. Speaker, health is number one, and the health 
care system and the hospitals and medicare, and the seniors and 
the youth and all the challenges they face, have never had such a 
financial commitment ever in the history of this country that 
they’ve got right now. And you’re going to see it again when the 
Minister of Finance delivers his budget tomorrow. 
 
(1445) 
 
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

234 
 
 

A massive commitment to health care and facilities and the right 
things in the right places, and new technology dealing with drug 
abuse, dealing with rehabilitation, dealing with housing, dealing 
with acute care, dealing with all the demands - and I mention it so 
that nobody can say that it’s not the case. 
 
And if you want to argue about how we deal with drug abuse, 
that’s fair argument. But let there be no argument that we deal 
with it. It’s extremely important we deal with it, because if you 
don’t deal with it you could pour hundreds and hundreds of 
millions of dollars and just patch up a problem that is deep rooted 
like a cancer. We’ve got to get at it. 
 
Secondly with respect to education, I can only say the same. 
You’ve never seen so much money dedicated to education and the 
proper facilities, whether they’re new technical schools like we’ve 
seen in Prince Albert, or new university facilities; whether they’re 
geological sciences or a new agriculture college or new high 
schools, the combination - distance, education, and training - we 
are prepared to educate and we are prepared to have our children 
compete with the rest of the world. And they should be able to 
read and communicate and know mathematics at least comparable 
to those in North America and the major competing parts of the 
world. 
 
And we’re going to do that, Mr. Speaker, dedicated to doing that - 
spending the money, doing it right. And if we have to change the 
curriculum, and if we have to change what’s taught at technical 
schools, that takes some courage, but you should do it to be 
relevant - to be relevant, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I would just hope that the member from Moose Jaw North 
would just bear with me as I go through this. Thank you. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the third is agriculture, and we said, Mr. 
Speaker, that agriculture is the backbone of the province, and we 
are going to put our treasury on the line, we’re going to put our 
reputation on the line and build in agriculture. We have done that, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to agriculture is unlike any other 
commitment you’ve seen in the history of the province or in the 
history of the country with respect to money, with respect to 
facilities, with respect to new programs, with respect to the 
balance between livestock and grain and the new technology an 
biotechnology. Not only a new College of Agriculture, and not 
only billions of dollars that we have out from the provincial 
treasury to agriculture, but we have done it across the board in 
terms of education, technology, contributions to agriculture, 
contributions all across the piece, Mr. Speaker, and it’s extremely 
important to this province and it fits with health care with 
education, and with the backbone for the people and the families 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The fourth one, Mr. Speaker, is the whole question of jobs and 
employment. I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that we have if not the 
best record in western Canada, it is among the best record for job 
creation in the last six years. New jobs, economic opportunities, 
and we have focused heavily on those with all kinds of programs 
in every  

community involving the public sector, involving the private 
sector, involving all kinds of programs, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 
that we can compete. And I’m going to list some of them later. 
 
But I would go back and look at the record - and I just throw it out 
to the members opposite and to the public generally - if you want 
to look at health care and education, agriculture and jobs, those 
four, and compare it to anything else that has happened in the 
history of Saskatchewan, or anything that’s going on across the 
country today, I would say that our commitment is number one. 
And you’ll see the financial commitment is phenomenal, Mr. 
Speaker, and we dedicate ourselves and our treasury and indeed 
our entire political reputation on those four, on the corner-stones 
of the Saskatchewan families. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a couple or three things that 
I believe that are worthy of noting. I say this because whenever I 
get into the essence of what Saskatchewan is all about, I want to 
have the ear of the Saskatchewan public and indeed the ear of the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the members 
opposite will keep telling the public that there is no commitment 
to agriculture, there’s no commitment to education, there’s no 
commitment to health care. And if you add up all the information 
and all the statistics and all the financial endorsements and policy 
that we’ve put together, Mr. Speaker, it’s massive. And they will 
go on to say that you can’t believe this. And they said it in ’82 and 
they said it in ’86. And when they get into real trouble, Mr. 
Speaker, then they even go a little ways beyond telling the facts as 
they are. They’ll stretch it sometimes, Mr. Speaker, but they’ve 
sometimes stretched the rules too far. We’ve seen it in here, and 
we see it in the public. 
 
And I just want to remind the people of Saskatchewan what’s 
important to Saskatchewan people. I started this presentation by 
saying, it’s families and it’s fairness and it’s decency and it’s 
honesty and it’s principle and it’s leadership for the rest of the 
community. And they want to see that in the way we operate. 
They want to see it in education, in health, in agriculture, and the 
kinds of things that we’re doing building communities. They want 
to see that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well it bothers us, Mr. Speaker, to hear, and in the media, that we 
have people who have been cabinet ministers and people who 
have been elected to this legislature, stand up and give an example 
of some of the worst kind of politics that we can see. And the 
children ask: is that what we should be doing? The young people 
ask: is that the example that we should set, that we should follow? 
And the senior citizens ask: is that what the NDP Party is all 
about? Is that it? You know what I’m referring to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week the president of the NDP Party of Saskatchewan 
admitted that there was vote buying, admitted that they were 
buying votes. And he went on to say, which is very interesting, 
Mr. Speaker, that not only was it evident that this was happening, 
but he went on to say that it’s okay to buy the vote as long as the 
people are  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

235 
 
 

poor. So he acknowledged the principle, the principle for all the 
children and all the seniors and all the families to see, that yes, we 
got caught buying the votes; and yes, we’ve been doing it in the 
riding of Shaunavon for some time, but it’s okay as long as the 
people are poor. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is about families 
and about decency and about fairness and about example. And the 
president of the NDP Party of Saskatchewan, who want to talk 
about helping the poor and helping families and helping natives 
and helping all kinds of people, says it’s okay to buy their vote, 
which is not fair in democracy; and then he goes on to say, and not 
only did we get caught - not only did we get caught, Mr. Speaker - 
but in fact it’s okay if we do this, it’s okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. I ask 
the hon. members to allow the Premier to continue. In the forum 
of this Legislative Assembly the odd interruption, when emotions 
run high, of course we overlook, but not the constant type of 
interruption which we’ve been getting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know the member 
from Quill Lake won’t want to hear this, but let me just go through 
the argument. Let me just go through the argument. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the president of the NDP Party of 
Saskatchewan says it’s okay to buy the vote as long as they’re 
poor, what do the children ask? What do the young people ask in 
this province that are looking for guidance; what do they say? Is it 
okay to buy votes as long as we can find the poor? One young 
person asked, they said . . . well imagine the next campaign 
strategy school put on by the president of the NDP Party of 
Saskatchewan. They’re going to hold a school for all the 
candidates and he’s going to say, now here are the rules, kids; here 
are the rules we play when we get into campaigning. He says, first 
of all it’s okay to cheat as long as they’re poor. And a young 
person puts up his hand and says, well, Mr. President, who are the 
poor, which ones? He’ll say, well it depends on how many you 
need. How many do you need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Who are the poor, who are the poor, Mr. 
Speaker? People on welfare could be poor - people on welfare. 
Students could be classified as poor, so it’s okay to buy their 
votes. Is that what he teachers them on campuses at the University 
of Regina or the university of Saskatoon or technical schools or in 
high schools - it’s okay to buy their vote because they’re poor? 
 
Immigrants, Mr. Speaker, immigrants could be classified as poor; 
senior citizens could be classified as poor; high school drop-outs. 
What about single parents? We could go through the riding and 
find the single parents. Whether they’re in Elphinstone or whether 
they’re seniors or whether they’re natives, Mr. Speaker, they could 
be classified as poor, and it’s okay to buy their vote as long as 
they’re poor. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker? Can you imagine the president of 
a democratic party standing up in front of  

television, and I saw him do it; in the newspaper, and I’m going to 
quote from him, saying, it’s okay, we’ve been doing it in 
Shaunavon for a long time, and it’s all right to buy the votes as 
long as the people are poor. And that could include virtually 
everybody - volunteer groups, religious groups. How many do you 
need, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And so now the great - once - party of soul and heart, the CCF, is 
now reduced to this - the New Democratic Party, no down 
payment; NDP, no down payment. We’ll buy your votes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And it doesn’t matter what income category 
you’re in - no down payment, we’ll buy the votes, and we’ll find a 
way to classify you as poor. It’s disgusting, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
pathetic. What an example for democracy. The whole country 
should be, and will be, made aware of this. 
 
And the people of Elphinstone who elected a man - and I say this 
in all sincerity - of integrity for years must be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Devastated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . well, devastated, to think that this 
president of the NDP will stand in his place in front of television 
and radio and say, it’s all right for us to buy the votes of the poor, 
only if they’re poor. Well obviously you can extend it, Mr. 
Speaker, to almost anything - 15 per cent of the poorest ridings. I 
mean, it’s all relative. Whatever is necessary, the ends justify the 
means. 
 
And history is full of atrocities, Mr. Speaker, full of atrocities by 
people saying: the end justifies the means; we’ll do this on behalf 
of the poor; we’ll confiscate land on behalf of the poor; we’ll take 
all this and do it on behalf of the poor. We’ll tear down cities on 
behalf of the poor because it convinces them that they’re 
self-righteous and that they can do these things. And they’re sitting 
in the place, in 1988, and saying it’s okay. And the children of this 
province are looking - are looking at the NDP and saying, where is 
the principle? Mr. Speaker, I know they don’t want to hear this, 
but I believe they should hear it. You should listen very carefully, 
extremely carefully because the principle of this goes to the heart 
of democracy. 
 
(1500) 
 
Well, let me just read how bad it can be. On a CBC interview, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Gruending was interviewing an Elphinstone couple, 
and I quote: 
 

Was it when Mr. Lingenfelter himself came here that you 
decided to take out a membership? The man said, “Yes, I 
did.” 
 
Gruending: Was it a big sacrifice to buy a membership? Was 
it a difficult thing to spend your money on? The woman said, 
“Well we were a little short at the time, but it will help 
maybe get a vote for him and get him so he can help us.” 

 
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

236 
 
 

Mr. Gruending: Did you actually have the money to buy the 
membership from Mr. Lingenfelter? 
 
The man: Not really; we didn’t have the money to buy it, but 
we did to help him out. 
 
Gruending: So what did he say when you wanted to be a 
member but didn’t have the money? What did he say about 
that? 
 
The man: It’s okay. I’ll collect later on. 
 
Gruending: Has he been back to collect? 
 
The man: No he hasn’t. 
 
Asked, Mr. Lingenfelter said this: My recollection is that 
they purchased their memberships and they’re excited about 
coming to the convention and getting involved in the 
process. 
 
Mr. Gruending: They told me they were short of money. The 
lady said she was short of money, then the man said they 
didn’t have the money, and that you purchased it and said it 
would be all right and they could pay for it at some time in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: Well that’s right, and that’s the 
discrepancy that I’m talking about, Dennis, but I think there 
may be circumstances here that, if we were to go back there, 
could get this sorted out. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lingenfelter goes on to say, and this is the 
president of the NDP Party of Saskatchewan, the president. This is 
not somebody that hasn’t been involved in politics. And he goes 
on to say that we have been doing this as party policy in his riding 
of Shaunavon for some time, in his former constituency. And I 
quote the Leader-Post, March 23, 1988: 
 

In his former constituency of Shaunavon, Lingenfelter said 
the party had a policy of paying the membership fee for 
those who couldn’t afford it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, here’s Mr. Lingenfelter: 
 

I would be very disappointed if we were excluding people 
only for the fact they didn’t have enough money to buy a 
membership. It seems like a silly thing for a social 
democratic party to be concerned about. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, even, even some members of the NDP found it 
appalling. Gloria Blanchard found it appalling. Mr. McKeown 
didn’t believe it was honest. He said, I think it’s foreign to us, and 
it’s never been cleared up, and I would not want to use that. And I 
would suggest anyone using it has got motives other than joining 
up for the party. I mean everybody can see through it. 
 
But the point is, he says it’s okay as long as they’re poor. The 
principle of cheating is okay as long as they’re poor. And Mr. 
Romanow said, and the leader, the leader of the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, went on to say, and this is classic: 
 

My own personal belief is that the party memberships should 
be paid for by individuals on their own. On a party basis 
there may be an argument for subsidization based on need. 

 
Well is that what you call cheating, subsidization based on need? 
If people have low income, Mr. Speaker, if they have low income, 
we can have subsidization based on need to get a hold of their 
votes? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t recall, I can’t recall at a time in 
Saskatchewan’s history, or indeed the country’s history, when 
people have stood up that were prominent people and said, it’s 
okay to cheat, and justified it. Not only did they get caught, but 
they said it’s okay. 
 
And I said last night to the people of Elphinstone and the people of 
Saskatoon Eastview and to the entire province. I know that a large 
number of you have voted NDP in the past, but look at what your 
party stands for, look what the president stands for, and look at 
what the leader stands for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I take the president of the NDP Party and his 
principles, they’re his principles, and then I go to the leader of the 
NDP Party, Mr. Speaker, the new leader, and I look at his 
principles, and I look at the poor, the poor, and I want the whole 
province to look at how the Leader of the Opposition, the leader of 
the NDP treats the poor. 
 
When they were in trouble at 20 per cent interest rates, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP and the leader was government, and people 
were losing their homes and their farms at 20 per cent interest 
rates, and the poor were suffering, every family was suffering, and 
they didn’t raise a finger to help them, not one dime, one dime, 
okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition might not want to hear this, but I’m 
going to go through it with them anyway. Okay, you want to hear 
this. When they were in trouble, the NDP didn’t help and the 
people threw them out, okay; they said they wouldn’t help. They 
talked about the poor all the time, but they wouldn’t help, and then 
there’s some evidence that shows up later why maybe they didn’t 
help them, Mr. Speaker, why maybe they didn’t help them. 
 
Do you know what they did? They’d go in and they’d buy their 
farm land - designed by the new NDP leader - buy their farm land 
from the folks that were poor, right; hard up; they’d take their land 
and then they’d offer it to the children at twice the price. That’s 
how they treated the poor. They bought a million acres. They went 
in there and they’d but it, Mr. Speaker, and they would offer it at 
twice the price. So as long as they could make some money on it, 
if they could speculate on the backs of the poor in agriculture, it 
was okay; it was okay. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s the real rub, here’s the real rub - and 
they don’t want to hear this, Mr. Speaker, but I have to share this 
with the public. We found out, Mr. Speaker, we found out that the 
leader, leader of the NDP, the new leader, was responsible for, and 
with his partner, initiating foreclosure actions against people who 
were poor, against farmers and home owners who couldn’t pay 
their bills, and they did that as long as somebody would  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

237 
 
 

pay them enough to do it. 
 
And they got a contract with the Bank of Nova Scotia and the law 
firm - I’ll use the name of the law firm. Can’t use the name of the 
law firm, but we all know the name of the law firm - the name of 
the man from Riversdale and the name of the man from Regina 
Westmount. And, Mr. Speaker, they would initiate foreclosure 
actions. I’ve got letters on my desk, Mr. Speaker, from farmers 
who said that same law firm initiated foreclosure action again. 
And it’s all right to do it for the poor and on the poor, if you get 
enough money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you . . . do you get the scenario? When interest 
rates were really high, they didn’t help, but they knew that it 
would help them, okay? They bought land from farmers that were 
hurting, and they could speculate on it and then sell it to the kids 
and make money, and they went around talking about how they 
were profiting on this speculation with farm land. 
 
And then when they’re in opposition, they’ll go out and they’ll 
foreclose on the poor - home owners and farmers that the Leader 
of the Opposition is involved with his law firm, and he’s never 
answered any of those questions. How many has he foreclosed on? 
How much money is it worth? How much money does that law 
firm donate to the NDP Party? How much money does that firm, 
Mr. Speaker, contribute to buying votes from the people as long as 
they’re poor? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the Leader of the Opposition answer 
the questions that have been put to him in the public newspapers. I 
want to know how long has the Leader of the Opposition’s firm 
been paying a salary to the member from Riversdale? How long? 
And do they still pay a salary? And how much? And just because 
he’s not a partner, is he still associated with that firm? How long 
has your firm had a contract with the bank, Mr. Leader? What 
kind of a contract is it with the bank, Mr. Speaker? Were you part 
of the firm when you signed that contract? When he signed a deal 
with the bank to go foreclose on people and work on behalf of the 
bank, was the Leader of the Opposition in the law firm? Was he? 
Was he a partner in the law firm? 
 
An Hon. Member: — People have a right to know this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well they have the right to know the 
answers. This is man of principle. This is a man who said: vote for 
me, he says, and I’ll protect the farmers. I want to know the 
answers to these questions. How much . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I will just hope that the members opposite could 
sit in their place, and they’ll get a chance to speak when I’m 
finished. 
 
Listen, listen to the truth. Listen to the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I am sure the hon. 
member knows that he must refrain from constantly interrupting 
him and I ask for his co-operation to do so now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just want the Leader of the NDP to answer 
these questions for the public, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve been 
caught cheating and they’ve had  

their hands in the cookie jars too many times. 
 
How much money does the firm, the legal firm, make from this 
contract with the bank, and what per cent of its income comes 
from that contract with the bank? What per cent of your income is 
derived from the contract? What’s the most money per annum that 
the Leader of the Opposition got from the bank? How much? I 
want to know, Mr. Speaker, and I mean the public should know. 
 
How many farmers and farm owners and home owners has your 
firm acted against - that is foreclosures actions - on behalf of the 
bank since the contract was given to the bank? How many people, 
how many home owners, how many farmers? 
 
And I also want to know, Mr. Speaker, and I’d ask the member 
from Riversdale, the new leader, the man of principle, to answer 
this. The man from Riversdale refused, in the legislature when he 
was deputy premier, to help people against high interest rates .He 
wouldn’t help the farmers; he wouldn’t help home owners; he 
wouldn’t help small business against bank interest rates. And I 
want to know: was his firm under contract with the bank, and was 
he contemplating this lucrative contract with the bank when he 
refused to help people against high interest rates? 
 
Did he have another motive? What was his reason for not helping 
people against 20 per cent interest rates? Was he already under 
contract with the bank? How long had he been in contract with the 
bank? And was that party responsible for him saying: there’s 
nothing you can do; it’s international interest rates? 
 
Because today we find that people are going broke and they’re 
being foreclosed on by a large firm in Saskatoon that has two 
members - both NDP, both sit in the legislature - who wouldn’t do 
anything to help the poor, Mr. Speaker. Nothing to help the poor. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne, his response, the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale, stood and said, he said: 
Mr. Premier, do you know that people are suffering because of 
financial stress? They’re suffering because of difficult times. Mr. 
Speaker, how much remorse, how much remorse does the 
member, and the member, and all those members that belong to 
the law firm, feel when they go out and initiate foreclosure action 
against home owners and farmers? How much remorse? How do 
they feel? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear the fact that the 
principles of the NDP Party are nothing but a vacuum. There’s 
nothing there. They can buy the votes if the people are poor 
enough. They can foreclose on the poor if somebody pays them 
enough. They can treat the poor any way they like. They can pick 
the kind of poor they want to deal with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I saw the member of Elphinstone, the former 
premier, resign, I said to myself: that man has integrity; he has 
contributed to this province; he has contributed to this legislature; 
he has contributed to this country. And now, Mr. Speaker, to sit 
back and watch the NDP take over that party, to watch them and 
their  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

238 
 
 

principles, or lack of principles, Mr. Speaker, it’s something to 
see, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a disgrace to the decency and the 
morality of real families in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislature understand the role of families. This 
legislature understands the role of decency and treating people 
fairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition didn’t admit and didn’t 
talk about any of the things that the president does, didn’t talk 
about any of the things that he has done. He never answers any of 
the questions, Mr. Speaker, he never addresses them. 
 
(1515) 
 
Wouldn’t you think it would only be fair to public questions that 
have been issued that the NDP would answer them, just come out 
and answer, tell us the truth, fill in the blanks? They just sit there 
and hold their heads down. The whole province can look at them. 
They will not answer the questions - just answers about your 
leader and about your president: how long has it being going on; 
how much money did it cost; how much money have you made; 
how long have you been in contract with the bank? Just answer the 
questions; answer them. Well I think the public deserves to know, 
Mr. Speaker. And when we’re talking about where this province is 
going to go in the future, it deserves to know. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, stood in here and said, 
there’s three engines of growth, three engines of growth in this 
province. And he said, this government doesn’t deal with the 
co-operative movement, this government doesn’t deal with the 
public sector, and this government doesn’t deal wit the private 
sector - all three. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t mention a brand-new upgrader in 
Regina. He failed to mention it - in co-operation with the co-ops, 
the largest single project in the history of Saskatchewan, and the 
Leader of the Opposition failed to mention it. Is that fair to the 
public, Mr. Speaker? And he says I am not dealing and working 
with the co-operative movement. How can people believe him? 
He doesn’t tell the whole story. He’s got his president doing a 
whole bunch of things that the people of Elphinstone and the 
people of this province find very, very appalling. And then when 
he talks about the co-op movement, he never mentions the fact 
that we’ve got the largest single project in the history of this 
province taking place right here with the co-operative members all 
across the province, and they’re so proud of that project, very 
proud of that project with the federal government and the 
provincial government - and the co-op refinery is an asset right 
there - very proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member, the leader, speaks up and he 
says, and there’s nothing going on in the public sector. He fails to 
mention a natural gas distribution system - 350 to $400 million 
that wasn’t here before. He didn’t mention it, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, he fails to mention individual line service. All 
across this province, private telephones, he fails to mention it - 
public money. He says, where’s government? Burying power 
lines, water projects, power projects, irrigation projects - 
government - new agricultural colleges, new technical institutes, 
Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition doesn’t mention any of 
those. 
 
And he says, the three engines of growth are gone. And then he 
says, well the private sector, the new small-business people, 
nothing for them. And he links them to trade and says, nobody 
supports the trade. Well I’m going to spend a couple of minutes on 
the trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Small business support trade 9:1 - 9:1. And our initiatives of small 
business have created more economic activity and more jobs than 
anybody in the history of Saskatchewan, and those are the three 
areas of economic growth: the co-operative movement, which is 
the biggest in history; the public movement, which we’re doing 
right across the province; and the small business and private 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t tell the whole story when he has the 
chance. He doesn’t answer the questions of the public when he has 
a chance, and, Mr. Speaker, he even condones the president of his 
party. He even condones it and said, well for the party this would 
be okay, this would be okay. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear about it. They don’t 
want to hear abut it. It’s not . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s something that, 
in public life, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anybody in democracy 
can treat people that way just because they can call them poor. 
And I don’t think they can tell half the story and say that there’s 
nothing going on with co-ops when the biggest project in the 
history of Saskatchewan is right there. People won’t buy that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we go back and we look at families and what 
we’ve done for the poor, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the more 
significant things that you will find in the history of the province 
with respect to people on low income. 
 
I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, that our party has been working 
with people on low income to provide the opportunities that have 
been missed for an awful long time, Mr. Speaker. I want to touch 
on three or four of them to provide the kind of information that 
much of the public would like to see. 
 
I’m going to give you an example - the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan, Mr. Speaker. The poor never had an opportunity for a 
pension. People on small business couldn’t afford one, the public 
couldn’t afford it, seniors - particularly women - couldn’t afford a 
pension. We put together a program, Mr. Speaker, the first in 
North America, to allow the public to participate in a 
Saskatchewan pension program. 
 
We’ve got over 40,000 people participating in that, and they are 
the poor, Mr. Speaker, or those on low income. Significant help, 
significant help - 40,000 of them, and  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

239 
 
 

over 80 per cent of them are women that have asked us to help 
them. 
 
We have increased the supplementary payments to people on low 
income, Mr. Speaker. We have doubled it to $50, and then we 
added a 33 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, we have dealt with 
them in terms of homes, in terms of income, in terms of facilities, 
in terms of legislation, their retirement. 
 
We brought in chiropody programs. We have dealt with them 
across the piece, Mr. Speaker, to provide the most comfort that 
they have seen for generations in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne focuses on families, it 
focuses on decency, it focuses on fairness, it focuses on the rules, 
and it focuses, Mr. Speaker, on the principles. The Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, has not take a position on a whole range 
of issues that face the family. 
 
We’ve said, Mr. Speaker, we will defend - we will defend 
children, Mr. Speaker. We will defend them from abuse, we will 
defend them from pornography and, Mr. Speaker, we will defend 
children against abortion on demand. We’ve said that, Mr. 
Speaker. I have said it; this party have said it. 
 
The NDP stand there and they say they support families and rights 
and fairness, and their party is for abortion on demand - clear and 
simple. Clear and simple. Let’s make it very clear. Their party, the 
NDP Party, is for abortion on demand and has passed resolutions 
to say . . . They don’t want to hear that, but I want to make it clear. 
There’s a clear-cut distinction here, Mr. Speaker. We are not for 
abortion on demand, and we protect families and innocent 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite favour abortion on demand, 
and if they were in power, they would legislate abortion on 
demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. I once more ask the members to refrain from loud 
outbursts and intervening in the minister’s message. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll come back again. This 
Speech from the Throne is about families and about values - 
families and values and ethics and principles. Mr. Speaker, they 
don’t want to hear about it. 
 
I just said, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot endorse abortion on demand, 
and I believe the majority of Saskatchewan people will not support 
it either. But the NDP stands up . . . See, they don’t want to listen, 
Mr. Speaker. They can’t sit and listen to the truth, because the 
whole province can watch me say that the NDP supports abortion 
on demand - and you do, party policy. And one or two of you can 
stand up and say it’s not the case, but I don’t see a change in party 
policy. You don’t change it. And if you had the courage, then 
stand up and change it. I ask you: stand up and endorse life and 
endorse families and endorse fairness and decency and protect 
those that can’t protect themselves. 

Mr. Speaker, our family and the families that we protect in this 
province are very important. I don’t see any change over there. 
They’re not coming out and saying that they will support the life 
of the unborn, Mr. Speaker, and we do. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have taken a clear position with respect to families and with 
respect to children and with respect to life-styles and with respect 
to adoption and with respect to families in general. Mr. Speaker, 
and the NDP is all over the map, all over the map. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they can’t change a thing. I just want - and I’ll wrap 
it up with this, Mr. Speaker - I just want the public to know, I want 
the public to know that they have now come out and they’ve 
endorsed buying memberships, they’ve endorsed buying votes, 
they’ve come out saying that they can do all kinds of things to the 
poor if there’s enough money in it, and certainly if there’s enough 
power in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want the public to know, and I would hope that the 
Leader of the Opposition would answer the questions that the 
public has put to him. I’d hope he’d have the decency and the 
honesty and the courtesy to the public to answer those questions. 
And I hope he comes out and says, this is how I feel about buying 
votes, and this is how I think democracy should work, and this is 
my feeling with respect to all kinds of ethical questions and 
considerations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Speech from the Throne talks about families, it talks about 
building, it talks about health care, and - major commitment - the 
courage to make the changes necessary. And the Leader of the 
Opposition said you can’t have a task force over here. It’s fine if 
he’s on a task force, as long as he’s getting a little bit of money to 
do it. Mr. Speaker, it’s always a little bit of this, isn’t it? Every 
time you look at these things, it’s always a little bit of that, a little 
bit of this. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just say, this Speech from the Throne is 
about families, about health care, about education, about 
agriculture, about building, about technology, about vision for the 
future and - the most fundamental thing - protecting democracy 
and protecting families, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I’ll be 
supporting this Speech from the Throne, and the mover and the 
seconder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, in accordance with a custom in 
this Assembly, I wonder if the Premier, before he takes his seat, 
would accept a question about the very matters that he has raised? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, today we witnessed a 
spectacle in this House the likes of which I never believed I would 
witness as long as I was here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I never thought that I would hear a premier 
of any political party bring the debate in this  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

240 
 
 

Assembly to the low that it was brought here in the last hour, or 
some hour and one-half. Mr. Speaker, people have a right to 
expect more from their Premier than what we saw here today - 
hypocrisy, hypocrisy at its worst, and he knows it, Mr. Speaker. 
This is not a Premier, this is not a leader, this is the signs of a very 
desperate man. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Premier spent 10 minutes - I timed him 
- talking about agriculture, talking about health care, and an hour 
talking about slurs and innuendoes and character defamation, Mr. 
Speaker. Never has any Premier sunk to such depths of 
desperation. 
 
I want to say for the record, Mr. Speaker, that never, and the 
record will show, has the Leader of the Opposition acted on behalf 
of a bank in a foreclosure action in this province. Never. And 
when the Premier, who makes these accusations, is asked if he 
would take a question, he runs and he hides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we asked him the question, we asked him the 
question that in view of his condemnatory remarks, would he 
undertake to this House that if any one of his members, cabinet or 
private members, have acted or been associated with any action in 
a foreclosure on a farm home and a farm family and the farm . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did he say? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — He stayed mum. He hid. He wouldn’t even 
respond. In the true tradition of this Premier since he became the 
Premier of this province, he runs and he hides. And we will ask 
that question again. We shall ask that question again. 
 
(1530) 
 
We listened here today, Mr. Speaker, to the preaching of a 
desperate man. And it was interesting because as I listened, I 
happened to catch an article here about another preacher who’s 
been preaching. His name is Jimmy Swaggart. This man has been 
preaching somewhat the same kind of message as this Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, and his parishioners have told him that they will not 
allow him to preach for at least a year. I say to the Premier, he 
ought to at least give the people in Saskatoon Eastview and 
Elphinstone the opportunity to say that to him as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That is not . . . it is not any sign of decency 
of commitment to democracy to keep people in a constituency, as 
has been the case in Eastview, waiting for nine months to elect 
their representative to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to this Jimmy Swaggart of Saskatchewan 
politics that he should grow some backbone and show the decency 
that people of this province have learned to expect of their 
leadership, and call those by-elections so that the people could 
speak and make a judgement on his policies and the kind of 
statements that he has been making. 

He spoke of democracy; he spoke of decency. And I ask, what is 
decent or what is democratic about one of his ministers saying to 
the people of the cities of Regina and Saskatoon and Prince 
Albert: I know you want the ward system, but I don’t care if you 
want it, I’m going to take it away from you. That’s not democratic. 
 
The Premier, in those 10 minutes that he talked about policies of 
his government, spoke about families. Words, Mr. Speaker, cheap 
words. That’s all. Because what is the record? Is it a commitment 
to families when government policies of lack of government 
policies are causing greater number of children and families to 
have to depend on the food bank to get their groceries? That’s not 
a commitment to families. That’s not moral. That’s immoral. 
 
Is it a commitment to families, Mr. Speaker, and is it moral that 
children in this province go to bed hungry at night? For shame. Is 
it a commitment to families when there are people in this province 
who cannot provide the essentials to their children because of 
either low incomes or lack of jobs? Is it a commitment to families 
when we have young people by the thousands, in the last three 
years, leaving this province, breaking up their families because 
they find there is no future for them here and they have to go 
somewhere else to find a job. Mr. Speaker, this is the reality and 
not the cheap words of the Premier opposite - hypocrisy. 
 
He spoke of health care in those 10 minutes that he bothered to 
talk about policies of the government. But he didn’t mention the 
14,000 people who are in pain or in fear because their cancer 
surgery has been delayed. Fourteen thousand people in Regina and 
Saskatoon waiting to get into a hospital, but there are no beds for 
them. He didn’t mention that. Thirty-four thousand dollars a day, 
the Deputy Premier will know, this government spends on empty 
office space in the name of privatization. If they would spend that 
money on hospital beds, it would provide 84 hospital beds a day 
for those people waiting on those waiting lists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — But no, it’s far more important, it’s far 
more important to these decent folk over there to pay off their 
friends politically through this patronage system of government 
that they have established and created in this province of ours. 
 
They tear the health system down, they destroy the children’s 
dental plan so that thousands of children no longer have dental 
care. They destroy a prescription drug plan so that now there are 
many, many families and senior citizens who have to make a 
choice on whether they’re going to go buy their groceries, or buy 
their prescription drug plan. Is that moral? Is that decent? Is that 
for the families, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No, no it’s not. Now they 
say, well we’re going to have a task force. They tear it down and 
they know they’re in trouble and they put up a task force which 
has yet to be named, in order to try to provide some cover behind 
which the Premier can again go and hide. 
 
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

241 
 
 

They tear the health system down, they destroy the children’s 
dental plan so that thousands of children no longer have dental 
care. They destroy a prescription drug plan so that now there are 
many, many families and senior citizens who have to make a 
choice on whether they’re going to go buy their groceries or buy 
their prescription drug plan. Is that moral? Is that decent? Is that 
for the families, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No, no it’s not. Now they 
say, well we’re going to have task force. They tear it down and 
they know they’re in trouble and they put up a task force, which 
has yet to be named, in order to try to provide some cover behind 
which the Premier can again go and hide. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, members of the government, and today in 
particular the Premier, have spoken a great deal about morality 
and about moral values, and I want to speak about that for a 
minute. And I say that’s fine. We should all spend more time 
reflecting on policy issues, keeping moral values in mind. I don’t 
argue with that. And I agree with those who say that politics in 
Saskatchewan is a very . . . in a very large extent about moral 
issues. But I say to you, sir, that simply to speak of morality and 
moral values is easy, but it can be very hollows, as I’m afraid the 
Premier’s comments were today in this debate and his members 
before him, if there is nothing of substance to back up those 
comments. Talk is cheap. Action and policy is the real test. 
 
Is it not immoral, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for political leaders to 
deliberately promote suspicion and intolerance and hate? We live 
in a society of many minorities - the ethnic minorities, economic 
minorities, and social minorities. And I have always believed that 
they had an equal right to share equally in the benefits of being 
Canadians without any kind of discrimination. I would have hoped 
that everyone who would be elected to this Assembly would 
believe likewise. The poor should be just as important in our 
society as someone who is wealthy. People who may be 
handicapped, or very old, or native, or have a particular sexual 
orientation should not be singled out for discrimination, as the 
Premier has so unwisely done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Our society, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it is to 
survive and grow and prosper, has no room for bigotry and 
prejudice and intolerance. 
 
High moral values must include, Mr. Deputy Speaker, love and 
tolerance and understanding and compassion. And yet there are 
those who go around in the name of God, yet preaching hate and 
intolerance and misunderstanding. It is a sad statement on the 
leadership displayed by any major public figure when the leader of 
that particular political party or the government can find the time 
to meet with and support the likes of the Paul Camerons and the 
Reverend Paul Marx’s, as this Premier has done, and provide them 
credibility, which he has done. 
 
He can find time to meet with them, but he can’t find time to meet 
with representatives of poor people who come to the legislature to 
speak on behalf of the people who they work for. They are not 
important enough, and they are of  

no concern to this Premier and this government. 
 
Now these people who I have mentioned, these two messengers, 
Mr. Speaker, are travelling this province as messengers of hate and 
intolerance, and I regret very much that members of this 
government have helped to give them more profile and helped to 
profile their message. There is nothing moral in that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I regretted very much the other day, when I discovered and I 
read the newsletter, when the Reverend Paul Marx was attacking 
certain Roman Catholic clergy in this province, because I know 
them well. We has attacking them slanderously and unjustly and 
unfairly. And I know their commitment to the well-being of the 
people who live here and the people who they work for and with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are we to assume, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that since the premier has condoned these people and given them 
the profile, that he has therefore condoned what they have said 
about these leaders of the church in this province? There was a 
newspaper article which recently said that those who we listen to 
for advice say much about every one of us. And I say to the 
Premier, stop being the Jimmy Swaggart of Saskatchewan politics. 
Stop saying one thing and doing something else. 
 
One of the things that Saskatchewan people want more than 
anything else out of their politicians is honesty. They haven’t had 
that from this government for six years. Don’t just talk about 
moral values; apply them in public policy. It’s not good enough 
for politicians to say they are against or for abortions and leave it 
at that. That’s cheap worlds too. That’s cheap words too. 
 
Now it so happens that because of my religious beliefs, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I don’t support abortion on demand. That’s no 
secret, and people respect my right to have that. Others have a 
different view, and I respect the fact that they have a different 
opinion. But I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that regardless of what 
position some people take, and regardless of my position, and 
regardless of what the law might be, there will be those who will 
seek an abortion. And therefore I think we have a moral obligation 
to strive to reduce the number of those people who might seek an 
abortion for various reasons. 
 
And the way that that is done, Mr. Speaker, is by providing the 
kinds of support services and the quality of life in society which 
will achieve that - family life education programs of appropriate 
funding; the prevention of unwanted pregnancies by appropriate 
funding for programs for that; greater awareness of the alternatives 
to abortion - counselling; adequate support for women wanting to 
continue their pregnancies; making sure there are jobs; making 
sure that people have an adequate income so that their children 
don’t have to go to bed hungry at night. 
 
Those are the parallels that have to be made. In this province, 
under the leadership of this unstatesmanlike Premier, all of those 
programs in the last year have either  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

242 
 
 

been eliminated, or cut back, or done away with altogether. And I 
say to you, sir, it is wrong. It is morally wrong to take the position 
that the Premier has taken without addressing these other 
important problems and the needs of people at the same time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I for one am determined to do both, and I 
know many others who do the same, and I regret very much that 
the Premier has ignored the needs that prevent people wanting to 
seek an abortion - in fact, has taken many of those programs away. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is something immoral; there is something 
immoral when the government allows policies which cause 11,000 
people in Saskatoon and 14,000 in Regina together not to be able 
to get a hospital bed. There’s something immoral about a 
government which wastes tens of millions of dollars on needless 
advertising and empty office space and patronage, while young 
people graduate from our schools - high school and 
post-secondary - in despair, in despair because there are no jobs 
available for them. And yet this throne speech made not one single 
comment about the need for job creation programs for these young 
people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, but they’re going to change the ward 
system. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — They’re going to change the ward system, 
and they’re going to legislate against made dogs. 
 
Well last Sunday, last Sunday was an important day. It was an 
important day in the Christian world; it was Palm Sunday. And as 
I listened to the sermon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was reminded of 
Jesus Christ who came to Jerusalem, and how the people stripped 
all of the palms and took the leaves and laid them on the ground so 
that he could pass over this carpet, and a few days later those same 
people stoned him and beat him and spat on him and had him 
crucified. 
 
And I was reminded while listening to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
of another incident that had just taken place in northern Ireland; it 
showed us that not much had changed. People at a funeral, using 
those teachings of our Lord Jesus at the funeral, turned on two 
men and they beat them and they stoned them and they spat on 
them and they shot them. 
 
Let us remember from this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: simply uttering 
the words isn’t good enough. And unfortunately that’s all we 
heard from our Premier today, simply uttering of the words. Love 
and tolerance and understanding must be practised in all of our 
endeavours, including the political process and public policy. It is 
just not good enough to talk about families and yet turn a blind eye 
to growing unemployment, to discrimination against our native 
people and the likes of that. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I enter this debate on behalf of the 
constituency of Regina North East. I’m representing their views 
and their concerns here as they have been  

expressed to me. And that constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 
a cross-section of families, which is quite representative of 
probably anywhere in Saskatchewan by and large, and they have 
passed judgement on this government. 
 
They have passed judgement on this government and they have 
said that they’re concerned. They’re concerned about the lack of 
leadership that exists here today. There is concern about the lack 
of jobs. There’s concern about the betrayal of rural Saskatchewan 
and rural families, and there is concern about high and unfair 
taxes, and there’s concern about dishonesty in government. 
There’s concern about incompetence to important and essential 
programs which this government became identified with. 
 
This throne speech said nothing to address any of those concerns. 
In all of my 14 years as a member of this legislature, never have I 
witnessed such a display of empty rhetoric as was evidenced in 
that throne speech on that throne speech day. 
 
It was the sorriest speech I can ever recall. Do you know why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Because it is a speech of that government that is 
burnt out. It is a government that has nothing left. It is a speech 
that kind of indicated that there is a government that almost lives 
under a death wish - almost like an admission of defeat. Ministers 
are on the front benches simply putting in time and wishing that it 
would all get by and be over with quickly so that somehow they 
can go and do something else. 
 
That speech showed no initiative. It showed no imagination. It 
showed no will to deal with the real issues of the day. And just a 
small point: the fact that most of the attention on that speech, the 
day of the speech and the day after, some proposed legislation to 
deal with mad dogs received more attention than anything else, I 
think speaks in a very strong way as a statement. The statement 
made was that there was little else of substance in this throne 
speech, and therefore that became the focus. 
 
Now it may have been the great wizardly creation of the Minister 
of Urban Affairs, a little dictator, to put that into the throne speech, 
but I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it didn’t go unnoticed 
by the public of Saskatchewan. They know that this government is 
done. They tried it last June. Last June they brought in a budget 
late, when it should have been brought in before April 1. 
 
They knew that they were acting illegally, speaking of morality. 
They knew that they were spending money by the tens of millions 
by order in council without a budget, and it was illegal. But they 
were prepared to carry on until legal counsel said in a written 
statement that it was illegal, and then panic set it and they had to 
call a session when they would have preferred to leave it until the 
summer. 
 
Why? Because once again they were running and they were 
hiding. They thought they could do all of these callous and 
cold-hearted things that the Minister of Finance’s budget did, and 
if they did it in the summer time, nobody would notice. But they 
did. Everyone in Saskatchewan noticed, and everyone in 
Saskatchewan is saying that the government is wrong. 
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

243 
 
 

They’re proud of the health system which they built by working 
together co-operatively. They weren’t told that it would be 
destroyed if this government was re-elected. 
 
Now that tells you something about why the throne speech was the 
way it was. They thought that they would down-play it, that 
somehow they would down-play the issues and they would go 
away and people would forget. They have not forgotten, because if 
this government thought that the people had forgotten, we would 
have an election in Eastview and Elphinstone today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Everywhere I go, everywhere I go, people 
are asking when is the next election? They’re also asking, is there 
going to be anything left by that time? 
 
These are not isolated pleas by a few stalwart supporters of the 
New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. No, the people of all 
political parties are saying it. That shows you why there was only 
about 100 people at the nominating convention of the 
Conservative Party in Elphinstone last night - because even the 
Conservatives have given up on this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It won’t work. It won’t work - this trying to 
hide from the people because they have made up their mind and 
they will deal with this government when it finally gives them a 
chance. It’s a deliberate attempt to provide some kind of an opium 
which will cause them to forget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying something which has 
been said by others. This province became great. It became great 
because the people who came here and were born here and grew 
up here built it co-operatively. They knew that if they worked 
together and helped each other that they could have one of the best 
education systems in Canada. They knew that if they co-operated 
and worked together they could have and pioneer the best health 
care system probably in the world. They knew that by dividing 
between small-business and working people and farmers, it 
couldn’t be done, and so they built something wonderful here. 
And now it is being threatened, and they want to get back to that. 
 
Now the members opposite, the Conservatives say that’s 
old-fashioned. Well I want to say to you that being your brother’s 
keeper is not any more old-fashioned today than it was seven years 
ago. Co-operation that built this province is the only thing that’s 
gong to continue to build this province. And simply to rely on 
outside people and interests to come in here and do it for us will 
lead us down the path of depopulation and economic depression. 
 
But that’s the path that these people are leading us down. They 
have given up on this concept that people should work together, 
and they’ve said to a company out of Quebec and out of Ontario: 
here, take Sask Minerals which has made money for 
Saskatchewan treasury, take the peat plant in Carrot River, close 
down the saw mill. Do it for us! 

They said to SED Systems: Let Fleet Aerospace buy you and 
things are going to be great. The member over there from 
Kindersley sits, and he made this great statement about a year ago 
when that sale came through, and he said: ah, this is great, no jobs 
will be lost; it will grow and it will expand. 
 
Well what’s the result of this “letting somebody else do it for us" 
approach? The result is that 53 people were laid off. Now another 
bunch have been laid off, so now it’s about 70. Fleet Aerospace is 
holding the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to ransom and it’s saying 
to this government, you’ve got to give us millions of dollars or 
we’re going to pull out. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where are they from, this Fleet Aerospace? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — They’re from Ontario. What happened to 
this minister’s guarantee, this high-flying minister who travels the 
world, and to weddings, and spends no time interested in the 
concerns of the Saskatchewan people? 
 
I say to this House and to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is what 
an Ontario company will do to a Saskatchewan company when it 
buys out, pull its management out and put it into Ontario, lays off 
almost 70 people, who says if you don’t give us millions we’re 
going to shut down, can you imagine what companies from the 
United States will do under the free trade agreement when they 
come in here and begin to buy up Canadian companies? We’re 
gong to become a colony of the economy of the United States and 
the corporations of that country. 
 
And the member from Arm River knows that but he’s afraid to 
admit it, because he is like that Premier who he serves. They don’t 
have the backbone to stand up to the Prime Minister to whom they 
think they owe something and they’re prepared to do anything to 
cave in if the Prime Minister says that they should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying this: 
it took courage to build this province by working co-operatively, 
by using the public sector and the private sector and the 
co-operative sector. People have to decide that they could do this 
themselves, and they did. It doesn’t take any courage to run away 
from that challenge, as this government is doing, and say, we’re 
going to depend on corporate money from somewhere else, and do 
nothing else. That’s going backwards. That’s taking us to a time 
when there was a former Conservative government which did the 
same thing and caused a depression, was part of a depression, is 
going back to an antiquated, old policy that doesn’t work - doesn’t 
work except for those few who are wealthy and powerful and buy 
it up and use it for their own purposes at the expense of the 
citizens and the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take up the time here. I know that 
there’s other members, a member, who want to speak. I simply say 
this. This throne speech is inadequate. It says nothing because this 
government is no longer  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

244 
 
 

capable of dealing with those important issues that face the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
They’re so preoccupied with serving their masters in Ottawa and 
in the large corporate world in the United States and in eastern 
Canada, that they no longer can pay attention to the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, and that’s reflected in that throne speech. It 
is a nothing speech because this has become a nothing 
government. I could not in good conscience possibly support that 
speech because of that, because people of Saskatchewan have a 
right to expect better and to expect more. 
 
And so I close by saying I will not support the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to make a 
few comments in response to the opposition House Leader and 
some of the challenges thrown out by the opposition House 
Leader, and I will try, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take these in order. 
 
He began his remarks this afternoon, attacking the Premier, based 
on the fact that the Premier made statements with regards to the 
Leader of the Opposition and his law practice and somehow 
suggested that, is there someone on this side of the House or is 
there someone else that has done the same thing. 
 
Now let’s carry that through, Mr. Speaker, and let’s look at the 
problem. The problem is now whether or not an individual acts for 
an individual or for a corporation or for a bank or for anything 
else, that is clearly the right of every citizen and clearly the right of 
every lawyer in this province. That is the right. The problem 
comes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the following way. When an 
individual stands up, or when his party stands up, and chastises 
everything that a bank does, or everything that a bank stands for, 
that they are robber barons from Wall Street or from Bay Street; 
that they’re out to take the poor individual farmer’s land away. 
And you don’t hear that from people from this side of the House, 
you hear if from people on that side of the House. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is the word hypocrisy - the word 
hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. It is one thing to stand and act for an 
individual or a financial institution, it is quite another thing to go 
out of the other side of your mouth and say they are bad; they are 
rotten; they are always taking the farmers’ land away; they are not 
good for agriculture. That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
the Leader of the Opposition and that is the challenge for the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
It’s one thing to stand up and say the banks are all bad. But how 
can you, in conscience and ethics, and to avoid hypocrisy, then 
turn around and take money by defending or acting for that very 
institution that you think is inspired by the devil. That’s where 
hypocrisy comes from and that hypocrisy stands on the shoulders 
of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

There’s others over there that I haven’t heard that from that can 
consistently, if they wish, act for whoever they want; but not the 
Leader of the Opposition, when he wants it both ways. The Leader 
of the Opposition can stand up and say that, Mr. Speaker, then he 
deserves to be brandished as a hypocrite, because there’s no other 
description as to what he is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, or the opposition 
House Leader, in his statement says: number two, that there are 
14,000 cancer patients waiting to get into Saskatchewan hospitals 
- 14,000 cancer patients waiting to get into Saskatchewan 
hospitals. Why is it in our system, Mr. Speaker, that people can 
make statements like that, that can go out into the world, not stand 
chastised, not criticized for saying something that he - a former 
health minister of this province, knows full well is not true - 
knows full well is not true. Why does he do it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Why does he do it? Does he do it to say, well this is what I 
believe. Does he do it because he is confused? Does he do it 
because he doesn’t know any different? No, sir, that is not why he 
does it. He does it to mislead the population. And I ask any elected 
official: is that only how you see your function in this Assembly? 
Is that what your function is? Well if it if, Mr. Speaker, then don’t 
stand up and lecture anybody else about ethics, because, is that 
ethical? 
 
Is that ethical to go out and tell somebody - 14,000 people - with 
cancer, dying, cannot get into our hospitals. That’s not true, Mr. 
Speaker. That is clearly false. The waiting time for cancer patients 
is perhaps two weeks. If a person has cancer or suspected of 
cancer, our hospital system, our health care system, takes them in. 
And well it should, Mr. Speaker. That is what it is designed for 
and, quite frankly, it is functioning very well. 
 
But can we, or will we, as a society. And is that the nature of our 
society and how we as leaders of society want to lead our society - 
by innuendo and misrepresentation? Is that what we are about 
here? Is that what we mean to our people back home? Is that why 
they sent us here? Is that why they believed in us? I don’t think so, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Regina North East, the opposition House 
Leader, says, well, the Premier talked about abortion and he talked 
about the principle of abortion on demand, and how folly of him, 
he says. But what did he then counter with, Mr. Speaker? What 
did he counter with? He says, I don’t believe in abortion on 
demand. As if, well, that satisfies my conscience, now I’ll get on 
with life, and while I don’t believe in it, I guess it’s okay for it to 
happen. That’s what he said. Now he says, sure we need some 
assistance to seek family education, or to seek counselling, etc. 
And that’s valid, and nobody disagrees with that. 
 
The problem Mr. Speaker, is this: is that issue, is the issue of the 
right to life of the unborn, is it fundamental that we should deal 
with here, or is it not? Now if we look at us all, we tend to very 
often say, well let’s not deal with that issue because it’s too tough, 
and it’s too political, and it’s got too many sides to it, and there’s 
no agreement. That’s what we say and that’s what he said. I can 
justify it in my  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

245 
 
 

own mind because I don’t . . . in my conscience are clean because 
I don’t believe it myself. But then to sort of say, well, having said 
that now I will leave that subject. What does that make that issue 
in his mind? Are there various arguments on that issue? Clearly 
there are. Is it a difficult issue? Clearly it is, but it is not something 
you can simply walk away from and say, my conscience are clean 
because I said I was against it. And then to stand up and say, we 
are delivering leadership and you are not. Is it a fundamental 
issue? How important is it? What does it meant to me? Then you 
address the question. 
 
Thirdly, the hon. member, the opposition House leader says, 
shame on you, Mr. Premier, for your statements about the 
homosexuals. They must have rights too, he says, and it’s 
important that we guarantee their rights. 
 
The issue, Mr. Speaker, is this. The issue, Mr. Speaker, is this. If 
we only ever look at but one thing and that is the rights of this 
person and not his responsibility to society, and not us as a 
responsibility as legislators to society, then what are we saying 
about that issue? Mr. Speaker, it’s fine to say that we should 
consider the people who are homosexuals and give them the rights 
they ask. Should we give them the right to adopt children? Is that 
an issue? Is that an issue? Clearly it is an issue, Mr. Speaker, and 
clearly it is an issue far greater than the rights of that individual. 
Surely that is also a responsibility and an issue for society as a 
whole. 
 
Is it the right and the right thing to do for us as legislators to 
condone people on TV holding hand sand males kissing in the 
park in Stanley Park, and sort of say, well that’s fine, that’s their 
rights? And we should say nothing about it, because to say 
something about it you are attacking that person’s rights? We are 
more than simply a society that gives rights to each other. We are 
a society that has responsibilities to each other as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I do not want to take my time 
talking totally about those issues because there’s an important 
distinction, I believe, also drawn by the opposition House Leader. 
Because you asked and look at what he said, and we are dealing 
with, I suppose, the fundamental philosophical direction of the 
party on this side of the House versus the party on that side of the 
House. 
 
And while we’ve had the Leader of the Opposition touring the 
province saying, we have learned from ’82; we no longer believe 
some of the things that we believed in ’82. Perhaps Crown 
corporations wasn’t the right way to go; perhaps some of them 
should be sold. Maybe business is more important than we gave it 
credit for. How shallow, Mr. Speaker, how empty the rhetoric! 
Because one after one of the members opposite stand up and what 
do they say? We don’t want businesses coming to Saskatchewan. 
We don’t want people coming here to invest, thank you very 
much, we’ll invest ourselves. 
 
Now who is going to invest by the theory, who is going to invest 
here if we totally shut our walls to any outsider? Who will it be, 
Mr. Speaker? And it will come to the same conclusion that they 
came to from 1971 to 1982. It is the  

government. 
 
They stand and say, you should not have sold the pulp mill in 
Prince Albert - oh, but we have changed our philosophy, but you 
shouldn’t have sold that one. And you shouldn’t have sold another 
one. And we really don’t want outside investment; no thank you, 
no thank you. They’re not welcome, they’re not welcome here. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve heard that song before. They 
wish to somehow sort of lull people into thinking, with their 
leader, by saying, we have changed folks. but have they really 
changed; have they really changed? What do they really stand for; 
what do they really stand for? 
 
(1615) 
 
They want, Mr. Speaker, more Crown corporations. They want the 
ones that they had because they were right. The people didn’t 
understand that, but they were right. We want all the Crown 
corporations that we had and we want to build more. And then 
they want to have . . . and how they would deal with the farmer. 
And did you hear the member from - the opposition House Leader 
say one word, one word about the farmer. No, you didn’t. Not a 
word. Not as much as a word. Never even mentioned the word 
farmer, or agriculture, and then stands up and says, you people are 
not listening, do not care about Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
people - not so much as a single word. 
 
But he does say, Mr. Speaker, we believe the old way is the only 
way. We want to go back to 1982 and before, because that’s what 
they believe, Mr. Speaker. They try to tell you they have changed, 
but what have they said that would in any way suggest that they 
have changed, Mr. Speaker? Nothing. They still want, Mr. 
Speaker, more government to run business, and they want 
government to own the farms. Why? Why, Mr. Speaker, do they 
want that? They want it because their exercise and sense of power 
belongs only to those who run the government. 
 
Now I say to the members opposite, and some of the new 
members opposite, check what is happening around the world. Go 
to New Zealand, socialist government in New Zealand, and what 
are they doing? They are selling off their nationalized industries, 
their Crown corporations. Why? Because they no longer have the 
capital in government tot put into it, number one; and number two, 
they have discovered that it works better if private capital does that 
job. That’s in New Zealand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Go to Australia, go to Australia, socialist government again, doing 
exactly the same thing, Mr. Speaker, socialist government. But 
even if you don’t even believe in those, Mr. Speaker, go to the 
Soviet Union. Gorbachev even is saying the system doesn’t work 
when government owns everything, and what we have to do is put 
it back into the hands of private entrepreneurs. Go to China, and 
that’s exactly what they’re doing in China today as well. 
 
So the world has discovered that, and what do the members 
opposite say? Keep the world away from us. Don’t let the world in 
here with their investment dollars. Don’t let the world in here with 
its trade. But you know  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

246 
 
 

what the worst thing is? Don’t let the world in here with new 
ideas, because that’s really what they’re saying. That is really what 
bothers them more than anything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They want to stay . . . you could take the speeches of the members 
opposite over the last seven days, Mr. Speaker, take the speeches 
of the members opposite, go back 10 years, go back 20 years, go 
back 30 years, and you will see the same words, Mr. Speaker. You 
will hear the same ideas, Mr. Speaker. You will hear the same 
principles, Mr. Speaker, because that is exactly where they are. 
What they believe in - larger government, more Crown 
corporations. They believe in land bank, and they believe in the 
government saying and telling people, we will plan your world for 
you, we will plan your economy for you, and we will go forward 
as we always have before, Mr. Speaker. Then they stand up and 
say, you guys over there, you’re not listening. 
 
The people over here listen, Mr. Speaker, because they are not 
driven by dogmatic principles that were written 150 years ago and 
put into practice in the 1940s. That is exactly, Mr. Speaker, that is 
exactly the problem with the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by saying this. The day after Allan 
Blakeney left this institution, and Allan Blakeney was a - while I 
disagreed with his economic philosophy, Allan Blakeney was a 
credible, credible individual that served very well in this Chamber. 
But even Allan Blakeney, the day after he left this Chamber was 
interviewed on a local television station, and said: I have no 
problem with the government selling Crown corporations. I have 
no problem with that. But the members opposite did not hear, or 
perhaps you must leave the party or leave the legislature before 
you are entitled to make those kind of statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps they should listen, because the words that 
have come from their mouths, the words that have come from their 
mouths have been nothing more than more government, more 
Crown corporations, and for the farmers they say, we will give 
you back the land bank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmer of Saskatchewan have said to them, no 
thank you. The farmers of Saskatchewan in the future will say to 
them, no thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the throne 
speech is consistent. It deals with agriculture, which he never 
mentioned. It deals with Crown corporations in a new direction for 
them. It deals with a new area in health care in education. It deals 
with a new area in health care or in education. It deals with the 
question of trade and whether we will become a colony and the 
borders will go up around Saskatchewan, or whether we dare to go 
out into the world. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House are 
not afraid to go out into the world. We are proud of the men and 
women that work and produce and build in this province, and they 
have done lots of it. 
 
And for that, Mr. Speaker, I support the throne speech, and I 
would hope all others in this House, even some of the members 
opposite that don’t believe, that don’t believe in some of the 
dogmatic rhetoric that their speech-writer gives them, one after 
one after the other. I  

ask some of them to stand up, stand up on principles, Mr. Speaker, 
stand up towards the future, and stand up with this side of the 
House and feel good about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I see by the 
clock that there are very few minutes left in this debate this 
afternoon, but I would like to take one or two of those minutes to 
address some of the issues that have been raised both by the 
Speech from the Throne itself and by the discussion that has taken 
place in this House with respect to that speech. 
 
If I could, Mr. Speaker, I would like to try to draw some of the 
debate back to the world of reality. I would like to get away from 
any scurrilous personal attacks - of which I think we’ve heard 
plenty this afternoon - and instead, I would prefer to deal with 
substance, Mr. Speaker, rather than some of the other matters that 
have unfortunately, in my opinion, dominated some of the 
discussion, especially today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the great joys of my job as an MLA and as 
leader of my party is the opportunity that I have to travel this 
province, to meet and to visit with the real people of Saskatchewan 
in every corner of Saskatchewan, and to listen very intently to 
what they have to say. And in that listening, Mr. Speaker, I hear of 
a Saskatchewan that is friendly and wholesome, where families 
and neighbours really count for something. I hear of a 
Saskatchewan of tolerance and compassion, where there is special 
attention for children and for the elderly and for the disadvantaged, 
and where vital human priorities like education and health care are 
cherished and defended. 
 
I hear, Mr. Speaker, of a Saskatchewan where agriculture and the 
family farm are proudly depicted as our most central and enduring 
economic pillars, and they must be defended. I hear of a 
Saskatchewan that takes pride, Mr. Speaker, in business and in 
enterprise - a competitive Saskatchewan that values initiative and 
self-reliance; a Saskatchewan that is striving for secure and stable 
growth for the future and not flashy quick fixes; a Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, that is yearning for a tax system that is fair, and 
equally important, Mr. Speaker, taxes that are not wasted. 
 
From the real people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I hear of a 
Saskatchewan where government has a legitimate but a limited 
role to play in people’s lives, where government is not Big Brother 
running everything all the time, everywhere, and where those, Mr. 
Speaker, who serve in government can be counted upon to be 
honest and competent and fair. 
 
From the badlands in my own constituency south of Assiniboia, 
Mr. Speaker, to the pine forests north of Ile-a-la-Crosse, what I’ve 
just described in the last moment or two, is what I hear from the 
real people of Saskatchewan, what they tell me about their values 
and about their hopes and their dreams for this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, I do not believe that either 
the present government nor the official  
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

247 
 
 

opposition is living up to the standards and the expectations of 
Saskatchewan people. What this province needs more than 
anything, Mr. Speaker, is that blueprint for the future that we hear 
a lot of talk about in this Chamber, but that blueprint which, in 
reality, does not exist today, a blueprint to build a better future for 
Saskatchewan more in tune with the values and the expectations of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And having that overall blueprint, Mr. Speaker, is fundamentally 
important for the long term because it provides that necessary 
sense of direction. It provides that necessary sense of purpose, and 
it gives you a yardstick by which to measure your progress. 
 
And for far too long, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been drifting 
from day to day, lurching from one crisis to the next, with 
government policy - quite literally in some circumstances - 
government policy being scribbled down on the back of the 
envelope to try to meet the most recent emergency or somehow to 
manoeuvre past the next election campaign. 
 
What we see is an exercise in crisis management or in damage 
control, and it does not appear to me, Mr. Speaker, and I submit 
that it does not appear to a very large number of Saskatchewan 
people, that anyone has been thinking or planning ahead in any 
serious way for the future of our province. The only obvious 
motivation in the ranks of the conservative government is a 
determination to bludgeon the NDP. But once that’s been done, 
they don’t seem to have any game plan or purpose or direction 
beyond that - certainly nothing that’s particularly new or exciting 
for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
The NDP are really the flip side of the same coin, totally 
preoccupied with the short-term gimmicks that are crafted to 
embarrass the government or to exploit every partisan opportunity 
no matter how superficial, no matter how short-sighted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is no foundation upon which to tackle the 
challenges of today, let alone to build a future of stability and 
opportunity for tomorrow. Saskatchewan needs that thoughtful, 
long-term blueprint or game plan that so many members of this 
legislatures talk about, but, Mr. Speaker, which is certainly not yet 
evident in the public policy of this province. 
 
I recognize that the clock is approaching 5:30, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I must inform the Assembly that under Rule 
13(4) it is my duty at this time to interrupt debate and put all 
questions necessary to dispose of the main motion. 
 
(1638) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 32 
 
Devine Pickering 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
Andrew Sauder 

 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Hodgins Neudorf 
Gerich Gardner 
Hepworth Kopelchuk 
Hardy Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
 

Nays — 21 
 
Romanow Simard 
Prebble Koenker 
Rolfes Atkinson 
Brockelbank Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Tchorzewski Lautermilch 
Koskie Trew 
Thompson Smart 
Solomon Van Mulligen 
Mitchell Goodale 
Upshall  
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Justice, be leave of the Assembly: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, March 31, 
1988, it do stand adjourned until Monday, April 4, 1988. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Justice: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move by leave of the Assembly, 
seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 84, hereby appoints the 
Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be granted to 
Her majesty and to consider the ways and means of raising 
the supply. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
  



 
March 30, 1988 

 

248 
 
 

 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:43 p.m. 
 
 


