


















































May 12, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 12, 1988 
 

1289 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 36 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, before supper we were discussing the government’s 
work for welfare programs. And I was making the point, Mr. 
Chairman, that the current strategy of the government in which 
a single, employable social assistance recipient is effectively 
forced to take a job if they want to stay on welfare, in which 
they’re asked to work two weeks on and then go two weeks off 
and earn only $360 a month, Mr. Chairman, is a disgrace in this 
province. Mr. Minister, what that means is that someone who is 
working is not earning a penny more than they would have on 
social assistance — not a penny more. 
 
Mr. Minister, their take-home pay . . . I’ve had an opportunity 
to visit with quite a number of people who are single 
employables on your work for welfare program, and their 
take-home pay — because I’ve looked at the cheques — is $316 
a month. And I say to the minister, shame, because no one can 
live on $316 a month. And this is a person who is working, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I think it demonstrates the real intent behind your work for 
welfare program which I ask you to acknowledge now, and that 
is that that program is intentionally designed to prevent people 
from earning more than they would if they were on welfare. 
That person is making 316 a month, Mr. Minister. Not only are 
they working, but they also lose their Y card; they lose their 
ability to get prescription drugs at no charge; they face 
additional transportation costs while they’re going to work — 
and that is fundamentally unfair. 
 
My question to you is: first of all, how can you justify only 
paying someone $316 a month while they’re working? And 
secondly, Mr. Minister, my question to you; why don’t you, 
instead of creating these short-term jobs where people at most 
are working 20 weeks and then are back on unemployment 
insurance, why don’t you concentrate on creating permanent 
long-term jobs for people on a full-time basis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I disagree with the 
member opposite that working is unfair. I don’t acknowledge at 
any time that it’s unfair to expect someone to work to support 
themselves. We’re talking here about single, employable 
people. 
 
Our calculations are . . . I intentionally designed the program 
that you would make more by working half-time than being on 
welfare full-time, and we do not believe that asking someone to 
support themselves is unfair nor unreasonable. The NDP’s view 
of, you have a right to welfare . . . Yes, you do but you also 
have a responsibility  

to support yourself if you’re given the opportunity. And that’s 
what we’re doing in this program, is giving people an 
opportunity to work rather than insist on their right to draw 
welfare. 
 
I can’t understand . . . Maybe there’s something wrong with the 
way I was raised; maybe there’s something wrong with the way 
my church taught me; and there’s something wrong with the 
way my grandparents taught me values, and my parents; and 
even the education system under Tommy Douglas. There must 
be something wrong with that system because they made me 
into a person who believes that there is nothing illegal about 
work. That work gives you dignity to support yourself. And the 
NDP say that it is wrong to ask people to work, it’s wrong to 
give them a job instead of paying them to do nothing. I just 
don’t understand that. Maybe I’m old-fashioned; maybe the 
NDP have some new ideas that I can’t comprehend. But it 
seems to me that if everybody insisted on their right to draw 
welfare, that nobody would eat. It seems to me that we would 
all starve if we all insisted on our right to draw welfare. 
 
So I would only ask that those people who can work, work to 
the best of their ability and those people who can’t work, we 
will help them to the best of our ability. I don’t understand 
what’s wrong with that. If the member opposite could tell me 
what’s wrong with such a value system maybe I could change 
my mind, but I just can’t understand it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, to begin with, these 
people aren’t on welfare any more. You cut them off welfare 
when they get these two-week-on, two-week-off jobs, which is 
why they lose benefits like their prescription drug costs. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Minister, you may not appreciate it, but I suspect 
that you don’t talk to many single employables on social 
assistance. Now I’ve taken the time since being Social Services 
critic, as my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North did 
prior to myself, in spending a lot of time talking to social 
assistant recipients. Now I can assure you, Mr. Minister, that 
many of these people are not as well off financially when 
they’re working as when they were on social assistance. And 
that’s a disgrace to your government and nothing short of that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to address another issue under this 
work for welfare program before I leave it, and that is your 
clear decision to violate the rules and regulations and federal 
legislation under which you get half the cost of social assistance 
paid for by the Government of Canada. As you’re well aware, 
Mr. Minister, it’s a cost-shared program between the 
Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and under the Canada assistance plan 50 per cent of the costs of 
social assistance are paid. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Canada assistance plan is very clear 
about the circumstances under which assistance is to be given. I 
want to read, first of all, what the Canada Assistance Plan Act 
says. Section 15, subsection (3), Mr. Minister, of the Act says: 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1290 
 

Every agreement made pursuant to this section shall 
provide that no person shall be denied assistance because 
he refuses, or has refused, to take part in a work activity 
project. 

 
And, Mr. Minister, in contrast to that, the letter that you sent out 
to people who are single employables asking them -—not 
asking them; telling them, in effect — that they will take these 
two-week-on, two-week-off jobs, in which they’ll make less 
than they did on social assistance in many cases, says this: 
 

If you do not take advantage of this job opportunity, your 
eligibility for social assistance plan benefits will be 
reviewed immediately. 

 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: how many social 
assistance recipients who are employable have been cut off 
social assistance in the last 12 months as a result of receiving 
this letter and refusing to take one of these so-called work 
activity job projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’d need a clarification. I’d need to 
know whether he wants to know how many were cut off or how 
many we couldn’t find. That is part of the question. I’ll try to 
get you the information on how many we cut off. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, what I want to know is 
how many people, how many people declined to take on of 
these SEDP (Saskatchewan employment development program) 
projects or New Careers Corporation projects upon receipt of a 
letter such as the one I’ve made reference to from your 
department, and as a result of refusing to take that project were 
cut off social assistance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the 
statistical breakdown of how many were cut off for refusing to 
take a jobs when there was one available, or how many we 
couldn’t find, but the total of those two would be about 300. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I thank you for providing 
a partial answer finally to a question that you’ve been asked. 
 
But my next question to you is: how did you justify, Mr. 
Minister, cutting off those 300 people when the federal 
legislation is very clear? The Canada Assistance Plan Act 
makes it illegal for you to cut off social assistance recipients 
that refuse to take part in a particular work activity project. 
 
And in addition to that, Mr. Minister, I want to read you a 
citation from the agreement that you signed with the 
Government of Canada in 1986. It’s the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Accord on Employability Enhancement for social assistance 
recipients, and the accord states, and I quote: 
 

Consistent with current regulations, the accord offers the 
opportunity for social assistance recipients to actively 
pursue on a voluntary basis employment and training. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is the agreement that you signed with the 
Government of Canada, in which the Government of Canada 
agreed to the principle of cost sharing SEDP projects, 
Saskatchewan employment development program projects and 
New Careers Corporation projects that use SEDP money — 
your so-called work for welfare program. But it was done 
clearly on the understanding that social assistance recipients 
were not obligated to take a particular job. 
 
I’m not implying, Mr. Minister, that in the event that someone 
is offered a choice of several jobs that at least would put them 
slightly ahead of where they were on social welfare, and they 
refused to take any one of them without a reasonable 
explanation, that their assistance shouldn’t be reviewed. But 
that’s not what’s happening here. They’re being asked to take 
work activity jobs in which, in many cases, they will make not a 
penny more than they did on social welfare, and your 
government is cutting them off when they refuse to do that. In 
some cases, Mr. Minister, you are forcing people to move from 
one community to another to take such jobs. 
 
And my question to you is: how is it, Mr. Minister, that you can 
so flagrantly violate the Canada assistance plan and flagrantly 
violate the accord that you signed with the federal government 
for employability enhancement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, let’s have a look at the 
Canada assistance plan. In 1966 the Liberal government under 
Lester Pearson — and Lester Pearson was very liberal, 
bordering on being a socialist, but he was very liberal — set up 
this Canada assistance plan among other things that he did. It 
was a good thing, but in 1966 no one intended that Canadians 
should not ever have to work again. Even Lester Pearson didn’t 
intend that. I respect the man. I didn’t agree with all of his 
policies. But even Lester Pearson did not intend, when he set up 
the Canada assistance plan, that Canadians should not ever have 
to work again. 
 
So what you had there was a plan that said, you do not have to 
work off your welfare like relief in the ’30s. You do not have to 
work back the money that was paid to you specifically. But 
what the Act says is that you have to agree to take training or 
you have to accept jobs when they’re available. 
 
And so we are perfectly legal within section 6(b). Our 
regulation 6(b) is perfectly consistent with the 20-year old 
Canada Assistance Act, that says yes, you have a right to 
receive welfare if you need it and it also says that you have a 
responsibility to take training or a job if it’s available. 
 
And so, I don’t know — the members opposite won’t come 
right out and say it, but they seem to be suggesting, and I think 
maybe they have on occasion said it, that you don’t have to 
work if you don’t want to ; that someone else will support you 
in this country if you don’t feel like working. And that is not an 
excuse. That’s where we draw the line. If you can’t get a job, 
we’ll help you, but if you refuse — flat, outright refuse — to 
work, then show me any law in Canada, either legal or moral, 
that says you should be able to live in this country and refuse to 
work,  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1291 
 

ever. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now here I’ll give you some information on what has happened 
on these projects, and this will give you a clear indication. You 
wanted to know what happened on some of these projects. At 
Par Industries, 146 people left, and here are the reasons: 71 quit; 
30 found other employment; 19 were fired; 18 decided to go to 
school or training; and six had illnesses that excused them; for a 
total of 46 who did not take the jobs that were offered there. 
 
At Meewasin Valley in Saskatoon: 57 quit, 17 found other 
employment, and I presume that they were happy because they 
found other employment; 12 were fired; five decided to 
continue their education; and three were excused due to illness. 
The total of all that is 240, 11 of which were excused due to 
illness. 
 
When you talk about our job search training program — which, 
I explained earlier, is three weeks of learning how to find a job 
— in February of 1988, 76 were invited to take the training; 50 
did not attend or did not show up or were exempt for one reason 
or another; 26 were selected; 19 located employment. That’s 
after taking the course. 
 
In March of 1988, 46 were invited; 24 did not show up; 22 were 
selected and took the course; five — we have a default figure 
here — left the course while in progress, and we are pleased 
because those five would have found jobs or had a reason for 
leaving. 
 
In April of 1988, 60 were invited; 37 did not show up; 23 were 
selected; seven defaulted — that means left course while in 
progress — and again, there were some who located 
employment. April, 1988, the next session, 55 were invited; 37 
refused to show up or failed to show up; 18 were selected and 
took the course. 
 
As you can see, you have all kinds of people in our society. You 
have some who are eager to improve their lives, and learn how 
to get a job. And some unfortunately have no interest 
whatsoever in learning how to get a job. 
 
What should I do with people who have no interest in getting a 
job or continuing their education, but simply want you and I 
and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to support them? I say that 
is not a valid reason for refusing a job, because you do not feel 
like working. That is not a valid reason. 
 
Now those people that took the course found it fulfilling. Those 
people who took the course, many of them have gotten jobs. 
But if the NDP insists that you have a right not to work in this 
province or in this country, then I say the NDP are wrong. I will 
say that for ever. Most people want jobs. Approximately 93 per 
cent of the people in this province are employed; 85 per cent of 
the youth are employed. Most people agree with me, that they 
want jobs, they’re seeking jobs. The NDP have a view of the 
world that probably only 2 per cent of the population agrees 
with. So either they are wrong or I am wrong. 
 
And as long as we are government, we will offer people  

jobs in lieu of welfare. We will offer people the opportunity to 
do something rather than to do nothing. And people who are 
doing these things feel good about themselves. Most people 
given the opportunity to work will work. I have no qualms 
about cutting them off welfare. I have to take care of the needy 
and I have to take care of those people who want to better 
themselves. 
 
But what do I do with the people that have no inclination at all 
to improve their lot? What do I do with them? You give me a 
suggestion. What do I do? Do I force them to go to school? 
What do I do with them? You have some ideas; you tell me 
what I should do with people who absolutely, flatly refuse to 
work. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — You know, Mr. Minister, you have a way with 
taking an argument and misshaping it and misconstruing it so 
badly that it borders, Mr. Minister, on . . . well I’ll just say, that 
it’s incredibly misleading. I was going to make another 
comment and I’ll refrain from doing that. But, Mr. Minister, 
what we’re talking about here is an alternative, is a strategy that 
members on this side of the House put into effect with great 
success when we were in government. That is, that we 
concentrated on social assistance, and we had, Mr. Minister, 
less than half the number of employable people on social 
assistance under our government than you did under yours, 
which is an indication of the total failure of your employment 
strategy, Mr. Minister, and the total failure of your so-called 
welfare reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: Now, Mr. Minister, what we’re talking about here 
is not a question of what you do with someone who’s not 
prepared to take work. We’re talking here about someone who 
refuses to take a job at slave labour wages that no one in this 
province should have to live on, namely, a take-home pay of 
$316 a month. That’s what we’re talking about. And I say to 
you, Mr. Minister, that I think anyone, any fair-minded person 
in this province — with the exception of the members opposite 
— would say that it’s unfair to expect someone to have to work 
for a take-home of $316 a month, and I challenge you to say 
otherwise, Mr. Minister. 
 
What’s happening here, Mr. Minister, is that you are just 
choosing to flagrantly violate the terms of the Canada assistance 
plan, the terms of the accord you signed with the federal 
government under which you get cost sharing for your work for 
welfare program, and I think there’s no other way to describe it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another example of how 
you choose to violate your own rules and regulations. And that 
is with respect to your announcement recently that you are now 
requiring all employable people in this province, without 
dependants, to pay their rent cheque from their social assistance 
cheque directly to the landlords of this province. Mr. Minister, I 
take very strong objection to that, as do all members on this side 
of the House, because Mr. Minister, in so doing this, you are 
flagrantly violating the confidentiality provisions of your own 
departmental  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1292 
 

regulations. 
 
We just had a debate earlier in question period this afternoon in 
which you went on a great length about the need for client 
confidentiality and non-government organizations to respect 
that — which is a point that we agree with — and yet your own 
department, Mr. Minster, is clearly going out of its way to 
violate the confidentiality of social assistance recipients. 
 
There are some landlords in this province who are renting to 
social assistance recipients who are well aware that they are on 
social assistance. There are many landlords, Mr. Minister, who 
are not aware that their tenants are on social assistance, and 
there is no reasons why any landlord should know that their 
tenant is on social assistance as long as that tenant is regularly 
paying the rent. And there is a ready procedure, Mr. Minister, in 
place for those who are not paying their rent. 
 
If there is a problem with someone paying their rent, there is a 
trusteeship system in this province that works very well — 
about 2 per cent of social assistance recipients are on it. 
Payments are made by a third party on behalf of that social 
assistance recipient if they are not able to manage their own 
affairs properly. The other 98 per cent of social welfare 
recipients in this province have managed their affairs perfectly 
adequately; the landlords have been paid. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want from you an explanation today about why 
you’ve chosen to violate the confidentiality of 8 or 9,000 social 
assistance recipients in this province who are now having to go 
through the indignity and the embarrassment of having their 
landlords find out that they’re on social welfare, and how it is, 
Mr. Minister, that you can justify violating regulation 40(c) of 
your own departmental regulations which says: 
 

Every unit of the Department of Social Services shall 
administer assistance so as to protect the recipient’s right 
to confidentiality. 

 
And that’s a direct quote. 
 
How is it, Mr. Minister, that you have one set of rules for 
yourself and another set for everybody else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I hope everyone heard 
that, I hope people on television, if anybody is watching — I 
think there might be a hockey game tonight — if anybody is 
watching, I hope they heard that. 
 
First of all, the member opposite has made a small error in that 
we are not paying the rent directly to the landlord, we are 
paying it jointly to the landlord and the tenant — just a small 
error. I will in this case say it was an error. 
 
But once we look at that . . . First of all, tell me what is 
inherently wrong with paying your rent? Everybody agrees that 
you should pay your rent. Now what is wrong with a system 
that makes sure that the money paid by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan for rent is paid for rent? And the members 
opposite say, well there is no confidentiality. 
 

Clearly they don’t know much about being landlords because 
landlords do credit checks on their tenants. Landlords ask, 
where are you employed. Landlords have some concern that 
they are going to paid, and in the past there has been some 
degree of abuse with respect to the payment of rent. And I have 
got too many calls as Minister of Social Services saying, 
so-and-so didn’t pay their rent and they owe me two months, 
they owe me three months; it goes on over and over again. I 
paid the money out on behalf of the taxpayers; that money did 
not go to the rent. 
 
So if I could ensure in the same way that that money would go 
to feed the children, I would come up with another joint cheque 
system. But when it comes to paying the rent, I can come up 
with a system that works. And I did, and we are doing it, and 
it’s working, and I’ve had no complaints from social services 
recipients. The only complaints I’ve heard are from the NDP 
MLAs — no complaints from anyone. 
 
And so we believe that this system is working well and should 
be continued and extended. With respect to confidentiality there 
has to be a balancing between what’s confidential and what’s 
fair. And I say it’s fair for people to pay their rent. I say that the 
members opposite are totally unrealistic. 
 
It’s hard to imagine . . . You know the members opposite would 
want us to build public housing for everyone in need. All right? 
And if we did build public housing for everybody in need . . . 
and we will try I see no wrong in trying to build public housing. 
Are they suggesting then that we pay social services to a citizen 
who lives in a government housing unit and does not pay the 
government, and that we do not deduct that from what’s owing? 
 
Well this is a similar situation, we are trying to get the best 
accommodation possible, whether it’s public housing or 
whether it is private housing. And therefore we are saying that 
this is not a question of confidentiality; this is a question of 
whether you pay your rent of you don’t. And I am pleased to 
say that social services recipients have not complained about 
this system, because they agree they should pay their rent and 
have no problem taking the cheque to the landlord, endorsing it, 
and it’s paid. So only the NDP are complaining. I don’t know 
where they get these ideas. Even the people who are getting the 
rent benefits are not complaining. 
 
With respect to the system of reform that we have brought in, 
the members opposite say they did different things with single, 
employable people on welfare. They did not. First of all, they 
didn’t even know how many single, employable people there 
were on welfare because they didn’t count them under their 
system. They simply paid people to do nothing, and they didn’t 
even ask whether you could do something. Their system would 
bankrupt this province, and it was starting to do that. 
 
The members opposite do not understand that if we correct the 
abuses, we have more money to pay to the needy people that are 
on welfare and should be on welfare. They do not understand 
that. 
 
There are 5 per cent fewer people on welfare this year  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1293 
 

than there were last year. And the 95 per cent that are still there 
are receiving more per case than they ever were. So we’re 
paying more per case than we ever were to fewer people. so 
we’re getting it down to the needy people getting the money. 
And they want me to pay welfare to ghosts, people that I can’t 
find. I should send them a cheque every month, and they don’t 
even expect me to inquire as to why we can’t find them. 
 
(1930) 
 
It is totally unbelievable that anyone would have a system like 
that. Socialist countries throughout the work have tighter rules 
than that. I mean, you look at the socialist countries of the 
world. They do not tolerate a system that says, you don’t have 
to work if you don’t feel like it. But somehow in a system like 
ours, driven on the work of workers and business people, they 
should support this kind of a system, but not in a socialist 
country where the government owns everything and the 
government insists that everybody pull their weight. But here, 
where farmers and business and labourers are out there earning 
a living, the members opposite insist that some people should 
have the right to do nothing. And I don’t believe that is the will 
of the people, and we will not be doing that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again you’ve 
misconstrued the arguments, and there have been two 
fundamental arguments here. One, Mr. Minister, is that under 
your own regulations, every social assistance recipient is 
entitled to confidentiality, and you have fundamentally violated 
their right to confidentiality by sending each landlord a cheque 
from the Department of Social Services, paying their rent. That 
clearly indicates that they’re a social assistance recipient. And 
that is a form of indignity that no social assistance recipient in 
this province should have to put up with. And you’ve done it, 
Mr. Minister, despite the fact that there’s a perfectly adequate 
system in place already — the trusteeship system — which 
ensures that if a landlord is not being paid their rent, they will 
be paid it by a trustee. And I say to you, same, because all your 
other attempts at arguing for your position simply misconstrue 
the argument. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, secondly, you have ignored the blunt reality 
that people in this province should not be forced — and under 
federal law, are not forced — to take work-for-welfare projects 
in situations where they’ll make no more on working than they 
will on social welfare, which is the kind of system that you have 
set up and that you have created. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you say that people are further ahead now 
who are on social assistance, in that you claim that you have 
increased the rates. You just made an argument, Mr. Minister, 
that those . . . that by cutting off people on social welfare who 
you claim — and we would dispute — are not entitled to it, that 
you have now more money to pay for others on social 
assistance. And, Mr. Minister, this is simply a bold-faced 
inaccuracy. It is simply untrue, Mr. Minister, for you to say that 
social assistance has gone up in this province. 
 
What have you done, Mr. Minister? Yes, you’ve increased the 
rate for an adult by $17 a month, and you’ve increased the rate 
for a child by $13 a month. But at the  

same time, Mr. Minister, you cut off their travel allowance, 
which was worth $22 a month in the case of an adult and in 
some cities as much as $27, Mr. Minister. And the children 
have lost their bus passes, Mr. Minister, as well. 
 
And in addition to that, what else have you done? Well, Mr. 
Minister, you cut the laundry allowance of social assistance 
recipients by 2 or $3 a month, and here’s a man who’s 
expecting people to look for work. And one of the things you 
need to do, Mr. Minister, when you’re looking for work, is 
present yourself in a clean manner, and yet you cut the laundry 
allowance. 
 
What else did you cut, Mr. Minister? You put a cap on the 
utility payments that your department will pay out for social 
assistance recipients. And many of them, Mr. Minister, were 
facing utility bills of 70 or 80 or $90 a month. And you capped 
it at 55 — $55 a month is the maximum now, Mr. Minister. So 
many people lost 30, 35, $40 that you previously paid on 
utilities, that you no longer pay. They lost anywhere from 22 to 
$27 a month on a bus pass, and they lost 2 to $3 a month on 
laundry allowance, and you call that an increase, Mr. Minister. 
 
I tell you, I’ve looked at many cheque stubs of social assistance 
recipients, and time after time I’ve seen social welfare 
recipients who are making less after January 1, 1988 that they 
were before because of the cuts that you have made. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I ask you again: how can you say that 
you have increased social assistance rates when the reality is 
that you have in fact cut them even further than they were 
before? And a single mother with two children in 1988 is not 
earning one additional penny through social assistance that they 
were in 1982. Inflation has been 30 per cent, and yet they don’t 
get a single dollar more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I know, this 
information is accurate, but I don’t know if this resolution was 
passed or not, but as far as I know from the 1981 convention of 
the New Democratic Party — New Democrats as they like to 
call themselves now and that they had a resolution 263 which 
read: 
 

Whereas it is desirable to encourage landlords with 
suitable rental accommodations to make these 
accommodations available to those who depend on social 
assistance; and whereas encouragement to such landlords 
would be provided by acceptance, assurance of prompt 
and full payment; therefore be it resolved that the owners 
of dwellings who rent these accommodations to those who 
receive social assistance be paid directly by the 
Department of Social Services on behalf of the tenant. 

 
This was a resolution before their convention in 1981. I say I 
don’t know if it was passed or not. Probably not, knowing the 
mentality of the members of the opposition, but a least there is 
some original and bright thought over there, and I don’t take 
credit for thinking of this first because I know that they did 
have this in their resolutions in 1981. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1294 
 

And so when I implement some of the policies that they used to 
advocate, it’s interesting that when a Conservative does it, it’s 
wrong, but when an NDP does it, it’s right. It’s just a question 
of that they didn’t do it. So the members opposite should know 
that their party is not unanimous on what there’s feeling on in 
the House today. 
 
In addition we have a calculation of the cost of living index in 
Saskatchewan, in Regina, and the accumulative increased in 
welfare rates starting back to 1975 to 1988. And it turns out that 
the welfare rates have increased 134.5 per cent from 1975 to 
1988, and it turns out that the cost of living in Regina has 
increased by 134.5 per cent in the same period of time. So 
between 1975 and 1988 — 1975, the NDP were government; 
1988, we’re the government — we, in conjunction with what 
the NDP did over that period of time, have kept the welfare 
rates increasing with the cost of living increased in the city of 
Regina for that 13-year period. 
 
So the rates have really not gone up or not gone down; they 
have kept up with inflation since 1975. And if you will recall 
that in 1975, the price of wheat was very high — not too high, I 
might say — buy very high compared to today; the price of oil 
had just sky-rocketed. Uranium, which my learned friend 
opposite doesn’t want to mine, was selling at a good price, or 
was being developed and the mines were coming in. Potash 
sales were excellent. And at that time the NDP had the same 
welfare rates that we have now when you take inflation into 
account. 
 
In addition, as I’ve pointed out earlier, we have the highest 
welfare rates for children in Canada, in this . . . I don’t know 
about the North West Territories and the Yukon because the 
cost of living is higher. But in the province of Canada we have 
the highest rate for children, for families, of any province in 
Canada. Now members opposite say it’s not enough. Yes, if I 
can save more money by correcting the abuses, I will raise the 
rates further. They have that commitment. But I have to make 
certain that the money is going to the people that deserve it the 
most. 
 
And I challenge the members opposite to say how much the 
rates should be raised. I challenge them. it’s not enough; I agree 
they could be higher. Could they tell us exactly how much the 
rates should be raised. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to give you some 
precise statistics that will bury your case. First of all, Mr. 
Minister, these are put together by the University of Regina, the 
school of social work — and these are professionals who ought 
to know what they’re doing. They have compared, in the tables 
I have here . . . This is two parents and two children on social 
assistance, 1981-82 figures, what they received prior to your 
welfare reform — $1,127.17 a month. In 1988, Mr. Minister, 
after your welfare reform that same family receives $1,126.20 a 
month, or 93 cents less while the inflation rate has been 30 per 
cent. 
 
A single parent with two children on social assistance, 1981-82, 
received $916.17, and in 1988 receives $916.14 — 3 cents less, 
six years later, after 30 per cent inflation. 
 

That, Mr. Minister, is one of the reasons why we have line-ups 
at food banks in this province. That, Mr. Minister, is one of the 
reasons why food banks are the fastest growing industry in this 
province. 
 
I was in Lloydminster on Friday and, you know, Lloydminster 
is hardly the kind of community that you would expect to have 
a food bank, but they’ve been forced to open one last year, in 
large part because of your policies and the policies of the PC 
government in Alberta. And they’re feeding 196 children a 
month, and 194 adults a month in the month of March. And if 
that doesn’t show the folly of your policies, Mr. Minister, I 
don’t know what does in a small city like Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have argued that the rates for the food 
allowance are adequate. I want to ask you this question. Mr. 
Minister, you will . . . Your department officials must be aware 
that Agriculture Canada regularly publishes a retail food price 
report in which they look at the minimum cost of a food basket 
that could nutritionally feed an individual or a family. And, Mr. 
Minister, the latest figures that I have that compare your social 
assistance plan food allowance of $108 for a single, employable 
person, that compares, Mr. Minister, with the estimate by 
Agriculture Canada that that same person would need at least 
$125 to pay for food costs. Leaving them $17 short. A single 
parent with two children, Agriculture Canada is estimating that 
they need $311 effective in 1987, and your food basket 
provided $287, leaving them $24 short. 
 
Mr. Minister, the most generous part of your social assistance 
rate structure is the food allowance section. Because what’s 
happening right now is that people are having to dig into their 
rent money because they can’t find shelter at $200 a month, 
which is the most you allow for a single employable. They 
don’t . . . A single employable doesn’t even get a clothing 
allowance. 
 
Mr. Minister, social assistance recipients are having to pay 
utility rates that are far higher than you will allow them, so they 
hare having to dig into their food budget on all those accounts. 
But even in addition to that, if you just take the straight food 
budget that you have allotted, Mr. Minister, it’s very clear that 
when you compare the Agriculture Canada food price report 
with your figures, that social assistance recipients are not 
receiving enough even from your food allowance to cover their 
basic nutritional needs. 
 
And my question to you is: will you, for goodness’ sake, Mr. 
Minister — for the sake of the children in this province who are 
on social assistance — increase the food allowance and increase 
the rates. And you have asked for a suggestion, and I would say 
personally 25 to 30 per cent. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, our government has had 
a policy of finding people jobs under welfare reform, and since 
we’ve started with the jobs, what we’ve found, with the jobs the 
federal government has provided in co-operation with us 
through Canada Jobs Strategy and New Careers Corporation, 
we have had a total, in the last  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1295 
 

three years, of 11,200 jobs for people who are on welfare. And 
now they are no longer on welfare; they have jobs, and they are 
very happy. 
 
The member opposite does not know that we have an 8 per cent, 
on average, and 8 per cent per month turnover rate, which is 
good. What’s bad about it is that the turnover rate matches. The 
number of people becoming self-sufficient each month is about 
8 per cent, but we seem to have about another 8 per cent who 
require assistance each month. So, very gradually, we are 
bringing the statistics down over the last year. 
 
The number of welfare is down 5 per cent. That’s because of 
two reasons: of that 5 per cent, some have received jobs and 
some are off the system because they were abusing the system. 
So it’s a twofold plan: take those people who are abusing the 
system off the system; give those people who want to get off 
the system an opportunity to get a job, an opportunity to get 
education. 
 
With respect to the rates that we pay, yes, we would like to pay 
more, and we will raise them as time goes on. 
 
However, as I indicated earlier, we have the highest rates in 
Canada for families, and yet the member opposite says that 
there is not enough to eat. Well how do people get by in other 
provinces? How do people get by in the province of Manitoba, 
where under an NDP government they were ninth in Canada in 
their welfare rates to families? Under the practising NDP in 
Manitoba, the people that say in Saskatchewan they would do 
more, they did less than we do in Saskatchewan. Here we have 
the theoretical NDP in opposition. They would do more but 
when they become government they do less for the poor. 
 
The members opposite talk long and loud for the poor but when 
given the opportunity, do nothing — well not quite nothing but 
ninth in Canada with the last NDP government in Canada is not 
a very good record to be proud of. And I would like the member 
opposite to defend that kind of a record — ninth in Canada, for 
Manitoba, for families and first in Canada, for Saskatchewan, 
for families. 
 
And there is no limit to the amount of money I will give to 
families to feed their children but that money has to go for food. 
There is no limit. I will find it one way or another. As long as I 
know that money is going to food, that money will be there, but 
it’s got to go to the children. We cannot have that money going 
elsewhere. That money for food for the children must go to the 
children so they get to eat properly. 
 
And that is what we have to solve — make sure that the 
children are properly fed, properly clothed, that they have an 
opportunity to wash, an opportunity for education, an 
opportunity to learn some values, whatever they are. I would 
hope they are not socialist values, but some values, some basic 
human values in life — the respect for human life, kindness to 
others — the kind of things that our society is built on. 
 
But the members opposite says, pour money on the problem and 
it will be solved. Well in Manitoba they didn’t pour any money 
on the problem and it was not  

solved. In Saskatchewan we pay the highest rates in Canada for 
families and children and it’s still not solved. I will try to find 
ways to solve the problem. 
 
But certainly the member opposite proposes a rate increase of 
25 to 30 per cent. Yes that would be nice and I would do it right 
away if all of that 25 or 30 per cent went to the assistance of 
those children, to get those children a fair break in life and a 
good start in life. 
 
The member opposite must realize that would cost $60 million. 
He must realize that our share would be one-half per cent in the 
sales tax, assuming that we could still get cost sharing from the 
federal government which he is trying to destroy; which his 
friends are saying they are going to sue because we are not 
following the agreement, and they are going to try to stop 
federal cost sharing. I say to his friends: sue if you think you are 
right in law. Go ahead. But we are following the laws of 
Canada. While following the laws of Canada, it would cost $60 
million to give a 25 or 30 per cent increase in the welfare rates. 
We are the highest in Canada. We will consider some increase, 
but we cannot raise the sales tax 1 per cent just to cover that 
expenditure at this time. So we have had a policy of jobs. 
 
And the member opposite quotes statistics, not from Statistics 
Canada, but from the University of Regina. And I don’t believe 
that the University of Regina has objectively calculated the total 
calculations with respect to what our benefits are. In 
Saskatchewan, a family of two adults and two children receives, 
if they are long term on welfare, $1,240 per month as their 
maximum allowance. They have $1,240 per month to live on. 
That is not, I agree, a great deal of money; but that same family 
if employed, paying income tax deductions and those other kind 
of expenses of employment, would have to earn in the nature of 
19 to $20,000 per year to have that same amount of money clear 
to live on. 
 
And I say to the member oppose, there are many families out 
there who are struggling to earn $20,000 per year and have that 
same amount to live on. And I can say to the member opposite 
that he should look at rural Saskatchewan, where half of the 
families on farms have less cash to live on than $1,240 per 
month. And they are getting by, and they are feeding their 
children — and they’re feeding them on their own, and they’re 
proud of it. And you come now and say to them that they can’t 
feed their children. They are feeding their children and they’re 
personally sacrificing their own clothing and their own benefits 
and their own life-style to take care of their children first, 
because the first priority of a family is the responsibility to their 
children. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I was in Europe about 10 years ago and I noticed 
a big difference in Europe between . . . in Canada. I saw, in 
southern Europe, families that were visibly poor, families that 
had mended cloths and torn clothes. And I saw those same 
families with children in the hand, and their children were 
dressed twice as good as the parents. I saw those families with 
nice strollers for their children. Those families throughout 
southern Europe were poor, but their first priority was to their 
children, not to themselves. And that’s what has to be done. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1296 
 

Every parent owes their first responsibility to their children 
before they start thinking about themselves. And I appreciate 
the difficulty that rural families are living under in these 
agricultural times. When these people in rural Saskatchewan are 
sacrificing — I see them in my constituency — they are 
sacrificing so that their children, first, have food; and secondly, 
so their children can play hockey and baseball. They will do 
everything first for their children, and their children are not 
going hungry. 
 
And I say that everyone in this province who puts a priority into 
feeding their children and taking care of their children will be 
able to feed their children. And if they cannot, the government 
will assist them. But that money has to go to the children, and 
we will have no other policy than that the money must go to the 
children and not be spent on anything else. 
 
Mr. Prebble: —Well, Mr. Minister, I remind you that half the 
persons on social assistance are children, and so the first thing 
you can do is give the families who already have the misfortune 
of being social assistance recipients under your government, at 
least give those families enough so that they can feed their 
children. 
 
Mr. Minister, I tell you, I believe you’re correct when you say 
that people in rural Saskatchewan are prepared to sacrifice to 
feed their children. I want to assure you that people in urban 
Saskatchewan are also prepared to sacrifice to feed their 
children, and we on this side of the House see that every day, 
Mr. Minister, and for you to somehow imply that that’s not the 
case is erroneous. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if you were really serious about supporting 
families, as you talk about, you wouldn’t deduct the family 
allowance from social assistance recipients before you issue the 
cheque. We’re the only province in Canada where that’s the 
case. If you were serious about supporting families, you 
wouldn’t have frozen the family income plan funds in the way 
that you have for working families, who get no increases as a 
result of this budget when they are low-income and their family 
size is large. 
 
Mr. Minister, time and again you can see where you have 
consciously cut back support for families in this province. Look 
at your cuts to the family service bureaus in Regina and in 
Saskatoon — cuts of 10, 15 per cent in many cases. Look at 
your cuts, Mr. Minister, to family service positions in the 
Department of Social Services — six positions lost in 
Saskatoon, for instance, in the 1987 budget. 
 
Time and again, Mr. Minister you have been cutting back 
services for families in crisis, not giving those families support. 
So don’t talk to this legislature about how your government is 
supporting families, because your record, Mr. Minister, is the 
reverse. 
 
Now if you’re serious, Mr. Minister, about addressing the 
problem of hungry children in the school system, then you will 
institute a school lunch program in all inner city schools in the 
major urban centres where it’s required, where there’s clearly a 
hunger problem. And, Mr. Minister, I venture to say that you 
could do that for less than $1.5 million. 
 

If you’re serious about addressing the problem of child hunger, 
why don’t you institute a school lunch program in all the major 
inner city schools in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, and Prince 
Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the member opposite wants me to 
institute a school lunch program in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 
Jaw, and Prince Albert. And if I did that, how would that be fair 
to everyone else in Saskatchewan who is already sending lunch 
to school to feed their children? 
 
Why should there be a school lunch program in Regina and not 
in other places? And why should the state prepare lunch at 
school so that the parents don’t have to, either have their 
children come home for lunch — in the cities they usually do 
come home for lunch — or so that the rural parents don’t have 
to pack lunches as they have for years and years? 
 
I have not had any rural parents complaining about having to 
pack lunches and send them to school. I have not had any urban 
parents complaining about having to pack a lunch and send it to 
school. I have not had any urban parents complaining that we 
should feed their children at school so they don’t have to come 
home to eat. 
 
I agree there are some isolated cases where there is a problem, 
that the children are not eating regular. I agree with that; those 
cases do exist. And I’ve said to you many times that when those 
hungry children are identified, we will act to make sure that 
they receive food and are not neglected. 
 
I challenged you in the legislature to give me, privately, a list of 
names of hungry children. You said there were thousands. I 
received one. And I instructed my department to deal with that 
case to make sure that that child was eating regular and was not 
neglected. You said there were thousands. You sent me one 
name. 
 
Because you can name one person that is not eating properly, 
you think that we should have a school lunch program for every 
person. That is the kind of dependency that the NDP stand for 
— a school lunch program, then an after school program, and 
after a while the NDP would have a system where you have 
your child and you give it to the NDP and they will raise it for 
you. That’s what they want to get to. They want to get . . . 
Somebody mentioned womb to tomb socialism. Yes, I believe 
that is exactly what they have in mind. Step by step, they want 
your children and they want to raise them the way they think 
they should be raised, as good socialists. That’s what they have 
in mind. They do not care about people. if they cared, they 
would send me more than one name, if there is more than one 
person. I said it was irresponsible for the members opposite to 
know of children in need and not to give me the information so 
I could assist them — and they sent me one name, one name. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Chairman, with respect to 
family allowance and how it’s deducted in our calculation, first 
of all we should know this, that the system of taking family 
allowance into account in welfare payments was started by the 
NDP, and I have not  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1297 
 

changed it. Now if it was so bad, why did they do it that way? 
 
Secondly, Mr. Deputy Chairman, our rate calculation takes into 
account the family allowance deduction, and even when you 
take that deduction into account, we still have the highest rates 
in Canada for families and children. So yes, I would like to 
change that system, but the NDP started it that way and built up 
a system of deducting family allowance, and it’s very difficult 
to change it in a fair manner at this stage. 
 
(2000) 
 
The NDP talk about helping families; they talk about creating 
jobs, about raising income, about giving more money for the 
people who need it most, yet they are opposed to freer trade so 
that we can build our economy. They are opposed to 
diversification of Saskatchewan. the NDP are opposed to 
anything that will earn this province money. I say to the NDP 
that this province has social programs that we all agree should 
be maintained and increased, but no amount of rhetoric or 
will-power or desire will generate the money to pay for those 
social programs unless we as a province and as a country get 
out into the world and earn that money so we have it to pay for 
our social programs. 
 
Now the member opposite believes in social programs, and we 
believe in social programs. But if he were running this province 
and if their party ever ran this country, we would all be poor 
because there wouldn’t be any money for anyone to pay for any 
social programs. They expect this country to build a wall 
around it, hide. 
 
They have policies like a made in Canada interest policy and 
currency controls. They have policies like, be opposed to 
deregulation, have regulations so that you cannot ship goods in 
and out of the country freely. They have all those kind of 
policies that would turn this country into an Albania. And you 
compare the social programs of Albania — the hermit of the 
socialist world that refuses to trade with anybody in any 
meaningful way — if you want an example of what being a 
hermit country is, look at Albania. And if you want a good 
comparison of trade — free trade — West Germany trading 
with the European Common Market, or East Germany only 
allowed to trade with the socialist world. There is a comparison 
for you of what NDP policies would bring you and all of us 
with respect to prosperity and social programs. 
 
The members opposite mean well but are idealistic. When I was 
member of that party, I discovered that they did not know what 
makes the world tick. They still do not what makes the world 
tick. They are social dreamers and they will always be social 
dreamers. And I hope I don’t ever see the day that their 
dreaming is leading this province. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I’m only 
going to say, in closing off this debate on the question of 
general welfare rates and child hunger, that we on this side of 
the House believe that a school nutrition, school lunch program 
should be established in any school in this province where there 
is a demonstrated need, whether it be rural or urban. And we 
urge you to do  

that with all haste, Mr. Minister. And I will let it go at that and 
turn to another pressing issue which is your government’s 
inadequate support for physically handicapped persons. 
 
And I want to particularly, Mr. Minister, focus on two issues 
that are affecting many physically handicapped people because 
a goodly portion of the physically handicapped find themselves 
on social assistance, Mr. Minister. And one of the things that I 
was particularly disturbed by was your recent decision, Mr. 
Minister, to cut the travel allowance for physically disabled 
people in the city of Regina from $27 dollars a month, Mr. 
Minister, to $20 a month — from $27 a month to $20 a month 
— at the same time, Mr. Minister, as the cost of the 
transportation service had increased for $1 a month to $1.10 a 
month. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in effect what this means on a round trip 
basis is that each physically handicapped person who’s on 
social assistance — and there are a large proportion of the 
physically handicapped who are — are now eligible for three 
less round trips a month to look after their basic needs. And in 
effect, Mr. Minister, what your policy of cutting back on their 
travel allowance has done is simply increasing their social 
isolation. They still have money to travel for a doctor’s visit or 
for doing grocery shopping or picking up prescription drugs, 
but the visits that are going be lost, Mr. Minister, are the visits 
to friends or the visit for an evening out to a movie or a social 
gathering of some kind. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to hear your justification for why you cut 
the transportation allowances of physically disabled people in 
the city of Regina? And I want you, Mr. Minister, to tell me 
what the reduction per month has been to the travel allowance 
of physically handicapped persons in other parts of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
physically handicapped, the member opposite probably does not 
know or does not wish to know that in 1982, his government 
spent $7.4 million on the physically handicapped, and in 1988, 
our government is spending $15.6 million. That is an increase 
of 111 per cent, Mr. Deputy Chairman. So they would try to 
mislead the world and say, no, we’re not doing anything for the 
physically handicapped, but a 111 per cent increase in 
expenditures for the physically handicapped in the last six years 
suggests to me that we are doing much more than keeping up 
with inflation. 
 
With respect to travel, the member opposite is again trying to 
distort things considerably here. The handicapped in 
Saskatchewan are not paid a travel allowance but are paid their 
actual travel costs — their actual travel costs, whatever they are. 
 
With respect to mobility restricted people — that’s people who 
are older, have a little more difficulty getting around but are not 
actually handicapped — we pay $20 per month towards their 
travel, a straight $20 per month. 
 
Certainly the member opposite is mistaken again when he says 
that we’ve reduced the travel for handicapped. We pay actual, 
whatever it is. It’s a special need and we  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1298 
 

pay it — doesn’t even show up in the calculation of the welfare 
rates. It’s on top of the rates that we pay. 
 
So the member opposite again is trying to play little games 
here, trying to scare people, trying to mislead the public. And 
now I have given you the full information, I would expect that 
he should now acknowledge that he didn’t understand that 
handicapped actually receive their actual travel costs. 
 
With respect to other matters. And we have increased spaces in 
sheltered workshops; we’ve increased spaces in the term of our 
government from 827 to 1,073; in activity centres, we’ve 
increased them from 612 to 801; in group homes for the 
handicapped we’ve increased the spaces from 384 to 506. And I 
think anybody with a pencil can see that those percentages are 
in the ranges of 30 to 50 per cent increase; 25 per cent in some 
cases. 
 
And so don’t let the NDP try to tell anyone that we have made 
cuts to the handicapped. Nobody will believe it. I have these 
figures right in front of me. They are audited by the Provincial 
Auditor. The Provincial Auditor would know if the figures are 
correct or not. They are examined in public accounts. They 
cannot deny those figures. They cannot deny all of the group 
homes that are being opened in Saskatchewan right now. They 
cannot deny the increases in the workshops of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they cannot deny when they hear of the 
programs that we will bring in in the near future to show that 
the handicapped under the programs of this government will be 
receiving actual jobs. 
 
The members opposite, I told them yesterday to be patient; I 
asked them to be patient for a little while longer and they will 
see a massive program in handicapped employment. And the 
members opposite doubt, they shout from their seats and they 
double that we will do anything for handicapped. The fact is 
that we have a record here that is very, very respectable with 
respect to assisting the handicapped. And based on the record 
that we already have, the handicapped can be assured that this 
government will take major measures to assist them in 
employment. So therefore the members opposite need not 
worry. We will take care of the handicapped even though they 
deny that it exists; we will continue to take care of the 
handicapped. 
 
And in addition, Mr. Chairman, we fazed out North Park in 
Prince Albert for the benefit of the handicapped who are now 
living in new group homes throughout Saskatchewan. Initially 
some people said it could not be done; some people said it 
should not be done. The NDP had a plan to do that but they 
wouldn’t do it because CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) told them they should not do that. And we regret 
the loss of jobs in Prince Albert. But we have to first of all take 
care of the handicapped; whereas, the NDP were first of all 
taking care of their friends. We were taking care of our friends 
the handicapped, and I do not apologize for it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, when you closed down North Park Centre how many 
of the residents of North Park Centre were transferred to Valley 
View Centre in Moose Jaw? 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the following is 
a breakdown of the locations of people who moved out of North 
Park: four went to their extended families; 58 went to new 
group home locations; 17 went to community living residences; 
41 went to private service homes; two went to special care 
homes; seven went to small hospitals in level 4 facilities; 47 
went to the Valley View Centres; one went out of province — 
for a total of 177. 
 
In addition, during the period of time of the phase out of North 
Park, 20 to 22 people moved out of Valley View and into the 
community in order to make room for the people from North 
Park who were coming in and also to move as many people as 
possible out into the community. 
 
Of the 47 that went to Valley View Centres, we will try to move 
as many as possible out of Valley View if they can possibly live 
in the community and outside of the institution, and we will 
continue to try to shrink the size of the institution at Valley 
View, so that in the future more and more people will be living 
in a community and fewer people will be living in institutions. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that this government had the 
courage to do what was right. The NDP when they were 
government did not have the courage to do what was right; they 
did what was expedient. 
 
I have been in the group homes throughout Saskatchewan and 
seen these happy people who are now living in communities. I 
have one lady that lives in my constituency who is 77 years old 
and was able and allowed to bake cookies for the first time in 
her life. And those are the kind of experiences, the kind of 
experiences . . . And the members opposite laugh. When I heard 
that I had tears in my eyes. They don’t believe that I have a 
heart. When I heard that, I had tears in my eyes, and the 
members opposite laugh. There’s the party, the party that say 
they have compassion and they care. And when I say that this 
woman, who is like an ordinary granny of 77, has now had an 
opportunity for the first time in her life, by her own words, the 
first time she’s had a chance to bake cookies. 
 
There are other examples of people. I was in a group home in 
your constituency, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and I heard a woman 
play the piano for me — and I can’t play the piano. She played 
the piano, she is very happy living out in the community. 
 
I saw the new group home that we’re building. And I was on 
the street . . . It’s in a brand-new suburban neighbourhood with 
the biggest houses in town, and the biggest house on the street 
is the house that is being built as a group home for the 
handicapped from North Park, where they will live with all the 
other citizens in town. And what really impressed me, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, was that the citizens on that street were 
pleased to have them for neighbours. It is truly amazing how 
the citizens of Saskatchewan have taken these people in as their 
neighbours. And members opposite still laugh. They didn’t 
have the nerve to do what was right; they did what was 
expedient. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1299 
 

(2015) 
 
Now I’ve given you the breakdown. We will do everything 
possible to make sure that everyone can live in the community 
as normal as possible, and we will not be putting people in 
institutions unless there is absolutely nowhere else for them to 
live. 
 
The members opposite can be assured that we will not change 
this policy, that we will continue to put the handicapped people 
into society to live as independently as possible. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, at the risk of another long answer 
— for anyone that may have wondered what the question was 
— the question was: how many who moved from North Park 
Centre relocated to Valley View Centre? And I gather that in 
the long rhetorical answer, Mr. Minister, the answer is 47. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is this: of the 177 folks who moved 
out of North Park Centre, how many are living at Valley View 
Centre today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I already answered the 
question; at last calculation 47. Now my officials advise that 
one or two may have moved out since, but initially 47 moved 
in. and for the period of time those numbers will go down as we 
find other locations for some of those people. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And so there has been none who moved to 
community who subsequently went from community to Valley 
View Centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, two people went into the 
community and have since gone into Valley View: one was for 
medical reasons and the other one was for emotional reasons. 
both of them were similar type of situations where they . . . 
because one was medical and the other one was because of 
behaviour, that person couldn’t function in the community and 
had to go to Valley View. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, out of the approximately 130 then 
— give or take a couple who moved from North Park Centre to 
community — how many of those people would be of an age 
category that we would consider to be a working age? I guess I 
would be assuming here, Mr. Minister, how many of those 
people would be under the age of 65? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, my officials don’t have 
an exact breakdown but they can give you quite an accurate 
guess, I might say. About 70 per cent were senior citizens, 
about 30 per cent were under the age of 65. That’s an 
approximation. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So it would be approximately 39 people then 
that were under the age of 65. Of those, Mr. Minister, how 
many are then involved in some kind of community placement? 
Would that be all of those people? and would you please 
describe for me, Mr. Minister, what kinds of placements, and 
again by number. Would some perhaps be during the day 
attending or participating in activities at a sheltered workshop, 
for example, or other kinds of  

work-related activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, my officials have sort of 
calculated this out, and to give you a picture of the situation, 
there were 36 day programs developed in Prince Albert; 10 in 
Moose Jaw; six in Hague; two in Maple Creek or in the regular 
workshop; seven in Nipawin have a day program, and a new 
group home; in Porcupine Plain four are in the regular 
workshop; in Grayson eight are in a senior citizens’ day-care 
program — they’re all over 65; Biggar has a similar program. 
And, in all, total about eight to 10 are the number that are not 
involved in a day program. 
 
All of those were developed in conjunction with the 
Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded, and 
wherever possible these were developed. And In those eight or 
10 situations, there are some people who just aren’t all that 
interested in a day program or going to the workshop. So for the 
most part everyone was accommodated where they were 
interested in some kind of a program, or else a program was 
instituted at their home because they may be over 65 and then 
they have sort of a seniors’ day program to give them things to 
do. And as I indicated earlier, you know, baking cookies is part 
of the things that they do. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I wasn’t clear from what you said, Mr. Minister, 
then how many of these people are now involved — of the 39 
under the age of 65 — are involved in some kind of a work or 
training-related program. I quite understand and accept and 
concur that for those who are at the age of 65 and over, 
consistent with the normalization principles and the normal 
life-styles for people in our society, that it’s really quite 
appropriate that they should be involve din some kind of 
retirement life-style. 
 
My question to you again, Mr. Minister, is: how many of those 
folks have been accommodated in some kind of a work activity 
program, of those approximately 39, the 30 per cent of the 130? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, as far as 
we know all of the 39 are involved in a day program or an 
activity of their choice, sort of thing. Everybody that wanted 
one got one, sort of thing. So as far as we know all 39 would be, 
but if there’s one somewhere that’s not participating that would 
be outside of my knowledge. But for the most part, the 
information we have is that everyone who wanted to have some 
sort of a program or take part in a workshop or have some 
activity was able to get that kind of activity. My officials 
remind me that it was regardless of age. We didn’t make them 
retire at the age of 65. If they wanted to work at the workshop, 
that was fine with us. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I certainly accept and respect that, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, the phrase you used a few minutes ago in 
describing the objectives in moving folks out of North Park 
Centre whether they wanted to or not, at that time you said the 
purpose for doing that was to, and I believe I’m quoting you 
precisely here, Mr. Minister, make them normal as possible. 
Now I assume by that, Mr. Minister, that you’re making some 
reference, or an oblique reference to the principle of 
normalization. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1300 
 

And you’ve spoken earlier in these estimates and earlier this 
day and in these past few days, about the importance of work 
and the relationship between dignity and work. Certainly people 
who are physically or mentally handicapped should not be 
deprived of the opportunity to earn dignity and self respect 
through employment, as would the rest of our citizens. 
 
I think I’ve heard you several times this evening making 
reference to the fact that you don’t want to see people getting 
something for nothing, and I assume by that, Mr. Minister, 
you’re operating from a philosophy that there is a relationship 
between work and dignity and self-respect. 
 
Consistent with that, Mr. Minister, I put a question to the 
Minister of Labour, just a couple of days ago, about the 
inclusion of handicapped persons who are working in sheltered 
industry in the labour standards coverage for minimum wage. 
Now, Mr. Minister, it seems to me to be a desirable objective 
that our mentally handicapped citizens should be given the 
opportunity to participate in society as non-handicapped 
citizens. And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that there is 
something to be said for the relationship between work and 
dignity. And, Mr. Minister, we do happen to live in a society in 
which to a large extent people make . . . There is a relationship 
between income, or the value of our work, and the dignity that 
we experience. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I expressed to you a couple of days ago 
some of my feelings about the inappropriateness of the sixth 
highest . . . the fact that Saskatchewan now has the sixth highest 
minimum wage in the nation, and we had a little hear-to-heart 
on that one. But I ask you, Mr. Minister: in light of the fact that 
there are a good number of citizens in this province for whom 
working for minimum wage would be a dream come true . . . It 
would be a dream come true, and I’m simply reflecting the 
sentiments of many of the members of People First. You would 
be familiar that in this province we have many outstanding 
citizens, in my opinion, who are members of People First, for 
whom it is an extremely important principle that they not be 
denied the same rights as other citizens of this province when 
working, that they are not included in coverage for minimum 
wage for their efforts. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, before you stand on your feet and say, well 
we can’t afford to pay handicapped people minimum wage 
because they’re not producing enough and all those sorts of 
things, you and I both know that we have administrations that 
can easily accommodate that and it’s simply a matter of 
rethinking how we administer the public moneys that are spent. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister: in light of the fact that you saw 
it so important to close down North Park Centre, to move a 
number of people out of that centre who had no desire to move 
because, in your words, you were going to make them normal 
as possible, and in my words, Mr. Minister, were going to 
simply follow the principles of normalization — I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, when are you going to carry through that commitment 
to allow the dignity for reward for work to handicapped citizens 
in this province who work in sheltered industry, to have the 
privilege to permit for them the dream come true that they 
would be able to make minimum wage? When will you  

do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the 
NDP that that would be desirable and I will work in that 
direction. It’s unfortunate that the NDP didn’t work in that 
direction when they were government, but now that . . . And I 
know this member’s not responsible. He wasn’t here when they 
were government, so I don’t chastise this member specifically. 
And I say I agree with him that that would be desirable. 
 
It would be desirable to have at least minimum wage paid to 
people in sheltered workshops. I don’t think we can do that in 
activity centres because they are activity centres rather than 
workshops, and I’d like to look at that, first of all, in 
workshops. 
 
And I can say to you that I will be moving in that direction, and 
in the near future you will see a major initiative in that 
direction, and I’m sure you will be very pleased; and you will 
agree, when you see it, that the government is doing the right 
thing. So I say, if you’re patient you will see in the very near 
future a major move in that direction. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re quite correct. I 
wasn’t a member of the New Democrat government in the past, 
but I anticipate, Mr. Minister, that some time within the next 
three years I will be a member of a New Democrat government 
that will come to Saskatchewan. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I have not in the past, and you know that 
. . . In this Assembly I have not in the past hesitated to give my 
approval or endorsation of initiatives that your government has 
taken for which I approved. I must admit that hasn’t been 
frequent, but that’s happened. But that’s perhaps the world of 
politics and represents some of the differences between your 
party and mine. And Heaven forbid — Heaven forbid that we 
should ever live in a world in which there is not freedom of 
speech and the freedom for people to have differences of 
opinions, contrary to what seem to be some of the policies 
coming out of your government and your actions in dealing 
with NGOs (non-governmental organizations) and the like these 
days, and that’s been under discussion in these estimates, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But I simply say to you, sir, that if you do undertake initiatives 
that do improve the opportunity for handicapped persons in this 
province — to not only be employed, to be gainfully employed, 
meaningfully employed, but to be employed under the same 
working conditions as the rest of the society, as the rest of the 
people in this province, Mr. Minister — if that occurs then I 
will certainly feel quite free to express my approval of that. 
 
But as we stand here this evening, Mr. Minister, I note, Mr. 
Minister, that, given that you had a commitment to a philosophy 
that said it was appropriate to move people out of North Park 
Centre who did not want to move because you believed that was 
right, I simply ask you again, Mr. Minister: you’re telling me 
here today that you believe it is the right thing to do; to provide 
coverage under the labour standards legislation so as not to 
exempt  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1301 
 

handicapped persons who work in sheltered industry. If you 
believe that to be right, when will you . . . Don’t give me this 
business about some time or when it’s practical or when it’s 
possible — I’m asking you a very specific question. You did 
not hesitate to take that action affecting handicapped persons 
when you literally forced some, some of the people from North 
Park Centre to move who did not want to. 
 
I ask you now, Mr. Minister: when will you act on this belief 
that you believe to be true? And when will you consult with the 
Minister of Labour? I recognize that that may be a difficult task 
for you at times, to consult with the Minister of Labour, but it 
should be easier than consulting with some others. When will 
you consult with the Minister of Labour, and together — the 
Minister of Social Services and the Minister of Labourer — put 
your collective minds together and bring to this province 
legislation that provides protection under the Labour Standards 
Act for handicapped persons who work in sheltered industry? 
 
Please, something a little more definite than when it’s possible 
or when it’s practical. This is an extremely important issue for a 
good number of our citizens, as I said before, who are members 
of People First, and a good number of our citizens who are 
working in sheltered industry and who recognize fully that the 
value given to their efforts because they work in an industry 
that is described as a sheltered industry are, by law, less than 
everyone else who works in this province. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, please be specific and tell us 
when. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I can assure the member 
opposite that later this evening the Minister of Labour will 
consult with the Minister of Social Services and will come up 
with a plan later this evening to employ more handicapped 
people and that I will have it implemented very soon. And so I 
could assure him that that consultation will take place later this 
evening. 
 
I can also advise him that while it is desirable to have people in 
sheltered workshops earn at least minimum wages, there are 
many cases where they are receiving from the province of 
Saskatchewan a sum well in excess of the minimum wage in 
that it costs, in some cases, up to $2,000 a month to care for 
them. So I will examine that, and I will consult this evening. 
And very soon, I promise you, I will take action, and it may not 
be complete, but it will certainly be more than you’ve ever seen 
under any government. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, not a question but a comment. I 
commit to you, sir, that when the Minister of Social Services is 
consulting with the Minister of Labour, that the member from 
Moose Jaw North would be most willing to participate in that 
conversation if, as a matter of fact, it is toward the objectives 
that you stated here tonight. So that’s not a question but simply 
a statement, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: —The member from Moose Jaw North and 
the Minister of Labour and the Minister of Social Services do 
not communicate on the same wavelength, so it would be rather 
difficult to do that, but  

certainly he will be advised of the result. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I 
know the strong support that the Minister of Social Services 
gives to the free enterprise system. I know how strongly he 
supports that and promotes it. As a matter of fact, the 
Conservative Party does because I have their There is a Better 
Way, the Progressive Conservative Party policy manual. It has a 
section entitled Small Business. And the first ten words, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, say: 
 

Taxation policies, government interference and regulations 
are hurting small businesses. 

 
And I think the minister must subscribe to this because it’s in 
his policy manual. 
 
I want to now refer the minister to a memorandum that was 
issued by his department on November 23, 1987. This 
memorandum regards taxi usage in the city of Saskatoon and I 
want to read the points on this memo into the record, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman. The first one: 
 

On today’s date (that means November 23, 1987) 
accountants in each office (and the two offices referred to 
are the child and family services, and the income security, 
Saskatoon region) will split out all taxi accounts by 
establishment, number, client name, and service cost for 
the most recent taxi billing. 

 
The second point: 
 

The above noted information is being given to each 
supervisor, who will be held accountable for assuring a 
60-40 split in favour of United Cabs company. 

 
The next point is, point 3: 
 

Supervisory realignment of taxi use by the required 60-40 
split must be in place by Friday, November 27, 1987. 

 
The fourth point: 
 

Until further notice, approval for all use of taxis will be at 
the supervisory level in order that the supervisor can 
monitor taxi use by the 60-40 split. 

 
And there’s a fifth point which is irrelevant to this particular 
comment of mine, but the sixth point reads: 
 

Supervisors must consider the above a priority. 
 
Now the background to this situation is this, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman: there are two cab companies in Saskatoon, United 
Cabs and Radio Cab — Radio Cab being the smaller, small 
business of the two. And I think we would rightly regard them 
both as small businesses. 
 
Radio Cab, through its diligence and good service to the clients 
of the Department of Social Services, had obtained the majority 
of the work of the Department of Social Services. In fact, they 
had the majority of the work; consequently the minister had 
issued as statement saying  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1302 
 

that he would interfere in the division from the Department of 
Social Services to make it a 60-40 split in favour of United Cab 
company, which is the larger of the two. 
 
In view of the policy of the Conservative Party and the 
oft-stated policy of the minister in support of private enterprise 
and non-interference in the private enterprise field, I wonder if 
he could explain why this was necessary in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s nothing 
new about this. This was one of their little controversies they 
tried to raise here about six months or so ago. And there’s a 
very simple explanation. 
 
In the city of Saskatoon the Department of Social Services 
spends about a quarter of a million dollars a year on taxi fares. 
And I say that quietly because people are wondering what we 
are doing when you say we have cut the transportation 
allowance, and we’re spending a quarter of a million dollars a 
year on taxi fares in the city of Saskatoon alone. 
 
But I say that these taxis are used to take children — the ones 
that you are concerned we’ve cut their travel — to their medical 
appoints, to take foster-children to school, to take 
foster-children to their medical appointments. Most of these taxi 
trips are for children — to take children to day care so that their 
parents can get an education, all of those kind of things. We 
spend about a quarter of a million dollars a year on taxi-cabs in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And there are two companies in Saskatoon. The one company 
has 60 per cent of the cars and the other company has 40 per 
cent of the cars. And I told my department in no uncertain terms 
that our business was to be divided 60-40, in the same 
percentages as the number of cars. 
 
Now I don’t care what colour those taxi-cabs are; I simply want 
it divided 60-40 to those taxi-cabs in the same percentage as the 
licences in Saskatoon. That seems reasonable. 
 
Now if one of those companies does not provide adequate 
service or should happened to charge more than the other 
company, which is not the case that I know of, then I would 
have to review that policy and have that taxi that provides the 
best service, or that taxi that provides inferior service would 
have to lose some of that business. 
 
As far as I know, both of those taxi companies in Saskatoon 
provide good service. They have cars in the ration of 60-40. I 
believe that is a fair distribution of the business in Saskatoon, 
and I can’t see why the NDP would have any objection to a 
mathematical calculation and a pro rata division of the business 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, the minister’s explanation 
flies in the face of his policy. His policy is non-interference in 
small business, and I read the policy of the Conservative Party. 
 
The Radio Cab in Saskatoon, through its diligence and  

good service conquered 60 per cent of the business of the 
Department of Social Services in Saskatoon. Now this minister 
arbitrarily, on his own, said no, that’s not the way it’s going to 
be. He said, I’m going to divide it fairly. 
 
That cab company, Radio Cab, earned that business. The 
parents by choice chose Radio Cab. But the minister said, my 
wishes are superior to their wishes, and my wishes are superior 
to the policy of this department — of my own policy about 
non-interference in private business. So he interfered, and he 
said that the large cab company should get 60 per cent of the 
business, which means it had to be taken away from the smaller 
cab company, which had earned the business. 
 
And I say that’s wrong, and I don’t go for the facetious 
explanation that the minister gives us as to the reasons why he 
did it. I’ll tell you what the reasons are why the minister did it, 
and it’s this — that friends of the Conservative Party own the 
United Cab business in Saskatoon. 
 
(2045) 
 
Now the member will squirm around and try to get out from 
under this, but I have some facts for the minister to consider. By 
federal order in council in 1985, and the order in council 
number if PC1985-774, the appointment of Helen Swan to Via 
Rail Canada Inc. was ordered by that order in council. By order 
in council, PC 1987, 917, the reappointment for a further three 
years, effective March 12, 1987, took place for Helen M. Swan, 
Saskatoon. Now if a person looks in the Henderson Directory in 
Saskatoon under Swan, you will find Swan, Garth and Helen, 
manager, United Cabs. You will also find under United Cab, 
Garth Swan, manager. Now I have no objection whatsoever to 
the Swans being Conservative — that is fine, somebody in 
Saskatoon has to be Conservative. But what I object to is the 
minister coming in with some phoney excuse why he’s 
interfering in small business in Saskatoon so the United Cab, 
his friends, can get the business. 
 
Everyone knows that the Swans are good friends of the 
Collvers, and they’re good friend of the present government. 
And it was thought by the minister that United Cab therefore 
should get some of the business — more than they earned. 
More than they earned. They did not earn that business. They’re 
taking business away from the other cab company that earned it, 
and it’s running into many thousands of dollars per month. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to know: is that policy still in force in 
Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that policy is still in 
force and that policy will remain in force because it is a fair 
policy. It’s a fair policy and there is no reason why someone 
who might be a member of the Conservative Party should not 
be allowed to do business in this province. 
 
I don’t know who owns Radio Cab, but I can’t see why Radio 
Cab would complain about receiving their fair share of the 
business. Now if you can tell me why Radio Cab should receive 
all the business, you can tell me  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1303 
 

whether they are friends of yours or whose friends they are, 
then I might consider giving them all the business. 
 
But it seems to me there should be a fair distribution of the 
business and there will remain a fair distribution of the 
business. And I will not penalize anybody because they happen 
to be a Conservative, nor will I give them unfair treatment — 
and unfair treatment is not giving them any business — nor will 
I give them all the business. I will give them a fair amount of 
business because they have 60 per cent of the cars, and I will 
give the other company 40 per cent of the business because they 
have 40 per cent of the cars. And if either one of those two 
companies doesn’t provide proper service, then they will get no 
business at all. But they are giving good service they will 
continue to get the business in a fair basis. 
 
And I will not apologize to the member opposite because he 
likes to drag the names of people through the muck in the 
legislature. Because somebody might be successful, he thinks 
they should be dragged down. I will not drag anyone down 
because they are successful. I will divide it fairly, and I will 
continue to divide it fairly. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I accept nothing of the 
minister’s explanation. That has got to be the phoniest bit of 
shilly-shallying around. What this minister has done is he’s 
taken business away from a small business that earned the 
business and given it to a bigger business that did not earn the 
business. And he has some phoney excuse about dividing up the 
business. 
 
What I want to know: has this minister got a similar policy in 
Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, here’s another 
example of the inconsistent Social Services system that the 
NDP left me to try to correct. My officials advise me that in 
Regina, taxi-cab rates are built into the foster-parent system, but 
in Saskatoon they are not built into the system. And therefore, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. It’s difficult to hear the 
minister’s answers. I’d ask members to allow the minister to 
answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, members opposite don’t 
want to hear the answer. The answer is that this is another 
example of the kind of Social Services mess the members 
opposite left for this government to clean up. 
 
I’m advised that in the city of Regina the foster-parents have 
built into their rate transportation for taxi fees and they hire the 
taxis; in Saskatoon they are not built into the rates that we pay 
directly for the taxis rather than have them built into the rates. 
Therefore, the amount of money we actually spend in the 
calculation in Saskatoon appears much higher because in 
Regina it’s built into the rates. 
 
Somehow they had a system here. The member for Regina 
Elphinstone, newly-elected, was minister for two years, and he 
had a system that had a different policy and different rules in 
Regina than in Saskatoon. So in Regina I haven’t had this 
problem because it’s built into the rates and the people are 
hiring whoever they want to. In Saskatoon, I am hiring the taxis 
and paying them directly.  

And either I have to get Regina and Saskatoon working the 
same to continue the silly system that the NDP started. And 
every time I turn around one of their other silly policies comes 
ahead and say, oh, this didn’t work. 
 
They had the same system in transportation. They paid 
transportation in cities, and they didn’t pay in rural areas. They 
paid to some people and not to other people. The people that 
needed the transportation most that were not in walking 
distance got no transportation. That’s the kind of inconsistent 
system they had. Because they had no management everything 
ran amok in the Department of Social Services. Every office did 
as they pleased. Nobody listened to any superiors. It was a 
system that was totally out of control under the NDP. 
 
I have had to clean that up. We are slowly cleaning it up and the 
members opposite ask why is it different. It is different because 
they made it different, because they weren’t smart enough to do 
it right in the first place. And now you have examples, still six 
years later, examples of how those people opposite couldn’t run 
a system. And we’re still trying to take the bugs out of it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the record will 
clearly show that the minister evaded answering the question. 
Whether he had made a similar arrangement in Regina, the 
record will show that. And the minister stands condemned by 
the record. I have no further questions for this minister. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
want to come back briefly to the question I asked the minister, 
about three-quarters of an hour ago now, on cuts to — and 
perhaps I used the wrong phraseology, Mr. Minister — but cuts 
in the travel allowance to the mobility handicapped in the city 
of Regina. Mr. Minister, will you confirm that you have cut 
their travel allowance from $27 a month to $20 a month, and 
will you justify that cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I answered earlier the 
same question that the handicapped receive their actual 
transportation costs. I have a new category of people called 
mobility restricted, that is people who have a little difficulty in 
getting around. I pay them $20 per month extra for 
transportation. 
 
So the member can go and tell the world another deception, that 
the handicapped do not receive money for travel. The truth is 
they receive their actual amount. That’s the truth. I don’t care 
what the members opposite are going to tell the public. That is 
the truth. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Once again, Mr. Minister, because you just 
won’t answer the question: have the mobility restricted been cut 
from $27 a month to $20 a month in the city of Regina? And 
what other cuts have that same group suffered in other parts of 
the province with respect to the transportation allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, on transportation, there 
is no consistency as to who got an increase or a decrease 
because there was no consistency on who was paid in the first 
place. So some people will receive less; some people will 
receive exactly the same, and others  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1304 
 

will receive more because if they’re handicapped we pay actual, 
and whatever their actual costs are that’s what we pay. 
 
We feel that the handicapped should be paid their actual 
transportation costs. Mobility restricted get $20 a month plus 
special needs, and single employables only get transportation 
for special needs. And that is how it is. That’s how it’s going to 
stay. The NDP may not like it but that is a fair system and that’s 
how it’s going to stay. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s obvious, since the 
mobility restricted were getting $27 last year a month and now 
are getting $20, that they’ve been cut $7, whether you want to 
acknowledge it or not. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to say that I think that once again 
shows the insensitivity of your policies. The travel allowance 
symbolizes, Mr. Minister, what your government is all about. 
Here we have mothers and children not able to get travel for 
grocery shopping; not able to get travel to go to church. I’ve 
seen, Mr. Minister, in the city of Saskatoon and in the city of 
Regina, mothers and their children having to walk more than a 
kilometre in the winter-time carrying heavy groceries from a 
shopping centre as a result of having their travel allowance cut. 
And we have seen, Mr. Minister, families unable to get their 
travel cost to church covered because of the cuts in your travel 
allowance. And clearly, Mr. Minister, that is insensitive and 
inappropriate. 
 
And I urge you again to restore the travel allowance for all 
those who have lost it in urban Saskatchewan and to extend to 
rural Saskatchewan so that all people can have the basic right to 
travel in this province. This is a province that’s cold in the 
winter; geographic distances are often significant, and all 
people in this province should have a basic allowance for travel 
as a basic right, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question with respect to 
the physically disabled, and that is, I want to ask you why, Mr. 
Minister, you have consciously ignored the request of the 
federal minister of Health and Welfare, the Hon. Jake Epp, 
when he increased Canada Pension Plan benefits last year. you 
very consciously deducted the entire increase in the Canada 
Pension Plan benefit that each physically handicapped social 
assistance recipient received — you deducted that off their 
cheque. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, I know that the Hon. Jake Epp, your 
counterpart in Ottawa, requested you, as he did every minister 
of social services in Canada, to pass along that increase in the 
Canada Pension Plan benefit, that the federal government 
adopted, to physically handicapped people in this province who 
were on social assistance. And yet, penny for penny, you’re 
deducting that increase from the social assistance cheque. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: why are you not 
passing that benefit on to disabled people in this province so 
that those who are disabled and are eligible for Canada Pension 
Plan benefits can live in some kind of dignity instead of having 
every penny of the Canada Pension Plan benefit deducted by 
you if they’re on social welfare. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we went through  

this all last year, and the members opposite should know the 
answer because they can read it in Hansard. I’ll explain it 
again. 
 
Canada Pension Plan is income like any other income. All other 
provinces in Canada treat Canada Pension Plan income as any 
other income. If you have Canada Pension Plan income because 
you’re entitled to some income allowances, you will receive 
more income than if you were on welfare alone without Canada 
Pension Plan. Yes, it’s deducted, but it’s also taken into account 
as income for the income exemption allowance. I explained this 
all last year, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and the members opposite 
have forgotten the explanation. We are doing this the same as 
all other provinces. 
 
It would be unfair to have different welfare rates for different 
people, and so therefore I don’t really know many different 
rates the members opposite would want to have. But people on 
Canada Pension Plan and welfare would be receiving more 
money than people who are just on welfare and didn’t have the 
benefit of having Canada Pension Plan. And so then you have 
people that were handicapped all of their life, and through no 
fault of their own couldn’t work, would be receiving less than 
some people who were fortunate enough to be employed during 
part of their life and then receive more once they come on to the 
welfare rolls in their older years. 
 
So it’s for fairness. In fairness to everyone the rates are the 
same, income is income, and the deduction is allowed as part of 
an income deduction. So you could still have some more, but 
yes, we do take it into account like all other provinces. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, we regret your decision in that 
regard. 
 
I want to move on to another topic, and that is general funding 
through non-government organizations, just to alert your 
officials to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us how many 
non-governmental organizations have had their budgets frozen 
at last year’s 1987 levels in the year 1988? And also I’d 
appreciate if I could receive in writing a copy of all funding for 
each non-government organization that your department 
finances. If I could receive that in writing for the 1988-89 fiscal 
year, I’d appreciate that, but I wonder if for now you could 
indicate how many NGOs have had their budget cut over the 
last fiscal year for this fiscal year? And how many NGOs in the 
province have had their budget frozen at last year’s 1987-88 
levels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, of the 
contracting agencies that our government contracts with for 
services provided to the government, there are 166 to whom, I 
believe, we pay in excess of $27 million. Is that a correct figure, 
or is it up to 32 now? 
 
There are 166 agencies, of which 55 per cent, or 91, received an 
increase this year, and the other 45 per cent, or 75, received the 
same amount as last year. 
 



 
May 12, 1988 

1305 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Is there any cut-off completely, Mr. Minister, 
and if so, which organizations were they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, all of the agencies that 
were receiving money last year are receiving money this year. 
none of them are receiving any less. There are a few that we 
have written letters indicating that we have to do a continuous 
review of the services they are actually providing, and we will 
be discussing with them, this year, whether we are satisfied 
with the services they are providing, but none have received 
less so far. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
effect, if I’m correct, I understood you to say there are 78 
organizations that are receiving the same as last year. is that 
correct? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seventy-five. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Seventy-five. So that means, in effect, Mr. 
Minister, that there are 75 non-government organizations that 
have received, in real-dollar terms, a 5 per cent cut in their 
budget again this year. and this gets, Mr. Minister, at the 
fundamental problem that many non-government organizations 
are facing. 
 
Last year, Mr. Minister, as you know, you cut the budgets of 
some 57 non-government organizations in this province. Their 
1987-88 budgets were substantially less in many cases than 
their 1986-87 budgets. Many of those same organizations, Mr. 
Minister, now, I suspect, are among the 75 whose budgets have 
been frozen this year. Last year, for instance, every friendship 
centre in the province received budget cuts; every family 
service bureau in the province received budget cuts; many of 
the big brother and big sister organizations in Saskatchewan 
suffered budget cuts; and the Welfare Rights Centre in Regina 
and the Saskatoon Self-Help Council each lost about $13,000 in 
funding; native family service agencies were badly hit; the 
Metis Society in Saskatoon lost over $40,000 in funding; the 
Regina Native Women’s Association lost over $70,000 in 
funding. 
 
Mr. Minister, my concern is that many non-government 
organizations are virtually at the breaking point now, Mr. 
Minister, in terms of being able to function under the funding 
cuts and funding freezes that you have imposed upon them. 
 
In general, the staff of non-government organizations is not 
well paid, Mr. Minister. Many of the staff have now had their 
salaries frozen for at least the last three years. A lot of the staff 
— and they’re doing very important work as I’m sure you will 
agree in the community, working with people in all walks of 
life who are in need — and these staff have few pension 
benefits or other benefits over and above their salary. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: would you not 
acknowledge that what is in effect happening now is that these 
non-government organizations, and the volunteers on the board 
of these organizations, and the staff who have had salary freezes 
in these NGO’s for several years are in effect picking up the 
work and carrying the financial burden that results from your 
governments’ cuts in the social safety net right across this 
province. And  

therefore, Mr. Minister, don’t you think it’s time that at least 
you began to fund non-government organizations in this 
province at at least the inflation rate, so that these staff salaries 
can at least increase at the rate of inflation, and so that they 
don’t have to consistently, year after year, to curtail their 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: —Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all let me 
explain to the member opposite that non-governmental 
organizations provide contract services to the government. They 
provide services on behalf of the government on a contract 
basis, services that we do not wish to deliver ourselves, or 
possibly they can deliver better than the government could 
deliver. You might say they are private agencies. You might say 
they are privatized. You may say they were always privatized. 
 
Now that you understand how they operate, I want you to also 
know that they should not consider these contracts as being 
some sort of a continuous funding for their agency. They are 
contracts; we buy the service. For he most part we are satisfied 
with the service In some cases we are reviewing the service 
because if we find that we are not getting our money’s-worth 
for the service that we are buying, we will have to consider 
contracting with another agency to provide that service. Now 
you believe very strongly in tendering out. We have to also look 
at what other people can provide if the service that we are 
receiving is not suitable or we believe that that taxpayers are not 
receiving full value for their money. 
 
So in almost all cases we are satisfied with their services, and in 
91 cases we’ve increased the amount of their contracts. We 
have raised their contracts to 55 per cent of them. 
 
Now that doesn’t say that all of them were in equitable position. 
I had extra money in the budget this year, and I allocated that 
money to what I felt were the most needy groups. And so some 
of them will receive increases greater than others. I didn’t go 
across the board. I allocated on the basis of need. Those that 
had lowest wages, I considered to be highest priority. 
 
Now some of the things that you say — and I realize you 
weren’t the critic last year — are totally inaccurate. For 
example, you talk about Big Brother and Big Sisters having 
their budgets cut. We buy a service for them and we pay on a 
per case basis, so the more youngsters they help, the more 
money they receive. If they help fewer youngsters, they receive 
less money. If, hopefully, there are fewer youngsters in need, 
then the amount of service they provide would go down. And it 
varies from year to year, depending on the need for their 
services. They provide contract services for our department. 
 
With respect to the friendship centres, last year we standardized 
their grants at $27,000 per counsellor. Some were at 30 plus, 
some were down at 21 — we standardized. So last year they 
had an adjustment on that basis at $27,000 per counsellor. We 
felt that that was a reasonable sum; we feel that under the 
circumstances, considering the educational level of the workers, 
considering the status of the economy, that $27,000 was a 
reasonable sum per person. If they can raise additional funds, 
they can pay more. We decided we would  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1306 
 

standarize all of them at $27,000 per counsellor, and that’s what 
we did. 
 
So I want you to understand that these are contract services; that 
we are satisfied with them in almost all cases; that we are 
having them sign contracts this year so that they know exactly 
what is expected of them; that in addition — in addition, we 
value these services. We could not function without these 
contract services, and we will treat these contract services very 
well. 
 
And I want you to understand that when you talk about massive 
cuts, that is simply your political terminology and not the 
reality. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it would be nice if many 
of these organizations, instead of having to devote much 
volunteer time to raising money through bingos and raffles and 
other fund-raising projects, could devote their volunteer time to 
getting on with the service that they want to provide to the 
community, and that presumably your government wants to 
provide to them, but that they can’t provide through your 
consistent underfunding of their organizations. 
 
I want to urge you again, Mr. Minister, to look at funding levels 
on an annual basis that at least reflect the rate of inflation and to 
look seriously at three-year plans or five-year plans for many of 
these non-government organizations so that they can establish a 
long-term plan for the delivery of service. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to move on to another topic, and that 
relates to your decision, effective January 1 of the year, to 
institute a new set of fees for post-adoption services in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, we object strongly to 
these fees. We say, Mr. Minister, why should your government 
be charging to reunite birth parents with their children or to 
provide adult adoptees with personal information about 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was really quite appalled when I saw the order 
in council laying out the new rate structure that adult adoptees 
or the parents of adopted children now have to pay to get 
information — personal information about themselves — or 
about their . . . or in the case of parents with adopted children, 
about their adopted children from your department, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
For instance, Mr. Minister, if someone, if an adult adoptee now 
wants to know something about the ethnic origin or the 
vocational background of their natural parent, they have to pay 
$60 to get that information from your department. And your 
department, Mr. Minister, I might remind you, has a monopoly 
on this information. The only way that the adult adoptee can get 
access to those personal records is through your department, 
Mr. Minister. And there’s simply no basis for charging someone 
$40 to get a xerox copy of information that is on file with your 
department, Mr. Minister, and that is personal information that 
they ought to have a right to, without charge. After all, they are 
already taxpayers in this province. 
 
So maybe you can explain to me, Mr. Minister, why it is that 
you’ve decided to charge adult adoptees a fee of $60  

to obtain personal information about themselves and about their 
birth parents that they ought to have a right to as a citizen of 
this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me explain to 
the members that prior to us becoming government under the 
NDP, you couldn’t receive information about your parents or 
about your children that you are trying to trace. They didn’t 
charge any fees, and they wouldn’t give you any information — 
they forgot. That was their closed policy. 
 
Now we are giving information. This province started that; 
other provinces have followed. Since then . . . Here’s the 
situation in Canada: Alberta has reunion by mutual request 
only, implemented in 1985; B.C. has reunion by mutual request 
only, implemented very recently; Ontario is similar to 
Saskatchewan, prior to 1987 reunions occurred only by mutual 
request; Manitoba is similar to Saskatchewan and their policy 
was implemented this year. 
 
(2115) 
 
We were the first to assist people in finding their parents or in 
finding their children. We allowed this, and it worked so well 
that our staff couldn’t keep up. The backlog was developing up 
to 16 to 18 months to do the research and find this information. 
And we found that also the costs were mounting because we 
had to have two and a half or three staff working on this full 
time. 
 
So we felt that there should be some cost recovery because this 
is non-essential information. If it’s essential information, we’ll 
go and find it for people for medical reasons. but the 
non-essential information . . . And we don’t just go and get the 
information; we also try to make sure that it’s the kind of 
information that should go out. I get requests constantly to my 
desk asking that I allow extra information so somebody can go 
beyond the normal rules and find their parents or find their 
children that they’ve given up year and years ago or they were 
separated from. 
 
So we implemented these fees and they do not recover all of the 
costs. But they do recover some of the costs of this service 
provided by our department, which is not an essential service, 
but is a great convenience and a great peace of mind to people. 
and we find that most reasonable people are prepared to pay 
these fees to get this information. And if people can’t afford to 
pay those fees, I have the power in hardship cases to waive 
those fees. 
 
We have very, very low fees if you’re on social assistance. For 
example, non-identifying background information for adoptees 
or birth family costs $60. If you’re a client of Social Services, it 
costs $10. I don’t think it’s unreasonable for someone who 
wants to find their family to pay $10 to get that information. I 
don’t think it’s unreasonable for somebody who can afford to 
pay $60, to pay $60. And if somebody has a hardship case, I 
have the power to, and will, waive the fee. 
 
But it’s not correct if all of this information is Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. A lot of it is from other  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1307 
 

provinces — people from all over. I get letters from people who 
want to find their relatives. I get letters from British Columbia; 
I get letters from the United States. And they’re not concerned 
about the paying of a small fee to help cover the cost. They 
think it’s worthwhile to find their relatives for whatever reason 
they want to be reunited. 
 
And so, therefore, I don’t believe it’s unreasonable to ask 
people who can afford to pay, to pay for a service that they are 
requesting, that the public as a whole does not need. 
 
Mr. Prebble: —Well, Mr. Minister, first of all we on this side 
of the House do want to commend your government for 
initiating this active search at the request of the adult adoptee. 
That was a positive move. I want you to know that we support 
that. That’s not what we’re criticizing now, Mr. Minister. 
 
What we are criticizing now, first of all, is that people are 
having to pay for personal information about themselves. You 
made reference to the $60 fee, as I did, for requesting 
non-identifying information about their natural parents. Now, 
Mr. Minister, that same service was available when the NDP 
was in government, and it’s available to my knowledge right 
across Canada. It’s available in every other province free of 
charge, and it was available under the NDP free of charge. And 
now you’re asking people to pay $60 in this province for simple 
information that is already on record with the department. And 
that, it seems to me, Mr. Minister, sets a very dangerous 
precedent nationally across the country. I don’t think we want 
to see a situation where other governments institute that policy. 
It would be very unfortunate indeed. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Minister, there are many working people, 
low-income people who are working full time in this province 
who can’t afford your $300 fee for an active search. They can’t 
afford it. And I’ve already talked to three or four who have 
phoned me up and have told me that that will be hardship for 
them to pay. They’re not social assistance recipients, but they 
can’t afford the $300. If you’re serious, Mr. Minister, about 
actively working to reunite families, then you will make this 
service a public service. 
 
Mr. Minister, in addition to that, there has always been a service 
in this province where the natural parents and the adult adoptee 
mutually express a desire through your department, each by 
writing in, to be in contact with one another. There’s always 
been a policy on the books that the department will facilitate 
that contact. Now even when you know where the adult adoptee 
and the natural parent are, you’re charging $180 to facilitate 
them coming together. Now that’s never been done before 
either. And I ask you: how do you justify those kinds of new 
fees, that are not charged anywhere else in Canada, for 
providing a service that surely these taxpayers are entitled to by 
virtue of being citizens of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I know 
that the free, universal, everything party does not believe in 
anyone paying if they can afford to pay. We know that, and we 
doubt very much if they will ever change. And I say to them: 
nothing is free; someone has  

to pay. And so therefore we believe that those people who can 
afford to pay for this service should pay for this service. It is a 
once in a lifetime service. It’s not a re-occurring service. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And you will pay when the general 
election comes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The members opposite shout for an 
election. They should be patient; there will be an election. 
There’s no need for them to get impatient. They said the same 
thing five years ago and the same thing four years ago, and we 
had an election. They weren’t satisfied with the results; now 
they want another election. They will get one in due course. 
 
What I am saying is that the free, universal, everything party 
does not understand that nothing is free. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you some 
questions now with respect to the pressing issue of the safety of 
foster-children. I think we’re very fortunate in this province to 
have a lot of outstanding foster homes, and it’s very much to the 
credit of foster-parents in this province, many of whom are 
prepared to take on many foster-children and provide a home 
for them. that’s a service that all of us in this province very 
much appreciate. 
 
Mr. Minister, on the other hand, there are a few situations in 
this province where we know that children who have already 
been physically or sexually abused in their natural homes and 
have been removed from their natural homes by your 
department are in care, and are in care in foster home situations 
that are not satisfactory. 
 
One of the concerns, as you will be aware, that the previous 
ombudsman, Mr. David Tickell, expressed, was that he 
recommended, in his January 1987 report to you, that your 
department should change its policy on corporal punishment, 
and that you should not longer permit the use of corporal 
punishment by foster-parents. 
 
The ombudsman, Mr. Minister, also recommended that this 
issue of corporal punishment ought to be the subject of public 
discussion and public consultation. Your government has taken 
no action on that recommendation by the ombudsman since his 
report came down. And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: 
are you prepared to act on that recommendation, and are you 
prepared to provide an opportunity for public comment and 
public review of this policy with respect to corporal punishment 
for foster-children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I have stated clearly on 
past occasions that I expect foster-parents to treat 
foster-children the same way other parents treat their children. I 
have said, as a last resort, that the government policy does not 
prevent spanking if necessary, but not necessarily spanking, to 
use an old liberal terminology. And, Mr. Chairman, the Foster 
Parents Association backs me on that position. 
 
I can say that the former ombudsperson, Mr. Tickell, did a great 
disservice to the foster-parents of Saskatchewan when he put 
out a report based on very old information  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1308 
 

that tried to paint all foster-parents, or did have the effect of 
painting all foster-parents as abusers. 
 
He did a great disservice to foster-parents; they resented it. I 
took up their cause. I agree that they are doing a good job. It’s 
only on the rarest of occasions that they ever go over the line, 
and you have to understand that they are dealing with very 
difficult children. This is not a situation like 20 years ago when 
orphanages — or 30 years — when orphanages where closed 
and all children went out into foster homes. 
 
The only children that they’re getting in foster homes now, for 
he most part, are the very difficult ones. And more and more 
children are staying in their own homes; more and more 
children are being adopted out; they’re getting the very difficult 
ones; they’re doing a good job with them. We have increased 
the funding to foster-parents. We have brought in a training 
plan for them. we’ve funded it for them. 
 
We have in many, many ways enhanced and will continue to 
enhance foster-parenting. We have turned around the loss on 
foster homes so that last year the trend was turned around and 
we now have more foster homes than we had last year. We had 
a declining balance for many, many years. Last year we made 
foster-parenting more respectable. We countered what the 
ombudsperson had to say that reflected badly on foster-parents 
and was unfounded with respect to foster-parents in general. 
 
And therefore, foster-parenting is doing better than ever. Their 
association is stronger than ever, and you will see initiatives in 
the future that will make foster-parents even stronger because 
we feel they are a very valuable resource, and we feel that they 
were slandered by a report that was out of balance. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I agree with you that large 
majority of foster-parents in this province, as I’ve said, are 
doing an outstanding job. We were pleased to see that at last 
you increased the rates that are paid to foster-parents, and we 
support that initiative. 
 
But that does not take away, Mr. Minister, from the problem 
that Mr. Tickell identified. That problem was not aimed at the 
large, large majority of foster-parents in this province. But that 
does not mean that the problem goes away, Mr. Minister. And 
the problem is that there is abuse taking place, of 
foster-children, and that that abuse needs to be dealt with by 
your department, and that we need, Mr. Minister, action to 
ensure, as a departmental policy, that corporal punishment will 
not be used — that the strap, for instance, will not be used. 
 
Children who are abused, Mr. Minister, and who are not like the 
natural parents in a . . . are not like the natural children of 
foster-parents in a foster home, they are already children 
who’ve been physically or sexually abused. They deserve 
special care. The responsibility for that care rests squarely on 
your shoulders. 
 
And the question is, Mr. Minister: are you going to change your 
policy and make it clear that corporal punishment is not 
appropriate on children who have already suffered physical and 
sexual abuse? This is not to say, Mr.  

Minister, that the large majority of foster-parents aren’t using 
corporal punishment — of course they’re not. We’re talking 
about the few who are, and we’re asking you whether you are 
prepared to change your policy. 
 
We’re not talking about somebody occasionally giving a slap on 
the bottom to an abused child, we’re talking about situations 
that the ombudsman identified, where in effect an abused child 
was being abused again in a foster home. Those are a very, 
small minority of cases but they are taking place, and I’m 
asking you what action your department plans to take to deal 
with that problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, there’s a difference 
between discipline and abuse. In no instance will we tolerate 
child abuse, whether it’s in a foster home or in a regular home 
or any other place. If the members opposite have evidence of 
child abuse, they should in confidence send that evidence to 
myself and my officials and we will investigate that. If they do 
not send that information to us, they are guilty of the same 
offence as the person who is conducting the abuse. So if they 
have any evidence, I would insist that they send it to us and we 
will investigate. 
 
But you are confusing discipline and abuse. We do not tolerate 
abuse. Discipline will be allowed — physical discipline, if 
necessary. We discourage it, but if absolutely necessary, we 
will allow it. 
 
And the members opposite say, read the report. I have read the 
report. I know what was on the mind of the former 
ombudsperson, and I know that he was more interest in 
sensationalism than he was in taking care of those children. And 
I’m telling you that that ombudsperson was indulging in 
politics, and he slandered the foster-parents of Saskatchewan 
when he did that. 
 
And I am saying that that was not fair to the foster-parents of 
Saskatchewan to take information that was four or five years 
old and bring that information . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And then the member here repeats, foster-parents, he says, are 
abusing children. Well if he knows about it, tell me, and I will 
put a stop to it. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I simply can’t believe 
what I’ve just heard in this Assembly. You, as Minister of 
Social Services, are accusing the former ombudsman, a 
legislative officer of this Assembly, who’s in no position to 
defend himself, I might add, from your comments, you are 
accusing him, Mr. Minister, of being political when there is 
absolutely no evidence to support that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I ask you, Mr. Minister, table that 
evidence in this Assembly now or retract those remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to raise a point 
of personal privilege. I heard the minister make those 
comments. Beauchesne’s describes a point of personal privilege 
is anything that brings this institution   



 
May 12, 1988 

1309 
 

into disrepute, and I think those remarks did. I think it is 
contrary to the rules of this institution for members to be 
attacking legislative officers. And I ask you, Mr. Chairman, to 
rule on it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I will take the member’s point 
of privilege into consideration and bring back the ruling next 
time in committee. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I ask 
you again, you have directly attacked the integrity of a 
legislative officer of this Assembly and I ask you now: will you 
retract those remarks that you’ve made, which are totally 
inappropriate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
gets very touchy when you talk about people they appointed, 
that they appointed. They get very touchy about that. There 
seems to be a lot of shouting over there on the other side; they 
are very sensitive about this. 
 
I will give you, Mr. Chairman, a list of the improvements we 
have made in foster care in Saskatchewan. We’ve developed a 
standardized introduction to foster care, delivered by joint 
foster-parent teams to all new foster-parents. We’ve recruited 
another 65 foster homes and increased the number by 9 per cent 
in the last year. we’ve assisted with the Foster Parents 
Association to initiate local training initiatives of foster-parents 
through their association. We’ve made a 6.5 per cent increase to 
the basic maintenance rates. We’ve established experienced 
foster-parents as local support parents. We’ve established a 
buddy system which matches foster-parents with experienced 
foster-parents. We’ve introduced an overall insurance rider for 
foster-parents. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have changed the system so 
that foster-parents now believe that they are working in 
co-operation with our department. They do not have the 
apprehension that they once had from our works; they feel that 
they are working together with our workers to help these 
children; they do not feel that people in the department are 
constantly watching them and threatening them. And when I 
was first appointed minister, the foster-parents as a whole felt 
threatened. Now we are working in partnership, and they are 
doing an excellent job in helping the children that they have 
under their care. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, you failed to retract your 
remarks. That has to be a big disappointment to all members of 
this Assembly. The former ombudsman conducted himself with 
honour and with integrity. When he, Mr. Minister, filed his 
report last January, he did so in a highly professional way. He 
was a servant of this legislature. He did not cast aspersions, 
contrary to what you have claimed, on foster-parents in general. 
 
Instead, Mr. Minister, he identified a crisis in child protection 
that largely your government must take responsibility for. He 
identified a number of specific issues which he wanted to see 
incorporated in a new family services Act in this province, 
which you have yet to introduce, despite the fact that you’ve 
been talking about it for three years. And you have absolutely 
no business, Mr. Minister, whether you agree with his  

recommendations or not, to criticize an official that conducted 
himself in a highly professional manner and that tabled his 
report in this Assembly in the service of all members of this 
Assembly. You have simply no business questioning his 
professional integrity. That is what you have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I ask you one final time, will you retract 
those remarks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the 
foster-parents of Saskatchewan with whom I met were not of 
the same opinion. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Your position is clear, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask you a couple of other questions about the 
Ombudsman’s report. One is that the Ombudsman, Mr. 
Minister, recommended a code of rights for all children in the 
care of the Minister of Social Services. He pointed out, Mr. 
Minister, that this suggestion has come from many 
professionals in the field of family services. I want to ask you, 
Mr. Minister, is it your intention to include such a code of rights 
in the new child and family services Act when it’s introduced in 
this legislature, and can you give us, Mr. Minister, an indication 
of when that Act will be introduced in this legislature? Will it 
be in this spring session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the current Act was 
introduced by the member of the NDP and their government in 
1973, and I will soon be introducing a new Act to bring the Act 
up to the standards of current thinking in current society. 
Society has changed quite a lot since 1973. 
 
I can tell the member opposite that his friend, the 
ex-ombudsperson, was recommending policy in his report, and 
to recommend policy is to engage in politics. And therefore I 
want you to advise him for me that this government makes 
policy and not the Ombudsman. And therefore we will follow 
the policies that we believe are correct. And that making of 
policy is politics, and that’s what this government has a 
mandate to do. We will be introducing a children’s code of 
rights. Children are covered by the existing laws of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, we want to urge you, on 
this side of the House, to look seriously at the implementation 
of a code of rights for children who are under your care. I think 
that that would be a very appropriate part of amendments to The 
Family Services Act. 
 
You are incorrect, sir, when you suggest that the Ombudsman is 
not entitled to make recommendations with respect to policy. 
That’s precisely part of his mandate, Mr. Minister. And it’s 
obvious that, despite the fact that you’re responsible, the 
minister responsible for the Ombudsman, you don’t understand 
what the purpose and the role of the Ombudsman is. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1310 
 

My colleague, the member for Regina Lakeview, has kindly 
given me a copy of the legislation that outlines the powers, 
functions and duties of the Ombudsman. And, Mr. Minister, I 
want to read section 12 of The Ombudsman Act to you: 
 

It is the duty of the Ombudsman and he has the power to 
investigate any decision or recommendation made, 
including any recommendation made to a minister, or any 
act done or omitted, relating to a matter of administration 
and affecting any person or body of persons in his 
personal capacity . . . 

 
Mr. Minister, it’s clearly part of the responsibility of the 
Ombudsman to recommend policy changes where the existing 
policy is impacting negatively upon individuals who are 
suffering some unjustified abuse in this province, and that is 
part of the responsibilities and duties of the Ombudsman. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one other question with respect 
to the Ombudsman’s report, and that is with respect to the 
question of mandatory reporting on child abuse. Mr. Minister, 
the Ombudsman pointed out to you that at this point in time it is 
unclear who must report child abuse and under what conditions 
child abuse is to be reported. 
 
Mr. Tickell, Mr. Minister, cited two examples to you: first of 
all, he cited the example of a mental health worker who did not 
believe that she had an obligation to report a case of child abuse 
when she witnessed that; and secondly, he reported the case of a 
day-care worker who did report abuse at her place of 
employment and was fired for doing so. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: can we expect in the 
new child and family services Act that a formal child abuse 
register will be established in the kind of detail set out in the 
legislation in Ontario and Nova Scotia? And can we expect 
from you a clear set of rules on who is responsible for reporting 
child abuse, and what form that report must take, and what fines 
will be levied against people who fail to report child abuse in 
this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am please to hear 
that the members opposite are in favour of mandatory reporting 
and that . . . I am surprised that the ombudsperson would 
recommend that we make a law that everyone has to report, 
because I quote for you section 16 of the existing Act that says: 
 

(1) Every person having information that a child is in need 
of protection shall report the information to an officer or 
peace officer. 

 
And I say that that is the law since 1972 when your party put it 
in, and the ombudsperson should have known of the existence 
of this law, and that if you have information that children are 
being abused right now, it is the law that you report it, and I 
suggest that you do that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, what’s not clear in the existing 
legislation is what the penalties are for not reporting child 
abuse, and that is anything but clear. Nor,  

Mr. Minister, is there any provision under the existing law, as I 
pointed out before, for a child abuse registry. And as the 
Ombudsman has pointed out, there is no provision in the 
existing law, Mr. Minister, for people to be able to find out 
whether their name is on that registry or not. 
 
In some cases reports of child abuse are inaccurate and people 
have the right to have their names removed from the registry or 
removed from the internal list, rather, that your department 
keeps on cases of child abuse. And at this point in time people 
don’t have access to finding out whether their names are on 
there. 
 
(2145) 
 
So is suggest that you establish a registry as the Ombudsman 
has proposed, that you establish some clear penalties for not 
reporting cases of child abuse, particularly with respect to 
professionals who would be expected, in the course of their 
duties, to report on cases of child abuse. I suggest that you 
provide a mechanism as the Ombudsman has recommended, 
Mr. Minister, for the removal of names of persons who are not 
guilty of child abuse but whose names have been given to your 
department and may be on lists that your department keeps. In 
other words, establish a registry in the same manner than Nova 
Scotia and Ontario have done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I agree that the 
legislation brought in by the NDP that now exists is guilty of 
sloppy draftsmanship and that there is no clear punishment for 
breaking section 16. And I can assure the member opposite that 
when we bring in an Act, there will be a clear punishment. I can 
assure him of that. 
 
I suggest that if he has any knowledge of child abuse, he report 
it immediately. But there is no punishment now, but there will 
be after we pass the new Act. So he should take heed of that, 
and I will follow his request. 
 
With respect to a registry, there’s a problem in that most 
provinces are going away from a registry because, for example, 
in Manitoba the courts struck down the registry. And the 
member opposite should know that to keep sort of a secret list, 
without convicting anyone of anything and to move them off 
and on, would be contrary to human rights and the principles of 
natural justice. And therefore we have a difficulty in trying to 
set up a registry system. We try to take precautions, but we’re 
not going to set up the kind of black list that you’re calling 
upon, where people have no recourse as to who might be on it 
or why they might be on it. It’s already been struck down by the 
courts in Manitoba. We don’t intend to get into that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to move to another issue 
in this large area of family services and child protection. And, 
Mr. Minister, I want to express to you a concern that I raised 
with you last year, but I want to express it more forcefully this 
year, with respect to the very serious situation that exists in 
Saskatoon right now, where Kilburn Hall and the some 35 
spaces that it used to provide to children whose relationship 
with their families had broken down in some way — primarily 
teenagers, Mr. Minister, who either are no longer living at 
home, are out on the street, or are living with a friend, or in 
some other way, Mr. Minister — for whatever reason, the  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1311 
 

authority relationship and the natural relationship that exists 
between parents and children has broken down, and these 
teenagers who are no long living at home, and who used to be 
able to be housed at Kilburn Hall where there would be an 
assessment of their situation and the family situation — some 
stabilization being provided and counselling being provided for 
the young person — and then either appropriate measures 
would be taken to either place that child in a group home or in 
some other situation that would be beneficial for the child or to 
reinstate them with their natural family. Those were the services 
that used to be provided by Kilburn Hall, Mr. Minister. 
 
My concern, Mr. Minister, is that those services are no longer 
being provided in the city of Saskatoon. Kilburn Hall is now, in 
effect, being used as a jail under The Young Offenders Act. 
Young offenders are being housed at Kilburn Hall, and there is 
no place for these young people, who are not in trouble with the 
law — they have not broken any laws, but they are no longer 
living at home, and they need stabilization and they need 
protection, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I want to know, Mr. Minister, what your department is 
planning to do immediately to resolve this very serious problem 
where literally, Mr. Minister, many people who I have talked to 
in Saskatoon, many professionals advise me that there are now 
hundreds of young people either out on the streets, or living in 
garages, or separated from their families and living with friends, 
who need this king of support and service and it is not available 
to them, Mr. Minister. You talked last year about super foster 
homes — we’ve yet to see any action being taken on that. When 
are you going to establish a stabilization and assessment unit to 
help these young people in the city of Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have taken 
new initiatives and we will try to do more. I agree that more has 
to be done. We have done quite a lot in the last year for . . . First 
of all, we’ve enhanced the foster care system. We have 
approximately 60 new foster homes. We will be announcing in 
the near future some changes in the foster system that will give 
a more specialized care to some of the people that you refer to 
that need specialized care. And we will have some higher 
quality — and I’m not saying the quality is low in foster homes 
now, but I’m saying we’ll have some specialized foster homes. 
 
We, as a matter of fact, do have 15 community homes operating 
now that we didn’t have operating last year, which I called 
super foster homes last year. we have 15 in place already. We 
have . . . and they include native families operating these homes 
so that native children can be raised and try to be corrected in 
native foster homes where there are native children. We have 
signed at Meadow Lake, with the Meadow Lake district chiefs, 
10 bands, the first Indian child care agreement in Saskatchewan, 
giving them jurisdiction over child care in their area on their 10 
reserves. 
 
We’ve placed a greater emphasis on alternative measures, 
which means rather than taking the lesser cases to court, we try 
to have a mediation process where the young offender either 
works off some of the harm that  

was done, if it was property damage, or makes amends to the 
victim in some way in lieu of having that child brought before 
the courts. We have also enhanced native participation in the 
foster home system because, as you may not be aware, about 68 
per cent of the children in care are of native origin. So we’re 
trying to get more native foster-parents involved. 
 
We are negotiating for land in the Saskatoon area to get a new 
facility in that area, and we will see how we do on those 
negotiations. We have put another 225,000 into intensive home 
parent support services to maintain youth in their own homes, to 
assist with parent-aid type programs. We have budgeted in this 
year’s budget for a new families type of program — I believe 
it’s $500,000. 
 
In addition, we have budgeted for family services in this year’s 
budget an increase of two and one-half million dollars — from 
32 million to 34.5 million. To put that 34.5 million into 
perspective, a half per cent of sales tax is going into — if it 
existed, but it’s irrelevant — one-half per cent of the education 
and health tax is going into family services budget. So the 
increase there is two and one-half million dollars. 
 
We are trying to do everything to assist these families. Certainly 
you can’t blame the government for all of the problems in 
society. I have no control over the amount of family breakdown 
there is. I have no control over abuse, other than to try to stop it. 
But I have no control over a lot of the things people are doing to 
each other that are damaging their families and that are 
damaging society as a whole. We try our best to prevent these 
things and to correct them. 
 
But society as a whole has to meet the challenge of trying to 
have our society operate as a better society with respect to less 
violence, less drug abuse, paying more attention to our children. 
And I might say that is difficult in the position you and I hold 
here where we work evenings until ten at night and have less 
time for our children, and I would hope that at some stage we 
wouldn’t have evening sittings so that we personally can spend 
more time with our children. These are the kind of things that 
society has to look at. And so the government is doing 
everything possible; we’re all in this together; society has to try 
to assist in this area — the government cannot do it alone. 
 
And I think you will agree that we have the most educated 
society in history, and yet we seem to have more social 
problems than we ever had. And it seems to me that academic 
education isn’t enough; we have to learn to love our neighbours 
and our families a little bit more. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to say first that one 
of the very, very serious problems is that there are simply not 
enough resources put in place by your department to respond to 
the urgent need that we face in this whole area of child 
protection and family support. 
 
Mr. Minister, I point out to you, for instance, that in the . . . if 
you take the Catholic Family Services Bureau or any of the 
other counselling services like just the regular Family Service 
Bureau in Saskatoon, you’ll find, for instance, that there is a 
six-week to two-month waiting list just to see a counsellor for a 
family that is in stress. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1312 
 

So you’ve not put the resources at the front end of the system, 
Mr. Minister, to take the sort of preventive steps that could 
readily be taken in the early stages of family stress to provide 
resources to families when they need it quickly, Mr. Minister, 
you have cut back on your family service positions in the 
department. I recall, for instance, last year, if I’m not mistaken, 
in the Saskatoon region alone you eliminated six front line 
family service worker positions. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is: since the 1986 budget, how 
many family service worker positions have you reduced 
between 1986 and 1988 in the Department of Social Services? 
Can you tell us that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I just 
indicated earlier that we’ve increased the family services 
budget. And I believe what the member opposite means by, we 
haven’t put enough resources into this — he really means we 
haven’t put enough money into this. He’s afraid to use the term, 
money. What he’s saying is, put more money into this. I’m 
saying that we’ve put $2.5 million more into it than last year, 
and we have six more employees in family services this year 
than we had last year. that’s in this year’s budget. 
 
With respect to — you say, cuts. We have not made any cuts. 
With respect to the Family Service Bureau of Regina, we have 
budgeted them this year for the same as last year — $130,220; 
Catholic Family Service Society of Regina — $103,630; 
Saskatoon Family Service Bureau — $131,530; the Catholic 
Family Service Bureau of Saskatoon — $102,540; the Minto 
Family Life Centre in Moose Jaw — $97,000. And you know, 
this involves teen-parent counselling, it involves family 
counselling, family support groups — these are family support 
services that provide a range of direct support to individuals. 
Humboldt is getting $23,000, the same as last year; Saskatoon 
Society for the Protection of Children — $107,000; the 
Cornwall Street Tutoring Project — $130,000; the SCEP Centre 
Society — $53,000; the Merici Centre in Regina — $206,000; 
Saskatoon Christian Counselling, for counselling — $10,000; 
the Friendship Inn in Saskatoon — $31,000; Christian 
Counselling in Saskatoon, for counselling and adoption — 
$104,000. 
 
So we are spending a lot of money on counselling, and you’ll 
note that most of it is spent in the large cities. You’ll notice that 
none of it is in many other constituencies. We are doing 
everything possible to help the cities with these family 
problems. How many resources — or money, as we should 
really say — how much money does it take to solve this? We 
will try to put more into it, but it seems to never end. So we are 
trying. We are putting in resources, which really is tax money, 
and we are getting results, but we can’t keep up with what is 
happening in society, so we have to see what we can do about 
improving our society. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 


