


















































June 1, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 1, 1988 
 

1745 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Petersen, chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members’ Bills, presents the fourth 
report of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and 
has agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 
Bill No. 01 — An Act to incorporate the Stephen and 
Michelene Worobetz Foundation 

 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate 
Full Gospel Bible Institute 

 
Your committee has considered the following Bill and, 
pursuant to a request received from the petitioner, your 
committee recommends that the Bill be not proceeded 
with: 

 
Bill No. 03 — An Act to incorporate the Circle Drive 
Alliance Church 

 
Your committee recommends under the provision of Rule 
58 that fees be remitted, less the cost of printing, with 
respect to Bill Nos. 01, 02, and 03. 

 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I now move, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon South: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure today to introduce to you,, and through you to 
this Assembly, 28 students from Christopher Lake School in 
Christopher Lake. They’re grade 6 students, their teacher Kim 
Heinrichs, chaperons Evelyn Hagely, Susi Miller, Ray Viney, 
Darrell Roth and Thomas Mirasty. 
 
I hope that they’ll certainly enjoy their visit to the legislature 
today, and I’ll be meeting with them for pictures and drinks at 
2:30. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of the most 
beautiful spots in the province with all its lakes and rivers and I 
want to, again, ask all members to welcome this group to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of 12  

students, grades 7 and 8, from the Spring Valley School which 
is on the west side of my constituency. 
 
I had the pleasure of meeting with them just prior to 2 o’clock 
for a few minutes, and I have agreed to go back and meet with 
them after they view question period here this afternoon, about 
three. 
 
I hope they find the Assembly informative, perhaps educational, 
and maybe more so, entertaining, because question period 
sometimes is very entertaining and sometimes a joke, like my 
colleague says. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming the 
people from Spring Valley to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct 
your attention to your gallery where I have a class of 33 grade 4 
students in from the town of Wadena, with their teacher Reg 
Glennie, chaperons Norman Sabit, Bob Cannon, Iner 
Scherbatiuk, Grace Griffiths, Sandra Johnson, Diane Leitch, 
and Pat Kalenchuk, with their bus driver Garry Peckham. 
 
I will be joining you for pictures and refreshments later, and I’ll 
be able to answer any question you may have. 
 
Please join me in welcoming these people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’d just like to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, 
to welcome back to the Assembly — I’m sure some hon. 
members certainly recall Don MacDonald, who represented the 
city of Moose Jaw, who is back as a visitor to the Assembly, 
behind the bar. And I’d like all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, to 
join with me in welcoming Mr. MacDonald back to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the House, through you, members of the coalition 
against open Sunday shopping who are seated in your gallery in 
the back row. They have met earlier today with the Minister of 
Urban Affairs to express concern on behalf of a lot of people 
throughout the province who they represent, and they have met 
with the New Democratic Party caucus as well, which we 
appreciated very much. 
 
I want to draw to your attention that present are Mark 
Thompson from Saskatoon, Mr. Lawrence Lanovaz from Duck 
Lake, Harvey Wessner from Saskatoon as well, and the Rev. 
Canon William G. Portman from Regina. We want to welcome 
them to the House, encourage them in their cause, and I ask the 
members of the House to join us in greeting them to this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the member 
who has just spoken in extending particular  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1746 
 

greetings and welcome to the committee who are visiting the 
legislature today with respect to the Sunday shopping issue. I 
too had the opportunity to meet with them earlier today and to 
hear from them a tremendous amount of useful and good 
advice, which I hope will impress itself upon the minister as 
well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would also want to 
join in a welcome to a very good friend and colleague who has 
already been introduced, but of course former member from 
Moose Jaw, who is a very distinguished member of the party 
which I have the pleasure to represent, and I certainly want to 
welcome Mr. MacDonald to this Chamber as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure today of 
introducing two groups visiting the Assembly. With your 
permission, Mr. Speaker, after I introduce the first group I’d 
like to remain standing to introduce the second group. 
 
It is with great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and 
all members of the Assembly, 23 students, grade 8 students 
sitting in the west gallery. They are from the Hanley High 
School from Hanley. They are here with their teachers Don 
Lockhart and Bill Oehler, and also their bus driver Hank 
Patkau. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be meeting with them at 3 o’clock for pictures 
and drinks and questions, and as always I enjoy questions from 
students. I’ll be looking forward to this, and I ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming the students from Hanley. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — It is also with great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, 
to introduce to you 16 students sitting in your gallery, in the 
Speaker’s gallery, grade 11 and 12 students from Craik High 
School. They are accompanied here by their teachers Audrey 
Sieben and Debbie Wildfong, and bus driver Myrna Meshka. 
 
This is especially a pleasure for me today, being the Craik 
School, where I attended this school from 1937 to 1949. Mr. 
Speaker, I have many memories of that school. I’ve tried to 
forget about the black strap. But other than that, I have many 
memories, and many wonderful memories of the Craik School. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them, I believe it’s 2:30 for drinks and 
questions. And I ask all members of the Assembly to join with 
me in welcoming the students from Craik. 
 
And I like to also add, a week from now my grandson in grade 
5 is coming here, but it won’t be he’ll be introduced here; and 
also I have a granddaughter in grade 1 at this school. So it is 
really a pleasure for me today to have this here school 
represented. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of all 
the members of the government, we’d like to  

welcome the committee, the coalition that I met with this 
morning regarding their concern on the store hours issue. I 
explained to them that this very day I would be introducing the 
amendment into this House. 
 
We had a very enjoyable and informative meeting for about an 
hour or thereabout. And it was an interesting discussion and I 
think very enlightening to us, and certainly to the coalition. And 
I welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you a group of grade 7 and 8 students from Deshaye School 
who are sitting in the east gallery and who are here to witness 
the proceedings today. I will be meeting with them after for 
refreshments and drinks and to answer any questions that they 
might have. 
 
I should also point out that they are accompanied by their 
teachers Mr. Al Jurzyniec and Ms. Muriel Drew. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Aid for Drought Relief 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence in the Minister of 
Agriculture I would direct my question to the Acting Minister 
of Agriculture, or possibly the Minister of the Environment. 
 
And it has to do with yesterday’s announcement from Calgary 
concerning drought. Everyone in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
knows that $12 million for the four western prairie provinces is 
not going to go very far in terms of dampening the drought. 
 
And I note from the media that there will be an announcement 
about the program to take cattle to feed or feed to cattle. And I 
was wondering if the minister could tell us today when the 
program will be implemented, and what actually will the 
program be, so that livestock producers know what their options 
are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, relative to further 
assistance provincially and federally for cattlemen, yesterday 
there was a meeting in Calgary with the four provincial 
ministers and the federal minister. As we heard yesterday, there 
was an announcement relative to everyone’s first priority, I 
think, and that is water. 
 
There was also a commitment coming out of that meeting 
yesterday to help with the feed and pasture situation. I think 
everyone’s agreed that there is more to be done there, and what 
they’ve set about now is the task of looking at what method 
pay-outs should be made on. 
 
I think it’s useful to note that our province, I think, has led the 
way — whether it be with announcements relative to water 
supply, helping list available feed and pasture, or  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1747 
 

changes to crop insurance, which my colleague the Hon. 
Minister of Rural Development announced. 
 
The commitment is there, and I think it was one of the 
producers from Saskatchewan who I thought put it best when he 
said, I’d much rather they take their time and have a fair and 
equitable program rather than one brought out early that isn’t 
fair. 
 
So what that tells me, Mr. Speaker, is the ministers are in a 
hurry to do it right. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well in 1985 livestock producers and those 
affected by drought said that this situation would never happen 
again because there’d be a long-term plan in place, and 
obviously that commitment has not been honoured. 
 
I have a new question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker. In this 
House on May 25 the Premier and Minister of Agriculture said, 
and I quote: 
 

. . . so that in fact if they needed to move feed or move 
water or move cattle, they should be doing it as they see fit 
because it (the money) will be retroactive. 

 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: what money, what money is there? 
On the one hand you’ve told Saskatchewan livestock producers 
to take action, saying that the money will be retroactive. On the 
other, your federal counterpart in Ottawa says there might not 
be any more money. And we want to know, Mr. Speaker, if 
there is no federal money, will the province stand good for the 
commitment you made to the livestock producers to pay for any 
actions they would have taken up until this point and in the 
future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, because all of the 
producers who were at the meeting yesterday, as well as all the 
ministers, recognize that some farmers and ranchers may have 
already taken steps — certainly I know some in my area who 
have made arrangements to cut hay crops in north-east 
Saskatchewan; others have made arrangements to buy hay — 
because of that, and because they recognize how the system 
works and that cattlemen aren’t people to sit on their hands and 
wait for government aid as the only determiner as to what they 
will do, the program will be retroactive, and that was pointed 
out yesterday in the press release that came out. And as well, 
the statement was made and the commitment is there to provide 
assistance. And as I understand it, the committee has been put 
to work to determine the best method. And we welcome the 
federal announcement relative to twelve and a half million 
dollars yesterday, and we look forward to their continued 
involvement. 
 
I must say, in the droughts that we’ve had previously — not that 
one wants to have to deal with this kind of problem — but in 
the droughts that we’ve had previously, we’ve always had good 
co-operation with the federal government, and particularly John 
Wise. I would have to say that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a brief supplementary 
question to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. I have in front of 
me a copy of the communiqué coming out of the Calgary 
conference, and I would just simply draw to the minister’s 
attention that the words of the communiqué say, on the question 
of retroactivity, that the initiatives, “should be retroactive.” The 
words do not say that the provisions will be retroactive. Is the 
minister telling the House that the Premier and the Government 
of Saskatchewan are confirming that any measures announced 
subsequently will be retroactive? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our position has always been that it 
should be retroactive, and I think of the announcements that 
were made earlier by the minister in charge of Sask Water, that 
these initiatives were retroactive. I think that speaks directly to 
the question of fairness, and that’s as it should be, so those who 
started early on the problem, if you like, won’t be penalized. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a further question to the 
minister, and this is a new question to the minister. The 
minister’s answer I might have misunderstood, but in effect said 
that the provincial government here at home says that 
subsequent, future announcements should be retroactive. 
 
I appreciate that, but that’s not my question. My question to 
you, sir, is . . . either you or the Deputy Premier to answer. Was 
one of the decisions that was taken — had and taken as a firm 
decision in Calgary yesterday — was one of those decisions 
that any future programs will be retroactive? 
 
Because if they are not retroactive in subsequent decisions, then 
the question put forward by my colleague from The Battlefords 
is very pertinent: will the provincial government make good for 
retroactivity for subsequent announcements? Please answer 
those two question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our view is the retroactivity, if you 
like, is key. If you’re asking me what the ultimate program 
design will look like, I can’t. That’s why they have struck the 
committee. 
 
But I don’t think any of the ministers would have put the fact 
that they believe these measures should be retroactive in the 
news release if they weren’t all of the same mind, and I suppose 
actions speak louder than words. Our commitment to the 
measures we’ve announced to date has been retroactive, and I 
suspect any future commitments will have the same kind of 
retroactivity. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, one more question with your 
permission, sir, to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. The 
Minister of Agriculture will understand this — the importance 
of the livestock people and the farming people to know with 
some certainty what kind of  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1748 
 

commitments they’re embarking upon, and what payments are 
likely to be accepted by the provincial government in the 
absence of the federal government paying retroactively. 
 
Will the minister please be very definitive on this for us, to 
answer the question from the member of The Battlefords 
specifically. Will he undertake, on behalf of the Premier and his 
government in the eventuality that future announcements aren’t 
retroactive, that this government will clearly, equivocally stand 
good for those commitments undertaken by the livestock people 
and other farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I work very much 
from the view that the program will be retroactive. And I 
wouldn’t even want to suggest to the federal treasury that I 
wouldn’t let them off the hook by saying, if it wasn’t, that we 
would pick it up, because I think the collective will and the 
collective view, not only amongst government but amongst 
industry, is that it should be retroactive. 
 
I think the important thing to remember here is that there is a 
commitment to act. As is so often the term is so often used by 
the industry to describe the cow herd, it’s the red meat factory. 
Everyone recognizes the importance of maintaining that red 
meat factory, whether it be the consumer in Regina of the 
rancher at Maple Creek or at Meadow Lake. 
 
Our government’s commitment has been clear to the red meat 
industry, whether it be stabilization programs, cash advances, or 
drought programs in the past. That red meat industry is 
important to every one in this province. We want to see it stay 
around and not have to be sold off because of a drought, and 
we’re committed to that end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

Lay-offs in Various Industries 
 

Mr. Shillington: — In the absence of the Minister of Trade and 
commerce, in the absence of the Premier, I refer my question to 
the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Minister, your peculiar style of building Saskatchewan 
continues apace. I refer in particular to 13 people who were laid 
off at Gainers — 13 families added to the hundreds of others 
who have lost their pay cheque in the last couple of weeks. 
 
Mr. Minister, these lay-offs are particularly galling because we, 
the taxpayer, paid millions of dollars for those jobs. I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, whether or not you think the many millions we 
paid shouldn’t have given you some leverage to intervene on 
behalf of these families. Don’t you think the many millions that 
these jobs cost us gave us some say in whether or not they were 
abolished? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat surprising 
to hear from the New Democratic Party that  

now they’re concerned about Gainers. They didn’t want them in 
the province in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did not pay for the 13 positions . . . employees 
in the Yorkton and Regina sales office. They were here prior to, 
Mr. Speaker, the Gainers plant being established in the city of 
North Battleford by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a part of the reorganization by Gainers, and 
yes, certainly we do regret any lay-offs, Mr. Speaker. But let me 
tell the hon. member — he may not want to listen to this, Mr. 
Speaker — that there are still 145 more people employed in 
Gainers in the province of Saskatchewan today as a result of the 
actions of this government assisting Gainers getting started in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Science and Technology, I address my question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Minister, yesterday Develcon announced that it 
was laying off 26 people in Saskatoon. And in less than six 
months there have been over 100 people losing their jobs in the 
Saskatoon high-tech industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is: when are you and your 
government going to do something substantive to protect 
Saskatchewan and Saskatoon workers in the high-tech industry 
and their families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, where were the NDP when 
we just injected $7 million into Develcon to assist them in both 
research, development, and to protect jobs in Develcon, Mr. 
Speaker? They criticize us for putting the money in two months 
ago, putting in an additional $7 million of taxpayers’ money. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s kept a lot more jobs going, Mr. 
Speaker, in a highly volatile industry. 
 
I’m a little surprised as well at the hon. member, and surprised 
at the Star-Phoenix, having read an article today, of the lack of 
the anti-business approach of that paper. Because I don’t hear, 
Mr. Speaker, when they talk about some of the lay-offs, Mr. 
Speaker, I didn’t hear the Star-Phoenix talk about the additional 
200 jobs of Intercontinental Packers, Mr. Speaker, that we were 
instrumental in getting. And I can take another 100-and-some 
jobs at Flexi-Coil, and I could go on and on and on, Mr. 
Speaker, and the new City Hospital and several others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest the hon. members pay attention to those. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My question is to the same minister in his 
capacity as the minister responsible for the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, perhaps the greatest betrayal of 
all was the lay-off of the 200 workers at the Cory potash plant. 
Now last year we passed legislation in this House which you 
said would ensure that this wouldn’t happen. Now this 
legislation has not  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1749 
 

even been proclaimed. 
 
My question is: what are you going to do for these 200 miners 
and their families? What’s going to happen to them, and how 
are they supposed to make a living under your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve now repeated it, I 
believe, three different days, that we have in the potash industry 
in Saskatchewan a tremendous . . . and in the potash 
corporation, a tremendous over-capacity. That over-capacity in 
general came about because of a decision made in 1979 to have 
a massive expansion at Lanigan. That surplus capacity is still in 
existence. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the initiatives being taken by the 
potash corporation, they do have outside people in, both on the 
counselling side, but secondly, looking for alternative 
employment for these employees. I am advised that they have 
made arrangements for some work for some of the employees. 
 
Secondly, I believe in terms of corporate security functions, that 
they are looking for opportunities to hire some of those 
employees for that and that they do have, Mr. Speaker, an 
active effort to try and find employment for these 200 workers. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I had intended to direct my 
question to the Minister of Trade and Investment, but in his 
absence it may be answered by the minister who has been 
fielding the questions today about massive unemployment in 
Saskatchewan and job loss. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have also heard that on Monday Domtar 
Incorporated announced pending closure of its gypsum-board 
plant in Saskatoon which put 88 more people out of work and 
put their families in jeopardy. 
 
The plant can’t continue to operate because it won’t have a 
large enough market in Saskatchewan. There isn’t a large 
enough market because nobody can afford major purchases any 
more in this province where inflation is running at 6 per cent, 
the highest in the nation. Instead of battling inflation, Mr. 
Speaker, this government continues to raise hundreds of fees in 
taxes to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Minister, will your government take responsibility for these 
88 unemployed people and their families. What are you going 
to do for these people, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, they are not 
unemployed. Secondly, that there have been negotiations 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and Domtar to 
continue those jobs, and looking for new opportunities in 
conjunction with Domtar. And I do believe that the hon. 
member will find out in the not too distant future that he has 
been too anxious to announce unemployment numbers and 
lay-offs, Mr. Speaker, much to the detriment of the workers. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct  

my question to the Acting Minister of Sask Forest Products. Mr. 
Minister, on Monday you closed the post treatment plant in 
Prince Albert, finally letting the corporation’s employees know 
their fate. 
 
Mr. Minister, some 30 employees have been laid off for about a 
year while you hesitated to make your plans known. Surely you 
have known for some time you were closing the plant. Why did 
you keep these employees on a string, letting them use up their 
UIC claims while waiting for a possible recall to work? Could 
you answer that question, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice, but advise 
the hon. member that I gather there has been some discussions 
with the employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The minister has taken notice, and while one 
or two briefs words can be allowed relating specifically to that 
notice, an answer of any lengthy nature can’t be allowed. 
 

Employment Policies of Government 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for recognizing 
me. I had not intended to get into question period today, but I 
must frankly tell you that I am surprised at the nature of the 
answers given by the government spokesman opposite, the 
Minister of Finance, perhaps to be renamed the minister in 
charge of unemployment. 
 
In the last week there have been 375 people, by these various 
lay-offs identified by my colleagues, who have lost their jobs. 
That’s just not statistics; they’re not faceless numbers. These 
are people, human beings, families. 
 
Will the minister admit in the face of these startling and 
depressing statistics in one week, will he admit that his 
government’s policies have gone awry; that they’re not 
working; that the programs of privatization, deregulation, and 
Americanization simply need to be abandoned? Why don’t you 
admit that possibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — With all respect to the Leader of the 
Opposition, like potash and like agriculture, I frankly suggest 
that he doesn’t know what he’s talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where is the NDP when they complain about public 
participation when WESTBRIDGE is out hiring an additional 
200 people and advertising now for an additional 25? Where 
were they, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where were they when we’re getting a new paper mill in Prince 
Albert and hiring 700 people out working on that now? Where 
were they? 
 
Where were they, Mr. Speaker, where in the city of Saskatoon I 
believe the work-force has increased 18,000 since we’ve taken 
office, Mr. Speaker? Where were they when we were talking 
about not only the health care facility of the new City Hospital 
and the several hundred jobs that will be there, Mr. Speaker? 
Where were they?  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1750 
 

Where were the NDP when we announced a new agricultural 
building which will see several hundred people working over 
the next couple of years, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where were they when we announced our expansion to 
Intercontinental Packers and the assistance for another nearly 
200 people, Mr. Speaker? Where were they when there is job 
creation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They’re still negative on this province when there’s job 
creation. They’re still negative on this province when there is 
new opportunities being created, Mr. Speaker. There’s dead 
silence when there’s a new job created. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think they’re being realistic when the Leader of the 
Opposition makes a suggestion the other day that the potash, a 
50-50 management and employees; I think it was silly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of Finance. I think it’s to be noted to all the members of the 
Assembly and by those who watch on television the 
proceedings, that not a word was said by the Minister of 
Finance about the families and the people involved, but instead, 
basically a political, rhetorical answer. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Minister of Finance — and you know them to 
be the case — that there are 15,000 more unemployed today 
than in 1982. There are 64,000 kids in poverty in Saskatchewan, 
the second highest in Canada. Five thousand people have left 
this province in search of new jobs in four months. There are 
14,000 more people on welfare today than in 1982. Those are 
the facts. 
 
Where is the NDP? The NDP is continuing to oppose your 
policies of privatization and Americanization which produced 
those shocking statistics. Why don’t you admit you made a 
mistake and start something new? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, they obviously — and the 
people in TV will know this — the NDP obviously don’t want 
to hear the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let’s remind the Leader of the Opposition that when net 
farm income can be below zero, farm families will be below the 
poverty line, Mr. Speaker, and that’s bound to increase our 
numbers. And yet every single program that we have brought in 
to help the farmers of this province, the New Democratic Party, 
its leadership, and its members have opposed those farm 
programs to help farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And, Mr. Speaker, when we try and give 
the opportunities for welfare recipients to work, jobs, they 
condemn welfare reform. Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic 
Party doesn’t want jobs for people on welfare and have opposed 
every program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about families, Mr. Speaker. They don’t care,  

Mr. Speaker, about families, because they don’t understand the 
initiatives being taken to try and create jobs to diversify this 
economy, Mr. Speaker, for the young people, for the families of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. They have opposed every new 
initiative that this government has brought in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of Finance. I think it would be useful to the debate if the 
Minister of Finance lowered the tone of his voice and tried to 
argue with a little bit of reason and rationality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Does not the Minister of Finance admit that 
the government has an ideological commitment to privatization 
and people like Oliver Letwin, for example, from the United 
Kingdom who absolutely know nothing about the Saskatchewan 
experience of building jobs and keeping families. You won’t 
listen to us. You won’t listen to the Eastview by-election result. 
You won’t listen to the Elphinstone by-election result. Are you 
not at least embarrassed by the fact that wives, wives of men 
who have lost their jobs are out there picketing and urging that 
their families be protected? So you not at least have any shame 
or self-respect to consider those concerns of the families instead 
of giving us some political rhetoric. Stand up, admit you’ve 
made a mistake . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member tries to say 
that privatization is ideological. I wonder why, Mr. Speaker, 
that trade union representatives have come out in favour, Mr. 
Speaker, of WESTBRIDGE and public participation. Why, Mr. 
Speaker, if it’s ideological, are the union representatives 
supporting and accepting what this government is doing to get 
the people of this province and the employees to having a direct 
interest in the economic development of this province. 
 
Let me tell you what is not the Saskatchewan way, Mr. Speaker; 
the Saskatchewan way is not the nationalization of the potash 
industry that that hon. member led and talked about and pushed 
and forced upon the people of this province. And the 
Saskatchewan way, Mr. Speaker, is not government ownership 
of pulp mills and every industry around. And the Saskatchewan 
way, Mr. Speaker, which has been so rejected by the people of 
this province on two election is not government ownership of 
farm land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to establish the Public Participation 
Program 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to establish the Public Participation Program. 
 
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1751 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Reorganization of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Attachment of Debts 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Attachment of Debts Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting Certain Adults Requiring 

Guardianship 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Certain Adults Requiring Guardianship. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Public Trustees Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Local Government Election Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting Securities in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Securities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 
Act, 1985. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Tax Enforcement Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Provincial Court Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 66 — And Act respecting Justices of the Peace 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Justices of the Peace. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting a Traffic Safety Court for 

Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting a Traffic Safety Court for Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Small Claims in the 
Provincial Court in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Small Claims in the Provincial Court in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Workers’ 
Compensation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1752 
 

at the next sitting. 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 33 — An Act 
respecting the Registration of Leafcutter Beekeepers be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 33, I am 
informed by our critic, Mr. Upshall . . . or the member from 
Humboldt, sorry, that we are prepared to let that Bill go into 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 36 — An Act to 
amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
members on both sides of the House for allowing the 
adjournment of this particular discussion of this particular Bill 
previously, so that I could have an opportunity to say a few 
words about it. 
 
The Bill that is before us, Bill No 36, An Act to amend the 
Meewasin Valley Authority, is an important Bill in that it deals 
with an important public institution, the Meewasin Valley 
Authority. But before I deal directly with the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
I do want to say a few words about the origin of the authority 
and its achievements to date, which have been notable. 
 
In the beginning, Mr. Speaker, the climate of Saskatchewan at 
certain times in the year can be described as outright hostile. 
The geography of Saskatchewan, at least in the southern settled 
section, is quite often described as plain. And as a consequence 
the people of Saskatchewan, the pioneers of Saskatchewan, 
have grown to appreciate any diversion which would detract 
from these two geographical observations and climate 
observations. 
 
Some number of years ago the province of Saskatchewan 
enacted legislation with regard to Wascana Centre Authority. At 
the time this legislation was enacted, Mr. Speaker, it was 
legislation of a very innovative style, and unique in the province 
of Saskatchewan at that time. 
 
One of the original movers of that legislation, who piloted the 
Bill, was the Hon. Allan Blakeney, former leader of the 
government and former leader of the opposition, recently retired 
from the legislature. And he and his advisers must be 
congratulated for their foresight, and all the people that 
supported that Bill in this legislature, because that was the 
creation of the Wascana Centre Authority which entailed a 
partnership among the university, the city, and province; was 
innovative, was co-operative, and was  

designed to relieve what I referred to earlier as some of the 
monotonous and harsh circumstances of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Wascana Centre Authority had been recognized throughout 
the world for its foresight, and the development here has made 
the Wascana Centre Authority a jewel in the city of Regina. 
And I think no one would deny that, and I think it has a wide 
public support. 
 
Thereafter, on September 4, 1979, the Meewasin Valley 
Authority was created. Some preliminary work was done by the 
city of Saskatoon and those in the city of Saskatoon that were 
concerned about this. And I must give credit for their 
leadership, in part, to the city of Saskatoon, its representatives, 
and people of Saskatoon, who saw a similar development to the 
Wascana Centre Authority as a distinct possibility, if not even 
greater than Wascana Centre Authority in its full and final 
development in the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
And I was present in the legislature at the time the legislation 
was brought forward, Mr. Speaker, to create the Meewasin 
Valley Authority, and it was a proud day for the people of 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. The member for Riversdale, 
who’s the present Leader of the Opposition, was instrumental in 
piloting that legislation through the Assembly, and it was 
adopted unanimously by this Assembly. 
 
I have here the first report of the Meewasin Valley Authority, 
1979-1980 annual report of the authority, and it deals with the 
significant time intervals with regard to the establishment of 
Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
What has happened with regard to recognition of this authority, 
outside the boundaries of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan? Well it 
has been much similar, Mr. Speaker, to the recognition that has 
come to Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
The architect, Raymond Moriyama, who designed a 
hundred-year program for Meewasin Valley Authority, was 
recognized for that architectural achievement. The Meewasin 
Valley, in its full scope, will be several times the size of 
Wascana Centre Authority, so there is a long term of 
development ahead of us. And all of the people that were 
involved in that project deserve to be congratulated for their 
foresight. 
 
The Meewasin Valley Authority has been recognized outside 
our borders, as I said. I see . . . here’s an award that was given 
to them in 1984. Meewasin Valley Authority has been awarded 
the Tourism Industry Association of Canada Governor 
General’s conservation award. And this is recognition from a 
very high level in Canada with regard to Meewasin Valley. 
 
These two authorities, and other authorities in Saskatchewan 
which have subsequently been created, have been important not 
only for the relief of our landscape and the beautifying of our 
province in the major urban areas, but have been significant 
because they’ve provided an attraction for tourism and they’ve 
provided employment. 
 
And there’s been recognition of the fact that they’ve  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1753 
 

provided employment because, as within all our knowledge, 
that at the time the authorities begin their major beautifying 
programs on an annual basis, it coincides nicely with the 
availability of students who wish summer employment. So 
these authorities, including the Meewasin Valley Authority, 
provide important employment opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
The interesting part dealing more directly with the Bill which is 
before us is the section 18 of the Bill. And this deals with the 
financial participation of the three partners. 
 
In May 1983, Mr. Speaker, this government who sits to your 
right passed a very brief Bill in this Assembly. It was Bill No. 
32 in 1983, and it was subsequently assented to on May 20, 
1983. And, leaving aside the formalities, the operative part of 
this particular Bill was: 
 

Subsection 56(1) of the Meewasin Valley Authority Act is 
amended by striking out “five mills” and substituting “four 
mills”. 

 
And this was the commitment of the province of Saskatchewan, 
an equivalent of four mills to the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
And I’ll say nothing of the other authorities and their financing 
now, because I’m dealing directly with the Bill and the actions 
of the government of the day in 1983. And that particular 
amendment to The Meewasin Valley Authority Act came into 
force on April 1, 1983. 
 
Subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, the city council in Saskatoon 
passed a motion. And the motion of the city council, which is 
recorded on May 24, 1983, which would be very shortly after 
the map was amended here in this Assembly, the motion was a 
follows: 
 

That the city of Saskatoon inform the provincial 
government that we appreciate their financial support for 
MVA and encourage the provincial government to 
re-establish the funding level at five mills for the year 
1984-85. 

 
Now what the government had done by their legislation they’d 
passed is give a 20 per cent cut to the amount of funding that 
they would put into the partnership. This partnership in 
Meewasin Valley Authority, which is recognized across Canada 
and elsewhere, which beautifies the city, which provides 
employment, had its budget cut 20 per cent by this Bill. The 
city of Saskatoon was alarmed at this and passed the resolution. 
And I know, because I was in council in the city of Saskatoon at 
that time. 
 
When the minister who was responsible for Meewasin Valley 
Authority was approached by the press at that time, it is 
reported in the Star-Phoenix on June 3, 1983 that the minister 
had said — and this is Mr. Paul Schoenhals, minister of Urban 
Affairs — and the news item relates: 
 
(1500) 
 

Saskatoon city council passed this week a resolution 
seeking reinstatement of the previous  

funding formula for MVA which was reduced in this 
year’s budget. Schoenhals said, it’s too late to change that 
now, even if he wanted to, but it could be a budgetary 
consideration next year — next year being ’84-85, budget 
year. 

 
So the minister in charge of the authority held out the 
possibility that there might be a change in the government’s 
position in ’83-84 fiscal year, however . . . or ’84-85 fiscal year. 
However, nothing’s been done. 
 
Now we come up to the current situation, Mr. Speaker. The 
legality of the 1987-88 funding of four mills from the province 
is now open to question. Had the province adhered to the law of 
the land, they should have paid an equivalent of five mills to the 
Meewasin Valley Authority in 1987-88. However, this 
government’s initial interference in the Meewasin Valley 
Authority in 1983 has now been compounded by their neglect, 
and that’s quite clear by this Bill. 
 
This Bill, Bill No. 36, aside from the housekeeping 
amendments and minor technical amendments, seeks to amend 
this government’s sloppiness, indifference, or disdain — take 
your choice — for the authorities. And I include all the 
authorities. That includes Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
If it would make any difference, Mr. Speaker, or I could change 
this government’s attitude about the authorities and the level of 
funding that they should be awarded, I would debate this Bill 
even longer. However, it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
all, as you might say, water under Broadway bridge in 
Saskatoon. We’re not going to change this government’s 
attitude. 
 
They took this position the earliest opportunity they could, to 
cut the funding of the authorities. They took the earliest 
opportunity that was available to them in the budget and cut it 
back in ’83, and they’ve never increased since then. And they 
don’t even have good housekeeping with regard to the Bill. 
 
They missed a year, neglected to bring the proper Bill to amend 
the law. As a consequence the Bill this year has to go back and 
retroactively take that money away, retroactively take that 
money away. I don’t believe that’s good enough. That’s not 
good enough for the Meewasin Valley Authority; it’s certainly 
not good enough for this government. And because of the 
consequences of this, because of this high unemployment 
period we are in, and recent announcements about job lay-offs, I 
cannot support this kind of legislation. 
 
Here is something that’s going to be done eventually. It creates 
jobs. The government itself says it wants to create tourist 
attractions. These are tourist attractions, yet the government has 
cut this budget of this authority and other authorities by 20 per 
cent at the first available opportunity they could. I cannot 
support that, Mr. Speaker, and I am therefore against this 
principle of this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1754 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 17 —An Act 
respecting the Inspection of Gas Installations and Gas 
Equipment for Consumers be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, since we adjourned 
debate on this Bill some days ago, I’ve taken that opportunity to 
reread the minister’s comments; the Deputy Premier, who 
introduced this Bill in second reading on behalf of the Minister 
of the Environment, I’ve reread his comments. And I’ve had an 
opportunity to consult with a number of people in the industry, 
to consult with consumers who are certainly affected by this 
legislation, and to consult with people who are currently 
involved in the inspection process, Mr. Speaker. And 
universally, universally those individuals and people share the 
same concern with this Bill that I have. 
 
As I reread the minister’s comments in introducing Bill 17, I 
noted how he very carefully avoided making mention of what is 
arguably the most significant change brought about by this 
piece of legislation, in terms of the inspection of gas 
installations in our province. And in essence, Mr. Speaker, what 
this Bill provides for is the privatization of the inspection 
process. This Bill will provide the opportunity for SaskPower 
now to contract out the inspection process, in the case of Bill 
17, in terms of gas installations. 
 
Bill 18, Mr. Speaker, is a very similar Bill. In that case, the 
contracting out will be provided for the inspection of electrical 
installations. And then when we look at Bill 9, we see also in 
that Bill that the — in terms of The Fire Prevention Act, that the 
fire commissioner will be able to designate persons employed, 
pursuant to this Bill 17, as inspectors. 
 
So what we are seeing in each of these three Bills is a 
privatization of the inspection process in our province. It means 
that a radical change from the current and existing practice, 
which has served this province for many years and served the 
public of Saskatchewan very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just describe for you the system as it 
currently exists. Under the present system, all inspectors in this 
province, be they of gas installations or electrical installations 
or in terms of fire inspection, all inspectors in this province are 
public servants. And what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
have but one single goal, and that is to protect public safety. 
Their only interest is the public interest. They are servants of 
the people of Saskatchewan. They have no vested interests. 
They have no particular friends within any industry. They have 
but one concern, and that’s public safety. 
 
Now if there is any problem with the current system, it’s that 
there are simply not enough of them; that the whole inspection 
process, be it gas or electrical, is understaffed. If there is a 
problem, it’s the current understanding levels. 
 
But clearly the inspectors of gas installations in this province, as 
they exist now and as they serve the people now, have but one 
interest and that’s to protect consumers and to protect the safety 
of the general public.  

They have no other vested interest. 
 
Now in terms of the inspection of gas installations and gas 
equipment, I would just refer you, Mr. Speaker, to the current 
legislation, section 5 of The Gas Inspection and Licensing Act, 
which reads: 
 

No person shall be appointed to the office of chief 
inspector or inspector who is interested either directly or 
indirectly in the sale or installation of gas equipment. 

 
That’s the current legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say what this legislation had done 
and what the practice of having public servants doing the 
inspections has done, is to instil, I think, a great deal of 
confidence in the public mind in the inspection process. 
Inspectors, I think, have earned both the regard of consumers 
and of contractors in the work that they’ve done in our 
province. They’ve earned the regard and respect of being fair 
and objective, and again I say, acting with only one interest in 
mind and that’s the protection of the public. And I think that the 
confidence of the public, the credibility of the inspection 
process is extremely important because, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 
dealing here with what is simply a harmless substance, we’re 
dealing here with natural gas and propane which, as you and I 
both know, as all members know, can be very lethal substances. 
It’s not an area where there’s room for error. 
 
Human lives are at stake, and so I believe it to be essential not 
only that the inspection process be objective and fair, but that it 
be seen by Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan consumers 
to be objective and fair. This Bill puts all of that at stake, in my 
judgement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For some unexplained reason the minister did not provide a 
reason for this change. For some unexplained reason this 
government now wants to begin to privatize the process of 
inspection. And so if this Bill gets passed as it stands, the 
government, through SaskPower now, will be able to appoint 
private contractors to be out inspecting the installations and the 
work of other private contractors. This Bill will allow the 
government to, through SaskPower, to appoint contractors to go 
out and inspect installations across our province. 
 
Very obviously, I think, Mr. Speaker, and those with whom I 
have consulted, very obviously we think that this presents a 
number of dangers. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this kind of privatization opens the 
possibility — I do not say the certainty — but it opens the 
possibility of less than objective inspections. In any given 
community in our province, the number of contracting firms in 
gas installation will be a limited number. Even in our largest 
cities it’s a limited number of contractors who will be in the 
field. These firms therefore are not known to each other. The 
contractors are not unknown to each other; they’re not 
strangers. 
 
And so by having one contractor inspecting the work of another 
contractor who on the one hand may be a professional friend, or 
on the other hand who may be a professional enemy, we clearly, 
Mr. Speaker, run the risk,  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1755 
 

we open the door to the possibility of less than objective 
inspections. Mr. Speaker, personal friendships or personal 
antagonisms, competition in the market-place, could all lead to 
a good deal of patting on the back — you scratch my back, I’ll 
scratch yours. 
 
We could, Mr. Speaker, have a situation of an inspector who is 
a contractor, inspecting an installation and declaring it to be 
unsafe and demanding that it be replaced, which of course will 
ultimately benefit another contractor. Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
singling out contractors as being any different than any other 
human being. We’re all liable to temptation and to influence. 
 
So what we could have with this Bill if we contract out the 
inspection of gas installations, we may not simply have those 
inspections being done on the basis of what is correct and what 
is objective, but we may see other factors beginning to creep in, 
and, Mr. Speaker, I submit, in the field of inspection of gas 
installations, or in the case of Bill 18, of electrical installations, 
that’s simply not acceptable. Even the possibility of less than 
objective inspections is just not acceptable. 
 
In my judgement, those who are out there inspecting must be 
absolutely free of outside influences or pressures. They must be 
absolutely unencumbered by anything but a concern for public 
safety. 
 
This concern that I bring to the House, Mr. Speaker, is shared. 
It’s shared by consumer organizations, it’s shared by people in 
the contracting field, and it’s shared by the general public. 
 
We open the door to the possibility, with this legislation, of less 
than objective inspections if we’ve got one contractor 
inspecting the work of another contractor who may be a 
personal friend or who may be a personal enemy. 
 
(1515) 
 
Another possibility, Mr. Speaker, that arises through this 
legislation, that arises through the privatization of the inspection 
process, is the possibility of patronage. The situation now, if 
this Bill passes, is that this government through SaskPower will 
be naming certain contractors to become inspectors — certain 
contractors. What that does of course, Mr. Speaker, is to just 
open another door for patronage. And I ask, who are the 
contractors who will be accepted to act as inspectors? Who will 
they be? Will they be contractors who perhaps carry a blue 
card? 
 
An Hon. Member: George Hill. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Or will they be related to Mr. George Hill, as 
the Deputy Premier just indicated. Or will they happen to be the 
contractors who make donations to the Progressive 
Conservative Party? 
 
Mr. Speaker, again it’s not a certainty, but in this case, and we 
know the record of this government, it’s perhaps more than a 
possibility that patronage can become involved all of a sudden 
in the inspection of gas installations in this case. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan don’t want patronage 
involved in their safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want this government to 
have that option. But, Mr. Speaker, neither would I want the 
government that we form in 1990 or 1991 to have that option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want the inspections that go on in this province 
for public safety to be beyond reproach, to be above 
questioning. What this change does then, Mr. Speaker, it opens 
the door to less than objective inspections and it opens the door, 
yet another door, to patronage for this government, and the 
result is, Mr. Speaker, the credibility of the inspection process is 
going to be hurt. The confidence, the public confidence in the 
inspection process is going to be lowered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we didn’t hear from the minister a reason, we 
didn’t hear from the minister a reason for this change. We can 
only speculate on that reason. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 
it’s because there is such a backlog of inspections that has built 
up because of the understaffing of inspectors. Perhaps it is an 
attempt to catch up on a backlog. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we can appoint contractors to catch up on 
that backlog and then, I suppose, withdraw the contracts when 
the backlog is dealt with. That’s not going to solve the 
long-term problem. We’ll just again have another backlog being 
built up in the future. In the future, the long-term solution, if the 
backlog is the problem, the long-term solution is to hire more 
inspectors, more qualified inspectors, public servants who can 
do the work. That’s a simple solution if that’s the problem 
we’re trying to address. 
 
We could speculate that this government perhaps may feel it’s 
cheaper to do it this way; it’s cheaper to contract it out. I’m not 
convinced it would be. That may be their thinking. But even if 
it is cheaper, Mr. Speaker, we have to balance that against the 
value of the human life. I mean, the memory of Polly Redhot is 
not lost to the people of Saskatchewan. And if it is the will of 
this government to sacrifice public safety for a few dollars, then 
I think it’s a government that again shows us that it’s got its 
priorities all wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what do the people of this province pay taxes for? 
Is it not an essential task of government to protect the interests 
of consumers and to protect public safety? And, Mr. Speaker, 
just frankly, I’d much sooner see my tax dollars going into the 
protection of consumers and the Saskatchewan public, into the 
protection of my home and family as into a variety of other 
things that this government now does with our tax dollar. So, 
Mr. Speaker, if the reason is to save money, then I find that to 
be a very poor excuse. 
 
Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it — and perhaps this is a reason — 
perhaps it’s just another example of this government’s headlong 
plunge into privatization; just another example of the blind 
ideology that says, privatize everything in government. We’ve 
seen the privatization of so many of  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1756 
 

our provincial assets. We’ve seen the privatization, the sell-off 
of those things which have made money for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve seen the privatization of the school-based 
dental plan. Now we’ve got some liquor legislation coming into 
this House; it looks like it contains privatization. 
 
And here we are again, another example of the privatization of a 
public service that’s not going to benefit Saskatchewan people. 
It may benefit a number of contractors. I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, 
that that’s what’s involved here — just another bit of the blind 
ideology, another bit of this headlong plunge into privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of those with whom I have spoken since this 
Bill was introduced, be they involved currently in the inspection 
process, be they involved in a consumers’ association, be they 
members of the general public, be they contractors that I’ve 
spoken with, all universally are opposed. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I too will be opposing this Bill if it continues in its 
present form. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 18 — An Act 
respecting the Inspection of Electrical Equipment, 
Installation and Material be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will limit some of the remarks I 
wish to make again on this Bill. It follows in the pattern of Bill 
17. With Bill 18 we are enabling the privatization of electrical 
inspection in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just refer to the section of this Bill which 
permits this to be. In section 6 which reads in part: 
 

The corporation: 
 
Referring to SaskPower, since these responsibilities are being 
transferred out of the Department of the Environment and 
Public Safety over to SaskPower. The Bill reads: 
 

The corporation: 
 

may appoint any inspectors, in addition to the chief 
inspector, that it considers appropriate. 

 
Then further down in paragraph 4 it reads: 
 

No contractor who is an inspector shall inspect any work 
of electrical installation that he has performed or in which 
he has any interest. 

 
Obviously, the provision of this Bill will enable contractors to 
be named inspectors, in this case electrical contractors, to be 
named inspectors of electrical installation. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, those with whom I have consulted, be they in the 
industry, be they currently involved in inspection, be they 
involved with consumer associations, be they members of the  

general public, have universally raised a concern with the 
practice of inspectors inspecting the work of other inspectors. 
 
Again we risk the possibility of losing objectivity in the 
inspection process, again we open a door to the possibility of 
patronage and the appointment of these inspectors. And again 
we run the real risk of lowering the credibility which is so 
important in the inspection process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not many days ago we awoke one Saturday 
morning to hear that College Mathieu in Gravelbourg was 
burning. And those of us who have lived in Gravelbourg, those 
of us who have had some association with College Mathieu 
were sorrowed to hear that. 
 
We were sorrowed to hear of the loss of the school and its 
facility and that historic old building, but we were relieved to 
hear that there was not a loss of human life. Some days later we 
read through the press and hear through the media that likely 
the cause of the College Mathieu fire, the cause of that fire was 
a poor electrical installation, some bad wiring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could have been talking about the tragic deaths 
of a number of young people. We are not again here dealing 
with a harmless substance. We are dealing with electricity 
which can be, as we well know, a lethal and destructive 
substance. It is so crucial that the inspection process in our 
province be credible, be objective, and be done well, as it has 
been over the years, by inspectors who have been public 
servants. 
 
Again I say, Mr. Speaker, with this kind of change, with the 
privatization of the inspections, we are going to lose that 
credibility. And so again I say, I cannot support this legislation 
for those reasons, and will not be, unless it be amended. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No 9 — An Act to 
amend The Fire Prevention Act, 1980 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment to The Fire 
Prevention Act has the hook in it in the proposed section 4 of 
this Bill, paragraph (2), which reads: 
 

Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Fire Commissioner 
may designate persons employed pursuant to The Gas 
Inspection Act (which we’ve discussed moments ago, to 
act) as inspectors for the purposes of this Act (The Fire 
Prevention Act). 

 
I read that to say, Mr. Speaker, that those private individuals 
and contractors who are now named through The Gas 
Inspection Act, or may be named if that Bill passes, may also be 
appointed now to act as inspectors for fire prevention. All of the 
same arguments, I think, Mr. Speaker, do apply, and therefore I 
will be opposing this Bill. 
 
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1757 
 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — And Act to amend The League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The League 
of Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, 
commonly known as LEADS, came into being in its present 
form in 1984 when the LEADS Act was first passed. Since that 
time the league has been administering its affairs in accordance 
with a view to maintaining high standards of competence and 
conduct among its members. 
 
In this respect, the league has identified what it considers to be 
some shortcomings relating to disciplinary provisions in the 
Act. The proposed amendments are designed to eliminate these 
weaknesses, Mr. Speaker, and the key points to note are as 
follows. 
 
The establishment of a professional relations committee and a 
discipline committee will now be mandatory rather than 
optional. The name, professional relations committee, will 
replace professional standards committee to better reflect this 
committee’s role in counselling and dispute resolution. To 
better ensure consistent and equitable handling of complaints, 
all complaints to either of the committees will now be 
channelled through the league executive which will prescribe 
rules governing the business and proceedings of the 
committees. Finally, both committees will report their findings 
and recommendations directly to the executive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments have been prepared in full 
consultation with LEADS officials who have indicated their 
agreement. The amendments reflect the league’s desire to serve 
the public interest by operating in a highly professional way. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and members of this 
legislature, that this is a laudable goal worthy of support by all 
members of this Assembly, and I therefore move that Bill No. 
40, An Act to amend the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I would concur with the minister that the 
request of the LEADS for these changes be proceeded with. We 
know that the LEADS is a fairly young organization in 
education, but it has made a tremendous impact. The 
organization of directors and superintendents in Saskatchewan 
have performed a very valuable role in leadership in education. 
I’m pleased to see that they are evolving their self-governing 
procedures with respect to discipline and competence. We will 
allow this to go at this time to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred  

to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1530) 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 39, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act establishes the level of provincial funding assistance to be 
allocated to both urban and rural municipalities. Accordingly, 
the amendment gives legal effect to decisions reflected in the 
government’s 1988-89 budget. 
 
In 1988-89 funds available to rural municipalities will be 
maintained at the levels established in 1987-88. The same will 
apply in urban municipalities, except for the injection of an 
additional $585,000. These additional moneys will fund a 
minus 3 per cent safety net. This safety net will ensure that 
through the revenue-sharing distribution formula no community 
will receive a funding reduction greater than 3 per cent. 
 
This form of protection will benefit 229 communities, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1988, many of whom would have been experiencing 
population decline. Together, revenue-sharing allocations to 
urban and rural municipalities will total over $115 million in 
1988-89 — evidence of the provincial government’s continued 
support to municipalities right across Saskatchewan. 
 
I urge all members to support this Bill so that payments to 
municipalities can be undertaken in a prompt manner. 
Accordingly, I move second reading of Bill No. 39, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have listened 
to the minister in the introduction to this Bill, who spoke, I 
noted, very briefly. And I want to make few comments and then 
adjourn. 
 
This is not your usual standard, non-controversial legislation. 
This is legislation, Mr. Speaker, that reinforces the neglect that 
has been displayed by this government towards our urban 
municipalities and I think that the result of that neglect are 
beginning to show up in many, many ways throughout all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This attack on urban municipalities and urban people continues, 
not only in the funding that this government has been providing, 
or lack of funding that it has been providing, but it continues in 
the total disregard for the interests of people who live in those 
communities, interests of the small-business people who try to 
make a living in those communities as is exemplified by the 
notice the minister has given today with his store hours 
legislation — once again, an example of where nobody seems 
to agree with him but himself and maybe some of his people on 
the front benches. 
 
There are no members of his back benches who represent rural 
constituencies who will support that Bill unless they  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1758 
 

are whipped into line by the cabinet, because they know how 
devastating it will be for rural business and rural communities. 
 
Now in the same way, Mr. Speaker, the cut-backs that we have 
seen in revenue sharing have affected those communities in a 
drastic way. And I want to spend just a few minutes to give you 
some examples. And I will elaborate at great length when I 
resume the debate when it comes forward again. 
 
Now this Bill is solely a means of instituting the funding levels 
announced in the ’88-89 budget — that’s true. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the one thing that the minister did not mention and the 
government fails to point out is that it is freezing the funding 
after it was cut back by 1 per cent last year. So we’ve had urban 
municipalities throughout the province who have had major cut 
in their revenue-sharing funding. And that has resulted in tax 
increases unprecedented in Saskatchewan over that same period 
of time. 
 
Now I’ll just give you an example of what has happened. In 
1987 the funding for urban municipalities on the revenue 
sharing was $67.126 million. In 1989, two years later which is 
this budget and this Bill which the minister talks about, ’88-89, 
the funding is $67,040. Two years later it is less than it was in 
1987. Now what in Heaven’s name can the minister and the 
government expect other than tax increases on property? 
 
This is a deliberate attempt by the government, which has 
unnecessarily created a deficit as massive as it is, to pass on this 
deficit to property owners; tell them that they have got to handle 
it. They did the mismanagement. They are the ones . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the Minister of Urban Affairs 
say they don’t believe me. Well he obviously has been living in 
a cocoon for the last little while and has not talked to very many 
people. Because I happen . . . the people I go and see 
throughout Saskatchewan in the places that I go, are saying very 
clearly that they are getting a tax load which they can no longer 
stand. 
 
In the last four years . . . I’ll give you a little comparison just so 
that for the record it is known the difference between that 
Conservative government and the government that was a New 
Democratic government before, unfortunately, they took the 
reins of office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read to you the following. In the last four years 
of the NDP government, which was ’78 to ’81 — I’m going to 
use four-year comparisons — the revenue sharing grants 
increased by 109.5 per cent, and at the same time inflation 
increased by 45.2 per cent. A net increase of 64.3 percent in real 
dollars was seen in that period of time. 
 
How does that compare with this government’s operation? Well 
I’ll tell you. In the last four years of this government, ’86-89, 
revenue sharing has increased by 2.9 per cent. Inflation during 
that same period was roughly 18.5 per cent, and this means a 
net decline in real dollars of 15.6 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s the result of that? Well the  

result of that is very traumatic. And I’ll give you some . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Wind it up. Let’s get . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I know the minister would like us 
to wind it up, because he doesn’t like to hear this, but I don’t 
intend to wind it up until I’m ready. 
 
The result of this neglect and this choosing of the wrong 
priorities, the result of saying to the municipalities, we’re 
cutting back your revenue sharing because we’ve got to have 
this money for the oil royalty holidays for our oil company 
friends, is the following. 
 
If you take a home in Regina, an average home of 1,000 square 
feet, three-bedroom bungalow, the taxes on that home in 1981 
were $1,102. In 1987 they were $1,531, and they’re going up in 
1988. Now if you add to that the removal of the property 
improvement grant, as I said the other night, that has been an 
increase in the term of this government, on that home, of $659 
on property tax. 
 
Now these are the size of homes that working people live in, 
who in many cases have not had an increase in their pay during 
that period of time. Some of them have been unemployed from 
time to time during that period of time. And this government is 
saying, you’ve got to pay for this deficit which the PCS created. 
That’s Regina. 
 
Saskatoon people haven’t fare any better. In 1981 their tax was 
$867 on the similar kind of home. In 1987 it was $1,272 — 
$1,272. And if you calculate the property improvement grant 
into that, their property taxes increased on that 1,000 square 
foot home by $635. 
 
I’ll give you a rural community. Now here is a government that 
talks about rural Saskatchewan, but that’s all it does is talks 
about it. Legislation on store hours that the minister introduced 
today is going to be devastating for rural Saskatchewan. It’s 
going to be the domino effect. And if the city of Saskatoon 
decides to have seven-day opening and if the city of Prince 
Albert does, then the town of Duck Lake and the town of 
Rosthern don’t have a choice. 
 
Now that is now on top of what the minister has done and this 
government has done in property taxes to towns in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s Balgonie — not a big town, but a pretty good place to 
live. People have raised their families there. But it’s not so easy 
to raise their families there any more, because the property 
taxes in 1981 in Balgonie, if you do it based on a computation 
of mill rate on a home with an assessment of $4,000 prior to 
reassessment in 1985 and an assessment of $8,500 after 1985, is 
as follows. In 1981, $656 was the property tax; in 1987 it was 
$1,062. And if you consider the property improvement grant, 
the increase on that home for that family has been $633 since 
this government took office. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is unacceptable. That is unacceptable 
from a government that says it’s got $2 billion to give to 
Imperial Esso, and all corporations which have made handsome 
profits in that period of time,  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1759 
 

handsome profits. Says, we got to give them $2 billion, but we 
got to cut back revenue sharing, and municipalities, you go get 
it out of the property owner. 
 
Now I could spend a lot of time giving you examples, Mr. 
Speaker. I could talk about my city, the city of Regina, and I 
could point out, and I will in my estimates later and also in the 
second reading speech in the Committee of the Whole of this 
Bill, that in the one year alone of 1986-87 in the city of Regina, 
this government cut back a total of $8 million — $8 million. 
Now that is a lot of money to cut back on a city of the size of 
Regina or Saskatoon in one year. 
 
And having done that, then the minister went out and publicly 
was condemning the city council, saying, oh they are 
inefficient; oh they are raising property taxes. But I say to him 
they were not inefficient. They have not in recent years raised 
property taxes in a massive way. But they had to do something 
because you cannot sit on your hands and do nothing when the 
provincial government says we’re going to take $8 million 
away from your funding from the province and we’re going to 
give it to the oil companies. 
 
Ordinarily, Mr. Speaker, this Bill would go by without any 
comment at all because it’s regular annual legislation. But 
because of the history that comes with it and because of the 
neglect that it exemplifies, I don’t think we can do that. Because 
I think we need to consider carefully those brief remarks that 
the minister made, and we need to talk at some greater length 
about the neglect of this government in funding, so at this time, 
I adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1545) 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Controverted 
Municipal Elections Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
move second reading of The Controverted Municipal Elections 
Amendment Act, 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say at the outset that this Bill is intended to 
put an end to voting irregularities that apparently occurred in 
the 1985 local election in Ferland. 
 
As many members of this House know, this alleged abuse of the 
election process involved land transactions. A number of names 
of people living outside the community were added to the titles 
of land within the village, allegedly to permit them to influence 
the results if the election. 
 
A judge who looked into the matter said that indeed some 
manipulation of the rules had taken place but that it was not 
illegal the problem arises from the right of people who reside 
outside that municipality to vote in urban municipal elections. 
Let me add that the right of non-resident landowners to vote is a 
feature of local government legislation in other provinces as 
well. 
 
However, the right is open to abuse when competing  

groups in a community sell or give inexpensive land to a 
number of their friends, to relatives who live outside the 
municipality. These non-residents can, under the rules of land 
ownership, place a number of names on the title of a single, 
small parcel or lot. They can then qualify to vote. If we do not 
change the rules now, Mr. Speaker, the possibility for this to 
happen in other communities in the 1988 municipal general 
election continues to exist. 
 
Well we did a great deal of work on this. We looked at the 
obvious solution of limiting the voters on any one parcel of land 
to one or two. We discovered that this was both legally and 
practically very difficult. 
 
First, there is no real fair way to determine which one or two 
landowners out a number of legal owners of a piece of property 
should get the vote. Selecting one or two voters from a number 
of equally qualified people could lead to lawsuits, quarrels, and 
other things. It would also run the risk of violating equality 
guarantees under the charter of rights. 
 
Well what’s the solution? There are actually two solutions, Mr. 
Speaker. One of these solutions is contained in the Bill 
amending The Local Government Election Act, which I will 
speak to later in this session, and it was introduced earlier in the 
day. The other solution is contained in this Bill. The 
amendments in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, will apply some pretty 
stiff penalties to anyone who buys land in a community to 
influence the outcome of a municipal election, and I will 
describe the measures that are in this Bill. 
 
First, it will be an offence for any person, resident or 
non-resident, to buy or otherwise obtain land for the purpose of 
influencing the outcome of an election. 
 
Secondly, it will be an offence for any person to counsel or 
procure another person to buy or otherwise obtain land for the 
purpose of influencing the outcome of an election. 
 
And thirdly, it will be an offence for anyone to even counsel or 
procure any person who has knowingly bought land with the 
intention of influencing the result of an election. 
 
Fourth, anyone who before this Bill was passed bought land for 
the purpose of influencing the local election, would be in breach 
of this Act if he were to vote in the upcoming October 1988 
local elections. It would be an offence for anyone to counsel or 
procure any person who bought land before this Bill, with the 
intent to influence a local vote, and has maintained interest to 
land since, or indeed votes in the October elections. 
 
And finally, any candidate who is involved in a scheme to get 
extra names on a land title with the objective of ensuring his 
election, will face a fine, the loss of his seat, and 
disqualification from office for a period of four years — pretty 
stiff penalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that every member of this House abhors 
any abuse of voting rights. We take voting matters very 
seriously, as well we should. I believe we have a fair and 
practical amendment package here that will prevent any 
significant abuse of the non-resident franchise in the  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1760 
 

future, and I urge all members to support this Bill. 
 
I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 42, An Act to 
amend The Controverted Municipal Election Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, on the face of the Bill and 
the intent of what the Bill intends to do and what the minister 
says it intends to do, I would have no reason to oppose the Bill. 
But I think that there are some implications here that this 
legislature ought to consider very carefully, and I want to 
explore some of them before we let this Bill go to the 
committee. 
 
First of all, it is well known that one of the reasons why the 
problem was created in the first place was because of some 
legislation that this government brought in about five years ago 
which caused the problem to exist, and caused the legislation to 
become such that it was able to have this kind of a problem. 
 
That’s a little bit of . . . I’m not talking about this minister, 
because he wasn’t then the minister. But . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipal 
Association) wanted it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — There maybe a lot of people who may 
have wanted it, Mr. Minister. The point is that the government 
has to decide, and you should consider that. You should 
consider all of the implications of any legislation, just like the 
minister should have considered the implications of doing away 
with wards legislation, and the implications of the store hours 
legislation. 
 
The problem is this government. Which pays very little 
attention to the law, very little attention to this Legislative 
Assembly, no attention to the process of this Legislative 
Assembly, has screwed it up, quite frankly. And so the problem 
is a result of wrong legislation that they had in the first place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know what the minister says in his Bill, and he 
says that for the purposes of influencing the election is guilty of 
an offence; any person who may be involved in buying property 
for the purposes of influencing the election, it would be an 
offence. 
 
Well, that’s easy to say. What I will be wanting the minister to 
explain is, how will it be determined that it’s an offence? How 
will the minister know and how will the judge know that citizen 
X, who bought property in the community six months before an 
election, did so because that will influence that election? 
 
Now I hope that the minister is able to explain that because I’m 
sure that he has thought through it carefully. And I just sort of 
forewarn him that when we get to the Bill we’ll be asking those 
questions. We’ll not be asking them in any political, partisan, 
critical sense. I just simply will be wanting to know, for the 
purposes of all the public concern, what the answers will be. 
 
I am having some legal interpretation of this Bill provided for 
me, Mr. Speaker, because I think that is necessary before I can 
make a final comment on it. And until I get that legal comment, 
I’m going to adjourn debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I intend at the end of my 
remarks to move second reading of The Residential Tenancies 
(Amendment) Act, 1988. 
 
Changes are being proposed to the Act which will streamline 
the procedure followed on applications under the Act, make the 
Act more equitable to both parties, and ensure the 
constitutionality of the powers granted to the Rentalsman. 
 
Landlords and tenants will be deemed to have agreed to refer 
disputes to the Rentalsman unless they agree in writing that 
their disputes will be resolved by the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
By making application to the Rentalsman voluntary, the 
province is acting within its constitutional authority in assigning 
adjudicative powers to it. 
 
The Rentalsman currently is required to investigate every 
complaint, but is not obliged to hold a hearing before making an 
order. This provision will be amended to require him to hold a 
hearing in every case, and give him discretion to investigate 
complicated cases. It is more conducive to the ends of justice to 
allow parties to present their own evidence and have an order 
made after each side has had the opportunity to present its case. 
 
As in small claims court, the person making their claim will 
serve notice of hearing on the person against whom he is 
making claim. A landlord presently must wait until the rent is 
past due 15 days before he can service notice of termination of 
the tenancy. We will reduce that to 10 days. 
 
The Rent Appeal Commission will be abolished, and the appeal 
to the commission from an order of the Rentalsman will be 
replaced with an appeal to the Court of Queen’s Bench. The 
Lieutenant Governor in Council will be given authority to make 
regulations to establish a fee for filing a complaint with the 
Rentalsman, and to provide for the unsuccessful party to 
reimburse the successful party for that fee. 
 
The system for resolving disputes with respect to security 
deposits is simplified. If the landlord has a claim for arrears of 
rent, it may be set off against the security deposit after giving 
notice to the tenant, without an order of the Rentalsman. 
 
For other claims the landlord must apply to the Rentalsman for 
an order resolving this dispute. If the landlord does not comply 
with the time limitations in this section, this claim will not be 
absolutely barred. The Rentalsman will have the discretion to 
make an order in his favour where the landlord has a reasonable 
excuse for not complying with the time lines and it would be 
inequitable to pay the security deposit to the tenant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Residential Tenancies Act. 
 
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1761 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
going to adjourn this in a moment or two. Suffice it to say we 
don’t share the easy assurance voiced by the minister who, I 
think, did not believe what he said, or perhaps didn’t understand 
what he was saying. But the speech read by the minister voiced 
an optimism that the procedure with respect to deposits would 
work out fairly for both sides. Suffice it to say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: We. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — He’s using the royal “we.” Yes. 
 
Suffice it to say that we have some concern about that. Prior to 
the coming into effect of The Residential Tenancies Act, most 
deposits were lost. Very, very few tenants actually got their 
deposit back. The system is heavily weighted in favour of the 
landlord. For one thing, for any individual tenant it’s usually 
too small a sum of money to pursue. This was intended to 
rectify that, to provide that the landlord was, and had to be, 
responsible, had to have good reason to keep the damage 
deposit. 
 
We fear, Mr. Speaker, that this system will take us back to the 
days prior to The Residential Tenancies Act in the early ’70s, 
when very few tenants could ever get their damage deposit 
back. So we are concerned about that. We want an opportunity 
to adjourn it, to consider that. We are also . . . I see the member 
from . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Wilkie. Thank you very much. I see the 
member from Wilkie wants me to expand my remarks. He feels 
I’m not dealing with this item with sufficient clarity and 
thoroughness. So for the benefit of the member from Wilkie, I 
shall be a good deal more thorough and I shall make sure that 
there’s all the detail there that he wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other item we have some concern about, is a 
serious vein, the other item we have some concern about is the 
abolition of the rental appeal. We think the system worked 
reasonably well, notwithstanding very stiff resistance by the 
landlords when it was brought into effect. We think most of 
them would admit at this point in time that the system has been 
reasonably fair to both sides. We are not sure the system that 
this government’s bringing in is going to work as well, and as 
we fear indeed that it may be again weighed in favour of the 
landlords. It is our concern that this legislation has been written 
after talking to the landlords and without really having 
consulted with any particular group of tenants. 
 
(1600) 
 
In the ’70s, before this was brought in, there were tenants’ 
associations. This legislation was brought in, met most of their 
concerns, and most of those associations disappeared. Therefore 
I think the government has heard the concerns of the landlords 
who are organized; has not heard the concerns of the tenants 
who have been organized but reasonably satisfied with things. 
 
With those comments, because I know the member from  

Wilkie will want to hear much more on the subject, I’m going 
to ask for leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 43 increases 
the tax on a package of cigarettes form $1.17 to $1.42, one cent 
per cigarette, effective April 1, 1988. And the tax on one gram 
of fine cut or pipe tobacco goes from $1.90 to 2.30. I’m a little 
disappointed that the New Democratic Party that in Ottawa 
favoured restrictions on cigarette advertising, is now saying that 
they’re going to oppose this tax increase. 
 
There are minor increases in the tax rates on cigars. The tax 
increases from 15 cents to 16 cents for cigars retailing for less 
than 20 cents; the tax on cigars retailing in the 21 to 40 cents 
category increases from 30 to 32 cents; and the tax on cigars 
retailing in the 41 cents to 60 cent category increases from 45 to 
48 cents per cigar. For those cigars that retail for more than 60 
cents, Mr. Speaker, the tax rate increases from 75 per cent of 
the retail selling price to 80 per cent. 
 
These tax changes, Mr. Speaker, are expected to yield an 
additional $18 million in 1988-89. 
 
I move second reading of An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax 
Act. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
of Finance is correct about one thing. We will oppose this Bill 
on second reading, if for no other reason that it’s simply another 
tax grab. We are not opposed on this side of the House, neither, 
I think, is any political party in this province or throughout this 
country necessarily opposed to taxes on tobacco or tobacco 
products, even if we have concerns at times about raising it too 
far and there being a diminishing rate of return. But in the case 
of this government, and in this province, we will oppose any tax 
increase put forward by them because we have serious 
reservations simply about how they tax the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We feel that there are perhaps fairer ways to tax people in this 
province, actions which the government has not provided, and 
therefore again this particular tax grab we will oppose, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am disappointed 
to hear the hon. member’s comments and I’ll be most pleased to 
pass on to groups like the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 
the heart-lung association and others, the opposition to this 
particular Bill by the opposition party. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance 

Act, 1983 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill is  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1762 
 

being put forward today simply to address a long standing 
technical difficulty with the Act. 
 
Traditionally when special warrants are raised during the course 
of a fiscal year, the warrants are submitted to the Legislative 
Assembly in the form of supplementary estimates and 
considered in Committee of Finance each year. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, these estimates are then passed 
at the same time as the main Appropriation Act for the fiscal 
year. The amendment simply clarifies that special warrants are 
to be included in the first main Appropriation Act, and not in an 
Act for the purposes of interim supply. 
 
I’m pleased to move that an Act to amend The Department of 
Finance Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the minister for his explanation, although it is somewhat 
brief. We will want to take some time to examine his remarks, 
to study them further, and would beg at this time leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Department of Social 
Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a short 
proposed amendment, and I would say it is of a technical nature 
in that the question has arisen as to the technicalities of the 
Department of Social Services having the power to make 
regulations. And for that purpose we have brought in this very 
brief amendment to clarify that technical point so that the 
Regulations Committee is satisfied that we are actually within 
our jurisdiction in making regulations. 
 
I believe that we have that power as it now exists, but the legal 
experts indicate that it is a little fuzzy and that it should be 
clear, and so therefore we propose this amendment to clarify the 
regulation-making power of the Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Speaking to the Minister of Social Services, 
perhaps you would like to move your Bill? 
 
An Hon. Member: Too late. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The members opposite say it’s too late. 
It’s never too late to bring in legislation, and I would move 
second reading of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for the 
oversight on this small Bill. 
 
Mr. Prebble: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for recognizing 
me. Mr. Speaker, I found the explanatory note, that went with 
this Bill of interest because what is in effect a relatively minor 
amendment, nevertheless gets at a matter that the Minister of 
Social Services has a real tendency to neglect, and that is acting 
in a legal manner when conducting the affairs of the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, that the explanatory note says, and I  

quote from it: 
 

There is no authority under The Department of Social 
Services Act to allow the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 
i.e. the cabinet, the power to make regulations to carry out 
the activities authorized under this Act. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services has 
been acting illegally in bringing forward all the regulations that 
he has done to cut back benefits to social assistance recipients, 
including, Mr. Speaker, the elimination of their travel allowance 
and the cuts that allow them to keep less money when they 
work on a part-time basis, Mr. Speaker, but are dependent on 
social assistance nevertheless. 
 
In other words, Mr. Minister, what this amendment does today 
is reflect the fact that the minister and the cabinet have been 
making these changes to the welfare system in a manner that’s 
illegal. And they’re now having to come before this legislature 
to correct it. And I say to the minister that this is just one little 
example, Mr. Speaker, of this minister’s tendency to break the 
law. 
 
I want to give a couple of other examples that I think reflect 
again the message that’s behind this Bill, Mr. Speaker, before I 
sit down, because the members on this side of the House will be 
supporting the Bill. The amendment is necessary to clarify the 
ability of the cabinet to pass regulations in support of The 
Department of Social Services Act. But before I sit down, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to point out that the member opposite, the 
Minister of Social Services, has done exactly the same thing 
with respect to violating the Canada Assistance Plan Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The minister, despite the fact that he gets 50 per cent of his 
funds for financing the activities of the Department of Social 
Services, including the social assistance plan, Mr. Speaker, 
from Ottawa, 50 per cent of the money is from Ottawa, and yet 
the minister continues to flagrantly violate the federal Act and 
the federal regulations that are laid down to protect social 
assistance recipients in this province and throughout this 
country. 
 
And I make particular reference in this case, Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister’s “work for welfare” program and the fact that despite 
the federal law making it perfectly clear that that work for 
welfare program is to be done, is only to operate on a voluntary 
basis, but the minister opposite has made it an involuntary 
program. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s just another example of how this 
minister acts and chooses to implement policies that are in 
violation of, in this case, the federal statute, but he’s been doing 
exactly the same thing provincially, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a minister who doesn’t respect the regulations of his 
own department. And when he brings forward regulations, he 
has been doing so, Mr. Speaker, ever since he became Minister 
of Social Services, without the legal authority to do it. 
 
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1763 
 

So what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that the cabinet, the 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker, cut the travel allowance of almost every 
social assistance recipient in this province without the legal 
authority to do so. What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
cabinet has in effect chosen, Mr. Speaker, to dramatically 
reduce the amount of money that social assistance recipients 
who are working part time are allowed to keep, Mr. Speaker, 
when they draw their social assistance cheque. 
 
I just want to give you an example of what the Minister of 
Social Services has done in this regard, Mr. Speaker. If you take 
a single mother with two children, the department, the minister, 
and the cabinet passed a regulation just a few months ago that 
says that that single mother with two children, if she’s earning 
$550 a month, Mr. Speaker, can only now keep $160 instead of 
$223 as she was allowed to keep previously, until the regulation 
change in January. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, the minister comes forward today and 
acknowledges that that change in the regulation was illegal. So, 
Mr. Minister, not only are you a minister who has shown 
incredible insensitivity to the less fortunate and the poor in this 
province, but you’ve been making all those changes in the 
regulations illegally. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, shame — 
shame that you’ve come before the House today acknowledging 
this. 
 
That’s all I have to say, Mr. Speaker. We accept the fact that 
this change in the legislation is needed to give the minister the 
right to act legally. But just because, Mr. Minister, you’ll now 
have the right to act legally doesn’t mean that your policies are 
any less immoral than they were the day before this legislation 
becomes law. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated 
earlier in debate, I did not acknowledge that the Department of 
Social Services had done anything illegally. We’re trying to 
cure some technicalities. And if the member opposite wishes to 
say to this Assembly that everything the Department of Social 
Services has done is technically illegal, then we have paid out 
millions and millions of dollars under the same illegality. And I 
would say that those millions and millions of dollars have done 
a lot of good for people. And I do not apologize on a 
technicality for having spent millions of dollars on some 
lawyers and some technical people to say that maybe this 
wasn’t quite according to the regulations. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is not an amendment that I bring forward to 
correct any error that this government has ever made. The 
Social Services Act is not the Act of this government; it is the 
old long-standing Social Services Act. I would have assumed 
that if I have done anything illegally, then the minister before 
me and the minister before him were just as illegal — and they 
happen to have been Conservatives. And the ministers before 
them, who happen to have been NDP, did the same thing that I 
have been doing and that other ministers have been doing. 
 
We have all . . . If I have done anything illegal, then the NDP 
ministers have done the same things illegally, and I don’t 
question their motives. I say yes, they did it for the good of the 
people and I have done these things for the good of the people. 
And I do not apologize for the  

questions of technicalities that only batteries of lawyers with 
much time on their hands could distinguish or be interested in. 
 
So what I’m saying here is, I am not correcting anything that 
was caused by this government, but a long-standing problem 
that this government finally has gone to this Assembly and said, 
listen, members, public — there may be a technical problem 
here and we are correcting it. And I noticed the member 
opposite, when he spoke, did not disagree with the principle of 
having paid millions of dollars to help people over the years. 
 
We are simply here complying to make absolutely certain that 
the technical requirements of Bills and regulations are followed, 
but this has absolutely nothing to do with policy. And I submit 
in closing debate, Mr. Speaker, that this small amendment to 
cure any technical problems that may exist is above board, up 
front to the public and to the members of this Assembly. This 
government has the courage to say that if there’s a technical 
problem we’ll correct it. 
 
The former government, Mr. Speaker, operated under the same 
rules and now says that there is something wrong with rules, 
there are devious motives. How can the members opposite, the 
members of the former government, some of them who sit in 
this very Assembly, have done the same things? If I am guilty 
of breaking any rules, Mr. Speaker, then the members opposite 
are guilty of breaking the same rules. And I am pleased that 
they are now agreeing that we should technically correct these 
rules so that their guilt is erased along with mine. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend The Residential Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the 
Assembly in opening debate on this particular Bill that this is a 
matter . . . another Bill of technical nature. 
 
The existing Act, had we not brought forth the amendment, 
only permits the Minister of Social Services to license 
residential facilities. And we have in Saskatchewan group 
homes that are under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Social 
Services, and we have group homes that are under the 
jurisdiction of the Minister of Health. 
 
This amendment will permit the Minister of Health to license 
those group homes for which health has the jurisdiction and the 
responsibility of submitting the tax funds for the operation of 
those groups homes and the general supervision and operation 
of those groups homes, and will continue to allow the Minister 
of Social Services to license those groups homes for which the 
Minister of Social Services has jurisdiction responsibility. 
 
So by bringing in this Bill, the amendment, what it does is it 
separates the jurisdiction, and rather than have the Minister of 
Social Services license group homes that are operated by the 
Department of Health, the Minister of  
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1764 
 

Health will license his group homes and the Minister of Social 
Services will license the Social Services group homes, and there 
will be coexisting jurisdiction on the licensing of residential 
facilities which are primarily group homes for either mentally 
retarded adults, handicapped people or people with mental 
illnesses. 
 
And that is a simple explanation, maybe a long explanation, of a 
simple amendment. But I wanted to make it quite clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is turning over to the Department of Health 
the jurisdiction for those things for which they now have 
responsibility. 
 
And I would move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Prebble: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, only to say that we 
agree with the minister about the need for this amendment, and 
will be supporting the amendment. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 50 — An Act respecting the Control of Distribution 
and the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to say to move second 
reading of Bill No. 50, an Act respecting the Control of 
Distribution and the Consumption of Beverage Alcohol in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is somewhat of an historic occasion, since the 
current Liquor Act has been in force since prohibition ended in 
1925. There have been some amendments over the years and 
The Liquor Licensing Act was enacted in 1959. However many 
of the provisions in both of these Acts are now unenforceable, 
redundant, or inappropriate in today’s environment. 
 
The most obvious reason then to bring forth new legislation was 
to make it more practical, relevant, and enforceable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill achieves our objective to a great extent by 
amalgamating the two Acts, by removing the requirement for 
local option area votes, simplifying the licensing system to two 
basic categories, and moving a number of provisions into 
regulations so that changes can be made more easily as 
society’s demands change; and ensuring all search, seizure, 
arrest, and other such provisions are consistent with the charter 
of rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also believe that the current legislation does 
not adequately address the problems of alcohol abuse and that 
the penalties are not in line with present personal and corporate 
incomes. 
 
Consistent with this government’s initiatives against alcohol 
and drug abuse, Bill 50 takes a stronger stance against the sale 
and service of alcohol to minors, over-service of alcohol, 
indiscriminate use of special occasion permits, consumption of 
alcohol in vehicles, and the unlawful sale of alcohol. 
 
The third reason, Mr. Speaker, for bringing forth this new 
legislation is to create a more positive, responsible  

environment surrounding the sale and service of alcohol, and at 
the same time allow new opportunities for the hospitality 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the opinion of our government that current 
liquor laws discourage the hospitality industry from 
implementing new marketing concepts which would have 
positive benefits for consumers, rural communities, and the 
tourism industry. 
 
The new licensing system set out in this Act is simpler, more 
practical, and allows more creativity in the design of individual 
licences. A class A licence would apply to all premises which 
make food the primary source of business. A class B licence 
would apply to all other licences, licensed facilities, that will 
require food sufficient for a light meal to be available. By 
requiring food to be available in all licensed establishments, we 
hope to discourage over-consumption and impairment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a variety of endorsements to both classes of 
licences will be available to meet the needs of specific 
communities and to allow new concepts such as brew pubs, 
neighbourhood pubs, bed and breakfast establishments, optional 
hours of operation, more family dining, and catering to 
functions off the premises. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, special vendors will be renamed 
franchises, which more correctly identifies their legal 
relationship with the Liquor Board. The franchise designation 
will allow for the creation of privately run wine boutiques and 
specialty shops which we see in other parts of the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes that individual 
communities should have more input into the types of licences 
established and the events that take place in their communities. 
Consequently, Mr. Speaker, the Liquor Board will be 
developing policies which will more closely involve local 
governments and require their approval in many cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act is in an almost identical form to the Act 
that was introduced during the last session of the legislature and 
has been in the public domain since last November. The general 
public and interested groups have had the opportunity to 
provide their comments and relate any concerns to our 
government. As we formulate new regulations and policies to 
accompany the Act, our government will continue its 
consultation process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 50 is designed to set the framework for public 
policy on alcohol distribution and consumption, which will take 
us into the 21st century. In the provisions of this new Act, Mr. 
Speaker, every effort has been made to balance the interest of 
the consumer, the industry, the government, and the society in 
general. It takes a stronger stance on abuse while encouraging a 
more positive environment for consumers, and new 
opportunities in tourism and hospitality for industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 50, the 
Alcohol Control Act. 
 
(1630) 
 
  



 
June 1, 1988 

 

1765 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be 
adjourning the debate on this Bill. It is a very substantial Bill, 
and although it’s been around for some time, I note that there 
have been some changes made since it was first introduced, if I 
am correct. And we will want to have a very close look at those 
changes, as I’m sure will people involved in the hotel industry 
and the public at large, because this is legislation that is not 
only of concern or interest and impacts on people who are in the 
alcohol business, if you want to put it that way, or the selling or 
the serving of alcohol, alcoholic drinks, but it also is of concern 
and of interest, I think, to many other people in the public. 
 
There no doubt are many good provisions in the Bill. It 
certainly is true what the minister says about the age of some 
legislation and how long it has existed. And times do change, 
but there are some provisions in the Bill that I think should 
cause us all to be extremely concerned. 
 
The provision that, and the minister referred to it, that deals 
with franchising, clearly is an attempt to put into the legislation 
what is required by the government in order to do a massive 
privatization of the liquor store operations and other aspects of 
the Liquor Licensing Commission and the Liquor Board. 
 
Now I notice that the minister didn’t point that out. He explains 
it in more acceptable language, but the fact is that there may 
very well be here another example of this government’s 
headlong charge into privatization, ideologically motivated, 
without any consideration for what is in the public good. And I 
think that question — if for no other reason; but there are other 
reasons — but if no other reason was there, that one in itself 
should be of concern and will be of concern in this debate and, I 
think, in the public. 
 
Another thing that I note in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that it will 
now allow the corporation — and I point out the distinction 
between the corporation and this legislature — this Bill will 
allow the corporation to make laws and regulations that regulate 
the sale and the consumption of alcoholic beverages in the 
province. 
 
Now I ask the question: is it appropriate for the corporation to 
make those kinds of laws, or should not that be the prerogative 
of this Legislative Assembly? Is there not some real danger in 
turning over almost all of the regulation and the setting of the 
regulations to the corporation and the minister in charge. That 
certainly has the potential for unbridled patronage. 
 
Now in the hands of this government, history in six years will 
show that patronage is a second name, and therefore clearly is 
some real danger, the real danger in some of the provisions that 
are here. Now there are other issues as well in this Bill that we 
need to ask some serious questions about, and our critic, the 
member from Prince Albert, is spending a considerable amount 
of time studying it and discussing it with groups and people 
who are going to be affected. He is going to be speaking on it in 
second reading debate. But for now, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn the 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:33 p.m. 
 
 


