


















































June 16, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 16, 1988 
 

2175 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I only have one official here at this time; 
there will be others very shortly. I have Don Elsaesser with me 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Chairman: Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m 
looking forward to the discussion we can have on this very 
important piece of legislation. As I understand the legislation, it 
sets out the return and recycling system essentially now to deal 
with the aluminum cans that are on the market and perhaps with 
plastic containers which may be coming on the market later this 
year. 
 
So we’ll just, right away, I think, move into some questions that I 
have, and I’ll appreciate your responses. Would you, Mr. Minister, 
give to the House your assessment of the return rate on aluminum 
cans that will be achieved through this legislation, through the 
system now in place or being put in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The indications that has happened in other 
provinces, at least, is that in the first year they start at 
approximately 20 per cent and then by the end of the second year 
would be close to 50. So in the first year we expect a slower return 
rate, gradually building to 50 or above. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you’re taking that information from 
the experience of other provinces. Could you indicate to me that 
the provinces which you have looked at to get that experience . . . 
And that would indicate that another province has a system very 
similar to ours. Which province would that be that these figures 
could be considered comparable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That would be the Alberta position as well as 
Manitoba, and it’s sort of the national averages that have occurred 
in the past. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, is it not true that the Alberta system 
is quite a different system than the one we have in place in 
Saskatchewan now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The system in Alberta, the universal system 
as it’s called, will be very similar to what ours will develop into 
except that we will be working with the handicapped rather than a 
different contractor. That’s the main difference. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, correct me if I’m wrong, but 
the system being set in place in Saskatchewan proposes to have 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of 40 to 50 return depots. And 
maybe I’m being generous; we certainly aren’t anywhere near that 
point now. The information that I have been able to gather from 
the Alberta system is that they have somewhere in the  

neighbourhood of 220 to 240 registered bottle and can depots. So I 
see that as a significant difference between the two systems. 
 
Are you saying to me, then, that you would anticipate this level, 
this number of return centres, by the time the entire program is in 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose the first thing that you would have 
to look at is, the population of Alberta is considerably larger than 
ours. We do anticipate to have a number of subdealers that will be 
bringing the cans into the depots. We expect to have between 30 
and 40 depots and then subdepots that will be distributed around in 
the smaller centres, that will deliver the cans into the rehab 
centres, wherever those depots are set. 
 
So we will have a number of depots. The exact number is not final 
yet, but SARC (Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres) indicate that they will be subcontracting to others to act 
as a dealer who would bring in the cans to the depots that they will 
establish. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, this is the first that I’ve heard of the 
subdepot idea. It has not been contained, I don’t think, in any of 
your press statements or any of the releases or so on. This is the 
first news I’ve heard of it. 
 
I take it from what you said that this not something that’s being 
established through your department or by regulation, but through 
an initiative of SARC. Is that true, that they will be SARC who 
will be establishing the subdepots around the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, SARC has the contract, and they will 
establish the depots and they’ll also establish the subdepots. It will 
take some time and they are negotiating with different 
communities now, but they haven’t set up any of the subdepots at 
this point. 
 
The first stage would be to put in place all of the depots 
themselves, then the subdealers will take place from there on out. 
And it will take a little time. That’s the reason that only cans have 
been introduced at this time and that the PET bottles, or plastic 
bottles, will not come until a later date. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, in that comment I take it then 
that the plastic containers, when they arrive, will also be included 
in the system where they can be returned; that there would be a 
deposit, or a refund, or they will be included in this return system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes. The plastics will be returned as well, 
when they are authorized to go. We haven’t set the rates that will 
be paid and the refunds that will be paid at this point. We want to 
work with other provinces to be sure that we’re in line with what’s 
happening around us before we set that rate. But there will be a 
deposit return system for those bottles as well. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, you’re assuring the House 
tonight — and therefore the people of Saskatchewan — that 
before the plastic containers are available for use that: (1) there 
will be the much broader  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2176 
 

return depot network set up, the subdepots and so on; and that (2) 
these containers will, in fact, be a returnable container, and by that 
I mean that they will have a deposit on them that can be returned 
to reclaim the deposit just like the cans. Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, they will have the deposit and the refund 
system. I can’t give you the exact number of depots that will be set 
up. We’re aiming at November 1 as the time frame before the PET 
bottles will come on stream, and SARC has got a lot of work to do 
over the summer to be sure that they are ready to handle those 
bottles. So they need some time. I think they’re working very hard 
at this point in putting equipment and people in place, and should 
be able to have the subcontracts in place, as well, before 
November. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I want to be sure we’re talking 
about the same thing, and perhaps I am confused here. Are we 
talking about the containers that will be used to purchase draught 
beer, the plastic containers that will be used to purchase draught 
beer? Is that what you’re referring to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. I was talking about soft drinks. And the 
PET bottles are the 1- and 2-litre bottles that you see around the 
world that are used for soft drinks. The beer containers we have 
not authorized at this point and there isn’t a definite date in place 
at this time. But probably it would be something like the other 
plastics. Once there’s market for plastic, then that system will be 
set up. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — My question then, Mr. Minister: in terms of the 
plastic jugs that will be used for draught beer, will they be . . . 
Once authorized, will there be a system in place for their return 
and recycling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, they will be the same system when 
they’re approved, but it’s not approved at this time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, it seems to me I’ve seen 
some recent press reports that indicate they may be approved as 
early as the month of July. Are you saying that that’s not realistic, 
that we’re not going to see them on the market or available that 
soon, but not until a system has been put in place for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe what you’re seeing is advertising 
and press releases being made by the hotel association. We, as a 
department, have not approved any plastic container to handle 
draught beer, and the main reason that we haven’t is that we have 
to put in place the recycling system so that it can be handled 
properly. And I don’t feel that we’re at that stage yet. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, then I just want to be clear, 
because I think there’s perhaps then some misunderstanding in the 
public mind about this issue. You are saying that the plastic 
bottles, the plastic containers for draught beer, will not be 
available for use in this province until a deposit and return and 
recycling system is in place. And my estimation would be that that 
certainly wouldn’t be as early as July. 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — I certainly have never said July, and I don’t 
see how it would be possible by then. But I’m working with 
SARC, and when they’re ready, that’s the time that I would see it 
as a possibility. 
 
I don’t want to get out ahead of them, because they are just 
starting; it’s a new industry in the province. Any industry needs 
some start-up time, and that’s the reason that SARC were given 
just cans in the early stages, so that they could get established, 
train their people and be ready for the operation, to hunt for 
markets for plastic and that sort of things before we get too far 
down the road. So it will be some time; I can’t give you a date for 
it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So when Mr. Peter Williamson, the executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Hotels’ Association, says, is quoted 
in the press as saying we are “very, very hopeful that (off-sale 
draft) will be in by July,” that his hopes are not likely to be 
realized. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s what I’m saying to you. He’s hopeful. 
I don’t believe that he’s looking at the whole situation when he 
says that. I would like to see the operation able to go ahead, but I 
don’t want it to go ahead until the depots are in place and that they 
can handle the return of those plastic bottles. I don’t want them all 
over the country and in the lakes and rivers and things. So I’m 
afraid the hotel association is really over-anxious and they’re 
going to have to wait a bit. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then can you explain to the House 
why it is that you did not have the return depots in place, at least 
much further advanced than they currently are, before the 
aluminum cans were put on the market. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres assured me that in three to four weeks from 
the time that they were given the contract that they would have 
their depots up and operating. In three or four weeks most homes 
don’t collect a large number of cans. They would collect some, but 
not a large number. So I believe that SARC has done a good job. 
 
They have, I believe, about 28 at this point — it’s between 25 and 
28 depots running now — and they’re going to open more very 
quickly now. So by the end of the month, I think they will pretty 
much have their 32 depots in place that they indicated at that time 
they could do. 
 
They’ve done a good job, and they’re working very quickly and 
have most of their equipment arriving on site now so that they’ve 
ready to do the whole job. And I think they’re making good 
progress; I’m satisfied with it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, would it be possible for you to . . . 
I’m not sure you can do it now, but could you at some point 
provide for me a list of the 32 communities that will have the 
depots? Perhaps you do have that information now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t have them here tonight. It will be 
basically the rehabilitation centres that SARC have and the 
abilities council will be establishing in Yorkton and in Swift 
Current, but we could provide you with the list of the intended 
areas. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2177 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Well I would appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and I 
would also appreciate receiving the plans that SARC now have in 
place for the extended depot network that you described earlier. 
We have, by my tally, something like 515 villages, towns, and 
cities in the province, well over 500 communities, and if we are 
going to target for any kind of reasonable return of the aluminum 
cans, it seems to me we need a much broader depot system than 32 
depots. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I asked even about the larger urban centres. It’s 
my understanding there will be one depot for the city of Regina 
for a population of 175,000 or so people. Mr. Minister, do you feel 
that that will achieve the kind of return that we would hope for? Is 
one depot in a city this size, in your mind, sufficient to achieve the 
kind of return that, by your own admission, we’re hoping for a 50 
per cent return? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the city of Regina and the city of 
Saskatoon, SARC has indicated that in their plans there’d likely be 
about four depots in each of the major cities, in Saskatoon and 
Regina. Now they’re starting with one, and they will branch out, 
but there’ll only be one at the first initial stage. So I agree with 
you. I think they need more than one in cities this size. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, as the Minister of Environment 
and as the one in our province who takes the lead responsibility for 
protection of our environment, will you be ensuring that in fact the 
network of depots expands substantially so that we might achieve 
a reasonable return rate? Will you be insisting that that happens 
and monitoring to see that it is happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, of course. That was the understanding at 
the time that the agreement was signed, and we will be monitoring 
very close, and the Department of Social Services are working 
very close as well because SARC operates under their wing, so to 
speak. So we’ll be monitoring from both sides — from 
Environment side and from Social Services to see that the job is 
well done. And I believe you’ll be pleased with it as it goes 
forward. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well let me just say this, Mr. Minister. We’ve 
had now about a month of the cans and the system, I realize, is 
only coming on stream, but clearly there will be a problem if we 
do not quickly expand the system. I was fortunate last night to be 
at a banquet of members of Ducks Unlimited and talked to some 
individuals who have just come from the North. They’ve been up 
fishing and they tell me that some of the lake bottoms are already 
visibly full of cans. We will have a major environmental problem 
on our hands, it seems to me, if we don’t act as quickly as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, in establishing the return rate — you’ve set it at 5 
cents a can — can you tell me how you arrived at that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We arrived at the figure by looking at what’s 
been happening across Canada and across other parts of the United 
States. In Alberta the rate is below the 5 cents; they’re 2 cents. 
And in Manitoba there’s no  

deposit. So we felt that the rate that had been used for the return of 
beer cans in almost all provinces has been 5 cents. 
 
We looked at what was happening in the province of Quebec, and 
their cans had . . . Their beer cans and their soft drink cans had 5 
cents. We are going to be a little above Alberta and 5 cents above 
Manitoba, but we feel that’s approximately the right range in order 
to get the cans returned. And that was the rationale for putting the 
5 cents. 
 
You indicate that there are a lot of cans in the lakes in the North. 
You may or may not know that the North has had cans for a 
number of years and that problem may be there. I hope that when 
people from here go fishing in the North or holidaying in the 
North that they will be more responsible than that so that we don’t 
indeed see a lot of cans. It depends on you and I as individuals, 
how we train our families. That’s the way that you control the 
number of cans in the ditch. It isn’t simply by opening a depot 
here and there. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I agree. I agree significant 
education needs to be undertaken, which leads me then to another 
question. Do you, as Minister of the Environment, through your 
department, do you plan an educational campaign to acquaint 
people with the system as it exists, and to encourage people to be 
responsible in saving the cans and having them returned? Do you 
have a plan for some kind of an educational promotion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we are doing an education advertising 
campaign, and you’ve likely noticed our ads in the papers, in the 
early stages here. We have spent considerable amount of money, 
and SARC will be spending money advertising. 
 
The Retail Council of Canada and the retail merchants of 
Saskatchewan have indicated that they would be willing to co-
operate in the education process. They’re very pleased that they 
don’t have the cans coming back into their stores, and through 
letters to the department, have indicated their willingness to be 
involved in the campaign to advertise the necessity of returning 
cans to keep the environment clean. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well I encourage the work that you’ve done, Mr. 
Minister, and I encourage you to keep it up, because it needs that 
kind of educational push, I think, for all of us, for all of us. 
 
Mr. Minister, in section, I believe it’s section 14.82 of the Act, the 
Bill that we’re now considering, there is the power given to you 
there to regulate the deposit rate and so on. If, Mr. Minister, in the 
course of, let’s say, a year or perhaps over two years we haven’t 
begun to approach the targeted return rate, would you consider 
raising the deposit as a means of encouraging the return of the 
cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well that’s an issue that we haven’t 
addressed in the department at this time. I think that we will have 
to monitor very closely what happens. That may be one issue that 
you could look at, is to raise the return. There may be a number of 
other things that we could do,  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2178 
 

so we will be looking at all options, and that would certainly be 
one, but I wouldn’t expect that it would be the first one that we 
would consider. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, can you describe for the House the 
monitoring system that will occur, that I assume that you’ve put 
into place now. How do you intend to monitor the progress of the 
system and the return rates and so on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — All of the distributors of soft drinks and beer 
are required to give us the detail of how many containers they sell 
per month, and the SARC operation on the collections side then 
will give us the details of the amount that they collect. So it will be 
a fairly accurate monitoring of the percentage of return that we’re 
achieving. 
 
I believe the public will certainly be the other side of that 
monitoring. They’re always there, and I’m sure that you’ll be of 
assistance as well in telling me that we’re doing a good job or not 
as good as we should do. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Rest assured, Mr. Minister, there’ll be a number 
of people monitoring the system in the province — no question 
about that. 
 
Mr. Minister, a quick little question, because it’s been asked of me 
— well I’ll join two of them. How is the return system to prevent 
the influx of cans from other provinces? You’ve indicated 
Manitoba does not have a deposit; Alberta has a lower deposit on 
the pop cans. The second question is, in what condition must the 
cans be returned to the depots? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Each container that’s sold in the province has 
to be authorized by brand and by type of container. So once you 
do that, even if it’s a distributor from outside the province, they’re 
licensed, so you know them how much product they bring into the 
province and which containers then are eligible to be recycled and 
to get the 5 cent deposit back. The container, the condition of the 
containers must be recognizable; you have to be able to identify it 
by the brand name on the container. Like sometimes people will 
squeeze it like that; well you can still read it. So that’s the only 
requirement, is that you can recognize it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Some friends of mine, Mr. Minister, were 
worried about the squeezing part; there seems to be some 
enjoyment in squeezing the can when it’s empty. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m not clear about your first answer though. I don’t 
understand how we differentiate therefore from a Coca-Cola can 
that’s bottled in Alberta and the Coca-Cola can that will be . . . or 
canned in Alberta and the can that will be done on the canning line 
here in the province. The beer cans, of course, are all coming from 
out of province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: I’m advised that it’s very difficult to identify the 
actual can if it were Coca-Cola, but if it were Cotts and we hadn’t 
any Cotts licensed to be sold here, then we wouldn’t be refunding 
on that. 
 

The other method, I guess, that you use, is the volume of Coca-
Cola sold. There may be some leakage at the borders; I wouldn’t 
expect it would be large. If somebody with an Alberta plate drives 
into Saskatchewan with a truck-load of cans, then they would 
most certainly be questioned and likely will not receive a refund. 
So we’ll be monitoring it closely, as closely as possible, but the 
best control we will have is on the licensing of the product that’s 
sold within the province. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, who will . . . If some out-of-
province cans end up in our depots, who in fact will suffer the 
loss? Who will suffer the loss in the money? Will it be SARC? 
Will it be the rehab centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I’m afraid it will be the province, because 
we collect the deposit and we pay out the refund, and we pay 
SARC for everything that they refund. They will be our agents, 
and we will expect them to be responsible agents and I’m sure 
they will be. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well either way, Mr. Minister, it’s not a happy 
situation if we’re losing any money, and clearly this province right 
now can’t afford even small amounts of money to be lost. And is it 
not possible, Mr. Minister to have the cans numbered? Is it not 
possible to have a stamped number on the can by which they can 
be identified as a product that has been sold in Saskatchewan? Is 
that not a fairly easy solution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It sounded like an easy solution to me as well, 
but in talking to the people who run the can lines, they tell me that 
when they run a batch of cans through, they don’t know where 
they’re going to end up as far as selling them. They may sell them 
in Regina, they may sell them in Alberta, or they may sell them in 
the United States. So they tell me that to mark them by number of 
by saying Saskatchewan on them or something of that nature is 
very costly and likely not something they would be willing to do. 
 
I don’t believe that we’re going to see all that much slippage at the 
borders. There will be some; there has been some cans going the 
other way into Alberta for a while. So we have to monitor as 
closely as we can and trust that it’s not gong to get out of hand. 
 
As far as the beer cans are concerned, there’s a 5 cent deposit in 
Alberta and the same 5 cents in Saskatchewan and the same 5 
cents in Manitoba, so I don’t see a problem on that side. It’ll 
strictly be the soft drink side. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, as my colleague pointed out, and I think as you’re 
already said as well, the beer cans are all coming from outside the 
province. And I wanted to ask you, sir, what has your department 
or your government been advised as to the number of jobs for 
brewery workers already lost since the introduction of cans in the 
market—place, and what are your forecasts for the numbers of 
jobs that will be lost over a period of time related to the 
introduction of cans in the market-place — beer cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I haven’t really been advised of any  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2179 
 

job losses but I have been advised that they were concerned there 
might be job losses. I believe that the problems in the brewing 
industry are much larger than simply whether it’s bottled or 
canned. They’ve been having trouble in the negotiations at much 
higher levels than Saskatchewan and many of them indicated to 
me, long before the decision about cans was made, that there was 
a possibility that they would not survive in Saskatchewan. I 
believe if they really want to survive in Saskatchewan they could 
do something like Coca-Cola did and put a can line in. You know, 
that’s not an impossibility; it’s something that they should look at. 
Coca-Cola at first told me they could not put a can line in, but as 
soon as the cans were on their doorstep they found a method, and I 
think the others could find a method as well if they chose to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it seems to me that what you’re very 
clearly saying, then, is that if the Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal 
is signed, the brewery industry is a dead duck. That seems to be an 
obvious implication of what you’re saying. The fact of the matter 
is, Mr. Minister, that, in Saskatchewan, because of decisions of the 
brewery companies — which it doesn’t appear to me your 
government has done anything about — if you want to fill a 
container in Saskatchewan, you’ve only got one option. You only 
put beer into a bottle; you don’t put beer into a can in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m advised that, already from Carlings in 
Saskatoon, there have been 14 positions lost; and I’m advised as 
well that it’s anticipated that there will be 25 jobs lost, it would be 
some time between now and September, from Molson’s Regina 
brewery. And I ask, Mr. Minister, what initiatives your 
government has taken, either through your department or your 
colleagues, as you’re a member of Executive Council, to offset 
these job losses in both Regina and Saskatoon for breweries 
workers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I indicated to you before, all of the job 
loss in the breweries cannot be attributed to cans. If there are job 
losses, they were having difficulty before and they may continue 
to have. 
 
I think what you’re forgetting is that we’re replacing those jobs 
with something like 150 jobs for handicapped people. And I 
believe that’s a very, very important part of this whole issue — is 
that we have people with disabilities of varying kinds who are, in 
many cases for the first time in their life, able to take on a job that 
they’re going to find satisfaction in doing. I’m very pleased to see 
1250, approximately, being employed in this industry at this point. 
And they indicate to me that it may very easily, with the plastics 
coming on stream later, double to something in the 300, 350 
range. 
 
So you have to balance one against the other. I know that I don’t 
like to see anybody’s job lost and no one does. But sometimes you 
have, really, little control over it in this province. 
 
We met with the brewing industry and we met with the union that 
was responsible for the employees in the brewers’ union. In our 
discussions with them, I think that we were up front in what we 
were saying at all times. And  

there may be some jobs lost, but we will make it as minimal as 
possible. Much of the control that we have, as far as the numbers 
of cans that would be sold, would be related more to the Liquor 
Licensing Commission and the Saskatchewan liquor marketing 
commission rather than to our department because the values that 
are put on the cans or the bottles do make a considerable 
difference in what people might purchase. 
 
In the early stages, I think you’ll see a run on cans because they’re 
a bit of a novelty in Saskatchewan. In a very short time people will 
be back to the point where they’re going to buy responsibly, I 
think, and buy whichever is the more reasonably priced product to 
meet their marketing needs. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I welcome those jobs . . . 
creation of jobs for handicapped persons, but we’re really 
comparing apples and fish here. Obviously if you’re having a . . . 
It’s not even as close as apples and oranges, as applies and fish, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
If you’re creating a job activity related to collecting empty cans, 
that’s got nothing to do with jobs that are involved in filling up 
containers. I mean, if your government had the political will to 
require that breweries in Saskatchewan who want to sell cans in 
this province had to fill them in this province, you’d still have 
created those same number of jobs related to the collection of 
those empty cans, Mr. Minister. So it is simply a faulty argument. 
 
Now I accept your point that some of this has to do with your 
department interfacing with the liquor commission, but the fact of 
the matter is that it’s an initiative of your department that created 
this scenario. And so I ask you again, Mr. Minister, is it, as a 
matter of fact, the case that your government made no attempt or 
. . . Let’s deal with conclusions and not efforts because ultimately 
that counts. Is it, as a matter of fact, the case then that your 
government was not able to require that breweries who want to 
sell beer in Saskatchewan in cans have to fill those cans in the 
province? That seems to be obvious, that you weren’t able to 
accomplish that. And I ask you again, sir, what initiatives your 
government has undertaken to try and preserve those jobs for 
brewery workers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the pricing of the cans of beer there was a 
move made that would price them a little higher in most cases than 
bottles at the liquor stores. Now if you go to the hotels they can set 
their own price, so we have very little control over that. So that 
part is difficult. 
 
And I think the other side that the government has taken is that 
they do not allow cans to be sold on the table in beverage rooms. 
They can only sell bottles in the beverage rooms. And in that way 
they are making an effort to maintain jobs in the bottling industry. 
 
I believe the percentage, you’re going to find, is still fairly good in 
the hotels that people will be drinking bottled beer. Some will 
drink draught of course, but for the most part you will see many 
bottles sold to the people who are customers in the beverage 
rooms across the province. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, plain and simple, the  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2180 
 

strategy that your government undertook to protect the jobs of 
breweries workers has been a failure. And I think that has to be 
admitted. And it would seem to me that your government should 
assume some responsibility in dealing with that and, more 
importantly, in dealing with a solution. 
 
I’m advised, Mr. Minister, in this latest heat wave that we’ve had 
in Saskatchewan, in which it would be normal for Carling 
brewery, based on past practice, to be running two or three shifts, 
as a matter of fact they were still running only one shift. And so in 
spite of, you know, the numbers of jobs that have bee lost so far, 
there’s been potential for employment related to the heat wave in 
Saskatchewan that has also been lost. 
 
(1945) 
 
But you will know as well as I, Mr. Minister. I’ve been advised 
that just a very quick survey of hotel outlets all across the province 
indicates very, very clearly that it is extremely rare that you come 
across an off—sale outlet that is charging more for cans than 
bottles. And the hoteliers are saying that the vast majority, I think 
by a scale of 10 to one, of their off—sales are cans over bottles. 
 
And so clearly, if there was supposed to be an incentive to 
purchase bottles because they were cheaper, that as a matter of fact 
is simply not happening. And I think, Mr. Minister, that you have 
to assume some responsibility with this initiative for not having 
thought it through and for Saskatchewan breweries workers 
having lost their employment because of your failure to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I have pointed out to the member earlier, 
when we priced the beer or when the Liquor Board priced the 
beer, if you buy at the liquor outlets, government liquor stores, you 
can buy then . . . I think it’s $1.55 cheaper for a dozen bottles than 
a dozen cans but if you buy at the hotel, then it’s up to the hotelier. 
We can’t control what they sell the bottle for. That’s been an open 
pricing for a long time. There was a price established for cans, and 
it’s the same price that will be sold by the vendors, but it’s not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — When they buy them for less, they have no 
incentive to sell cans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member may say it differently but we 
don’t control the price of bottles, and I believe that it’s up to the 
hotels. If they want to maintain the market share of the bottles they 
could price it at that price, the same as they do with the can. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I’d like to ask the minister whether or not there 
is a brand or two of beer that comes from the States that you are 
not accepting the cans for and whether you charge or you don’t 
charge the deposit on these cans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It would be the Liquor Board that would 
control the importation of beer from outside of Canada. My 
department doesn’t. I really don’t have the detail that you’re 
asking for. 
 
I’m advised that any American cans that show up, we will not be 
paying a refund for, but I don’t know how much of it is  

coming or whether there are very many brands. That would be 
under the minister responsible for the Liquor Board. So you could 
ask those questions in his estimates. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, wouldn’t it be reasonable, in view of the 
fact that there are quite a few cans of American beer coming 
across the border and expect that there will be more, that you 
would establish a scheme of deposit, taking a deposit, and so that 
the littler could be controlled? What’s going to happen is we’ll end 
up advertising all the American beer in our ditches and the lake 
bottoms, and there’s that aluminum certainly just as unsightly as 
Canadian aluminum, and it just doesn’t make sense that you 
should take the Canadian cans back and not foreign cans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — On the information that my officials have, 
they say that there is no American beer imported into 
Saskatchewan. The only beer that comes in is when people go to 
the neighbouring states and bring it back in the trunk of their car. I 
don’t know how much we have at this point — it’s something that 
we’ll have to look at — but I haven’t an answer for you on that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Do you have any prices about the salvage 
value of a can? do you have actually the salvage value of it with 
respect to . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the value of a can depends a lot on the 
market value of aluminum on any given day. I’m advised that 
when the price of aluminum is around $1,500 a tonne, then it’s 
about 3 cents a can value. If it goes up to $2,000 a tonne, then 
you’re going to look t pretty close to 4 cents. So it’s on the open 
market as far as aluminum prices go, and so you’d have to watch it 
on any given day, but that’s about the ratio. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Just getting back to the first point, Mr. 
Minister. I would think that it would be your responsibility as the 
Minister of Environment to deal with the liquor commission, 
rather than mine. We can ask them the questions, but I think that 
the deal should be struck between both of you who are in cabinet 
to control all the litter here, and so that he would license only that 
which you could reclaim and have control. And we should be 
advancing in the direction of even getting to be able to collect all 
the whiskey bottles and any other bottles rather than going the 
other way around and expanding the amount of litter that’s around. 
I would like to leave you with that message. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, that’s basically what we have done up 
to this point, is we approve the container and then the product is 
allowed in the province. I just advised you that our Liquor Board 
is not importing American beer. The only way it’s coming in is 
when you and your neighbours go visiting friends and relatives or 
go down to gamble in the States or whatever and bring it back. So 
it’s very, very hard for us to control that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I think we’re prepared to move 
along very quickly if I can just say this: I think some purpose has 
been served through our discussion tonight. I think there’s some 
good news and some bad news. I was very pleased to hear you say 
tonight that the . . . 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2181 
 

An Hon. Member: — Give us the bad news first. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, the member from Lloydminster wants the 
bad news first. Well let me talk about the bad news first. The bad 
news first is that we have a government that doesn’t really seem to 
care a hoot about an industry in this province, and I refer to the 
brewing industry. And I’m surprised that the member from 
Lloydminster doesn’t have some concern for workers in the 
brewing industry. We’ve seen that clearly tonight, Mr. Chairman. 
 
On the good news side, Mr. Minister, I was pleased to hear you 
say that the plastic containers that will be used in this province at 
some point for the sale of draught beer will, in fact, be returnable 
containers; that in fact they’ll not be on the scene in this province 
until the system is in place. And I think that’s good news for the 
Saskatchewan environment. 
 
I was happy to hear you say tonight that SARC will be in fact 
broadening the network of depots. The number that we’ve heard 
so far is simply not enough, in my judgement, and we’re happy to 
hear that it’s a broader network. 
 
And I’m happy to know that you and your department and you 
should be happy to know that we on this side of the House and 
people concerned about the Saskatchewan environment, will be 
monitoring the system. And without question we’ll be discussing 
these issues in this place again. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 4 has quite a few House amendments. 
Section 4 of the printed bill: 
 

Amend section 14.1 of the Act, as being enacted by section 4 
of the printed bill, by striking out clause (f) and substituting: 

 
“‘Purchaser’ means a person who purchases a beverage in a 
designated container: 

 
(i) for his consumption; 
(ii) for the consumption by one or more persons at his 
expense; or 
(iii) on behalf of or as agent for a principal who desires to 
acquire a beverage in a designated container for 
consumption by the principal or by one or more persons at 
his expense.” 

 
Amend subsection 14.82(1) of the Act, as being enacted by 
section 4 of the printed Bill, by striking out everything before 
clause (1) and substituting: 

 
“14.82(1) Subject to subsection (2), every purchaser in 
Saskatchewan who purchases a beverage in a designated 
container shall pay:” 

 
Amend section 14.83 of the Act, as being enacted  

by section 4 of the printed Bill, by striking out “person” in: 
 

(a) subsection (1); 
(b) subsection (2); and 
(d) subsection (3); 

 
and in each case substituting “retailer or other person.” 

 
Amend subsection 14.85(3) of the Act, as being enacted 
by section 4 of the printed Bill, by adding “and not in the 
Consolidated Fund” after “deposited in the fund.” 
 
Strike out section 14.87 of the Act, as being enacted by 
section 4 of the printed Bill, and substitute the following: 
 
“14.87(1) There is hereby established a fund to be called 
the environmental protection fund, in this part referred to 
as the ‘fund.’ 
 
(2) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may prescribe a 
fiscal year for the fund. 
 
(3) The Minister of Finance may invest any moneys in the 
fund that are not presently required for the purposes of the 
fund in any investments that are authorized in The Financial 
Administration Act as investments for the Consolidated 
Fund. 
 
(4) The Minister of Finance may dispose of any securities in 
which any part of the fund has been invested pursuant to 
subsection (3), subject to the terms of the investment, in any 
manner and on any terms that the Minister of Finance 
considers advisable. 

 
(5) With respect to each fiscal year of the fund, the minister 
shall in accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 
submit to the Lieutenant Governor in Council: 

 
(a) a report of the fund on its business for the immediately 
preceding fiscal year; and 
(b) a financial statement showing the business of the fund 
for the immediately preceding fiscal year, in a form that 
may be required by the treasury board. 

 
(6) The minister shall, in accordance with The Tabling of 
Documents Act, lay before the Legislative Assembly each 
report and statement mentioned in subsection (5).” 

 
Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank my  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2182 
 

officials and thank the opposition for their questions tonight. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Let me join with the minister in thanking the 
officials for their contribution to our discussions tonight. It’s much 
appreciated. 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Department of Social 
Services Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. With 
me is Lorelle Schoenfeld, executive director at Social Services 
with respect to these programs. We have so many executive 
directors . . . Policy and program services division is her division. 
We’re ready to proceed with this particular Bill. It’s not a lengthy 
Bill. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We shall certainly deal with this bill 
expeditiously, not because of its length, because there can be some 
Bills pretty short that will be fairly traumatic. I regret that your 
official had to wait, Mr. Minister, but I think we’ve got all that 
together now. 
 
I just have two or three questions that I want to ask. I know what 
the Bill does. It gives the minister the authority now, under the 
department Act, to pass regulations, as I understand it. If I am not 
correct I wish you would correct me, Mr. Minister. But what I 
would like to know is: what does this Bill permit you to do now, if 
it is passed — I suspect it will be — that you cannot already do? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you. With respect to the question, 
first of all, it should be clarified that on e of your members in 
second reading was speaking with regard to the SAP regulations 
— Saskatchewan assistance plan, the welfare regulations of these. 
This has nothing to do with the welfare regulations. 
 
We were making regulations under The Statutes Act with respect 
to the Saskatchewan employment development plan program, and 
that is where people are working in lieu of welfare. Justice and the 
Regulations Committee indicated that the statutory authority under 
The Statutes Act was not as clear as it should be. Other 
departments have this authority within their department. And 
many years ago when this departmental Act was passed — maybe 
not even when you were government, maybe even when the 
Liberals were government, but before we became government — 
this was omitted in this particular Act, and so therefore the 
regulations were passed under The Statues Act, and we have given 
an undertaking to the Regulations Committee of the Assembly to 
bring in this legislation to give clear authority under the 
departmental Act rather than rely on The Statutes Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the reason why there has not 
been the authority for ministers to be able to make regulations 
under any legislation under the sun is because governments prior 
to yours have never thought that  

the Executive Council should have such powers that it should be 
able to do anything it wishes without ever reporting to the 
legislature. 
 
That’s really what this is all about, Mr. Minister. I’m not going to 
argue with it; it’s your bill and you will have it. But the point I 
want to make is that this Bill is like many other bills before it. It’s 
an ongoing process, particularly in the last two years, where 
ministers have introduced powers in Bills where they can act, in 
the form of regulations, so that they don’t have to come to this 
Assembly and justify those actions other than maybe in estimates 
or maybe in question period. And that is one concern I would have 
here. 
 
What this Bill does is what you have said. It permits the 
department to make regulations under The Statutes Act or under 
the departmental Act. You can make regulations under all of your 
program Acts already. Now you say you only need it for one 
purpose and that’s for the Saskatchewan employment 
development program. 
 
Now how long has this program then existed, Mr. Minister, for 
which you now want to have the authority to make regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I was not of 
the view that we needed this Act, but I thought I would 
accommodate the Regulations Committee, accommodate the 
Regulations Committee of this legislature and follow their 
recommendations. And this program of work in lieu of welfare 
and community work, on-the-job training, the Saskatchewan 
employment development program, has been in existence for 
approximately three years. 
 
In addition, the Saskatchewan skills development program has 
been in existence for approximately three years where people 
receive an education rather than be on welfare. And we haven’t 
had any regulations under that particular program, but this Act will 
now allow us to make regulations. 
 
In addition, with respect to the new community living plan where 
mentally retarded adults are living in the community as well as 
children in group homes, this will allow us to make regulations 
governing the community living programs with respect to the type 
of accommodations that these people should have and regulations 
to ensure that they are adequately cared for. 
 
So we feel that under The Statutes Act there was adequate 
authority. The Regulations Committee of the legislature would 
like to have clearer authority as is in other departmental Acts, and 
we fell that we should have the same regulation making power 
under this Act as under the other Acts with respect to various 
government departments. So we have nothing to hide. 
 
I do not believe that this legislation is absolutely essential; 
however, I am prepared to accommodate the committee of this 
legislature that insists that all the regulations be neatly bound and 
absolutely slotted into the right places, and I’m prepared to do that 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . And the member opposite says it’s a 
very important committee. Yes, I once sat on that committee, and 
when  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2183 
 

you spend all that time sitting on that committee you’d like to have 
your recommendations followed, so I’m following the  
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That being the case, I’ll have to speak to 
my colleague over here who was on that Regulations Committee. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t argue with the fact that if the Regulations 
Committee has recommended this that it’s probably an appropriate 
thing to do. What I would like to know then is: have all of those 
programs which you have just referred to existed without 
regulation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, some of 
these regulations, as I indicated earlier, have existed under The 
Statutes Act for about three years. Other programs like the 
Saskatchewan skills development program do not now have 
regulations, but we are contemplating bringing in regulations with 
respect to that program. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
introduce the assistant deputy minister of Human Resources, 
Labour and Employment, Gerry Meier; and John Alderman, 
director of the occupational health and safety branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This Bill 
before us is an amendment to The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act. And when we look at occupational health and safety, Mr. 
Chairman, I think there are basically two issues that are in play as 
we review this Bill in committee. 
 
When we look at occupational health and safety regulations, those 
regulations, Mr. Chairman, are only as effective as the will of the 
government to enforce them. Obviously, when it comes to 
occupational health and safety regulations, just simply having 
them on paper really does not solve a great deal; it’s the 
enforcement of them that comes to play. 
 
Also because we have an amendment to The Occupational Health 
and Safety Act, which was certainly a leader Act when it was first 
introduced back in the ’70s. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it is also appropriate to review the very process of 
amending occupational health and safety regulations. And 
therefore it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that tonight we need to 
look at two things. One is the intent of the government to enforce 
and to put into practice the good that can come from this Bill; and,  

secondly, is to question why there are not some additional 
provisions when amending The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act. 
 
Now as time goes by, Mr. Chairman, sometimes circumstances 
change. Sometimes we become more familiar with information 
that causes us to believe that different kinds of things are 
appropriate in trying to protect the occupational health and safety 
of workers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this Bill, Mr. Chairman, I quote understand, as it’s written, 
deals essentially with one area, and that’s to bring Saskatchewan 
up to snuff with the rest of the country in terms of introducing the 
work place hazardous material information system. And I 
certainly have no bones to pick at all with that initiative. I said in 
second reading that I think that is a positive initiative, and 
certainly there is no reason why Saskatchewan should not be 
doing it along with the rest of the country. 
 
But when I look at the budget that has been passed for the 
Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment, Mr. 
Chairman, I note that in that budget, in the budget subscribed to 
occupational health, indicates that there will be an increase of only 
two employees — from 39 to 41 — and an increase in the budget 
for occupational health from $2,100,200 to $2,203,600, which is 
approximately a 5 per cent increase in the total operating budget 
for the occupational health branch, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now that doesn’t, I have to admit right off the bat, strike me as the 
kind of a budget that’s associated with a department that’s 
prepared to take a quantum leap forward in the enforcement of 
occupational health in the province of Saskatchewan. And so, Mr. 
Chairman, there are a number of questions that I would like to ask, 
as I said, related to the implementation of this Bill and the 
enforcement of this Bill. And, also, a number of questions, while 
the minister is amending The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 
that I would like to ask as to why he did not undertake initiatives 
to bring up to snuff the occupational health and safety protection 
that’s necessary . . . related to other parts of the work place. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, let me begin. Let me begin, Mr. Minister, by 
asking you this: what additional numbers of occupational health 
officers, and what related training is your department planning so 
as to carry out the requirements of this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, a 5 per cent 
increase in budget, I suggest, would be significant considering the 
decrease in income that this provincial government and the 
provincial economy has received as a result of world economic 
conditions. To have a 5 per cent increase in occupational health 
and safety budget, I suggest, is significant. 
 
(2015) 
 
Two additional people are being hired, a toxicologist and a 
communications officer. In addition . . . This is not entirely new, 
and we have been involved in chemical safety up until now. 
There’s some overlap with the  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2184 
 

existing actions taken by the occupational health and safety 
officers. And in addition, they will be covering the area of 
chemicals closer than they had in the past. 
 
So with the addition of the new staff and some economies of scale, 
because this is not an entirely new field, it’s just an improvement 
in the enforcement of an existing field, we feel that the 5 per cent 
increase, the two additional people should be adequate, and we’ll 
have to monitor it and see how it goes in the first year. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it is my information that what exists 
in the occupational health division right now are only nine 
occupational health officers, who — and I’m not talking here 
about the specialists such as hygienists and toxicologists and so 
on, but the occupational health officers themselves — that 
Saskatchewan has only nine occupational health officers who are 
responsible for covering occupational health and safety in some 
60,000 work places within the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, the work place hazardous material information 
system does bring a new and improved sophistication to the 
protection for workers on the job, and obviously what your 
department has a responsibility to do is to undertake a significant, 
not just a little bit, but a significant education of, first of all, your 
own officers, and then secondly, workers and employers within 
the province. 
 
Now I have to admit I was quite prepared to give you the benefit 
of the doubt and to assume that those two additional positions 
were, as a matter fact, increases to the staff of occupational health 
officers, which in my opinion is grossly understaffed at this point 
in time. I must admit I’m a bit surprised by your answer when you 
tell me where those two positions are going to go. 
 
Let me ask you again then what . . . because really the question, as 
I said before, is this: the change in the legislation and the 
improvement in the legislation is no more effective than your 
department’s ability to educate the people involved in the work 
place, both employers and employees; and secondly, to enforce 
the legislation as required in this amendment. So let me ask you 
again, sir: what resources are you going to introduce . . . and I 
gather this work place hazardous material information system is 
going to go into place in October. What resources are you going to 
introduce before that time to train your occupational health 
officers and to provide training to both employers and employees 
around the province of Saskatchewan who are impacted by this 
WHMIS (work place hazardous materials information system) 
introduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we’re a little bit ahead of 
the suggestions made by the member opposite. We’ve already had 
a one week, concentrated training course for all officers. We are 
holding seminars or advertising for seminars for interested 
employers and employees. We have scheduled workshops for 
occupational health and safety committees — required at all work 
places with 10 or more employers. 
 
Last year, I’m pleased to announce that fatalities, work-related 
fatalities were down 40 per cent over  

the five-year average prior to this last year, and that injuries have -
gone down every year over the last three years. So not only are our 
officers in occupational health and safety doing an excellent job, 
but employers and employees are also co-operating, making the 
work place safer. And I hope this trend continues. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve rarely been accused of 
being a man ahead of your time, but I appreciate your suggestion 
that, in your opinion, you are in this instance. I must admit, Mr. 
Minister, that you’ve managed to sneak this in without the rest of 
the world knowing about it because there is a great deal of concern 
around the province of Saskatchewan that both employers and 
employees will be adequately informed as to the requirements of 
the WHMIS, work place hazardous materials information system, 
that’s required in this Bill. And I’m clearly, Mr. Minister, and 
correct me if I’m wrong — and I’m sure that you will — I am 
clearly of the opinion that what you’re telling me is that you have 
not designated any substantial increase in resources related to 
training, and that’s absolutely essential. 
 
I would like to make the assumption, Mr. Minister, that the vast 
majority, if not all employers, and the vast majority if not all 
employees, welcome the introduction of the work place hazardous 
material information system, but they need to know and 
understand it and that clearly requires training. 
 
Now let me ask you again: just exactly how are you planning to 
get that information out to the work place to ensure that training 
will take place for employees so that they will recognize the 
information when they see it, and also for the employers so that 
they can participate knowledgeably in the requirements of 
WHMIS. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, members opposite 
advocate spending more money. They couch that in terms of more 
resources. That’s the modern buzz word for spending everyone’s 
taxes. It’s called “to allocate more resources.” What they really 
mean is “spend more money,” and I can’t see why we should 
spend more money when we are doing an adequate job at present. 
 
We’ve already increased the budget by 5 per cent. Fewer people 
are being injured, and Saskatchewan, with 4 per cent of the 
population, produces only about 2 per cent of the chemicals in 
Canada. 
 
There is reason here for some sensible management of 
government, and that’s what we’re doing. We are not going to 
spend more money if it’s not necessary, and I’ve indicated that 
safety is improving. It’s not necessary to simply pour money on 
the situation. Through good management and the measures I have 
indicated earlier, we have reduced the number of accidents and we 
expect that trend to continue. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, it sounds like, in effect, what you’re 
saying is that we’re going to introduce this legislation and then 
we’re going to pray. 
 
Obviously if you’re going to introduce improved protection for 
employees in the work place, employees and employers must be 
able to recognize what is required  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2185 
 

of them and to recognize the information that they’re seeing. I 
simply do not agree with you that there are fewer injuries on the 
job. 
 
More to the point, Mr. Minister, because you are understaffed in 
your occupational health officers, nine occupational health officers 
for 60,000 work places. That works out to about . . . in excess of 
6,000 per occupational health officer. It is clearly insufficient, 
when introducing this legislation, that you’re saying, well we’ve 
been just doing a lovely job. We’re going to introduce this Bill, 
and then we’re going to hope for the best because we really don’t 
need many more resources to make it fly. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is totally unacceptable, and I ask you: is that, as 
a matter of fact, how all other provinces across Canada are dealing 
with the work place hazardous materials information system? Is 
that how they are dealing with it? And how do you justify, how do 
you justify being in agreement with this national program, but 
putting absolutely no increased resources into the education of 
both employers and employees in the work place? 
 
That’s the only criticism, Mr. Minister, that I’ve heard about 
WHMIS — that’s the only criticism I’ve heard. Absolutely 
everybody I’ve talked to says it’s a good idea, if people are 
educated and if it’s enforced. If they’re not, then it’s not worth the 
paper it’s printed on. 
 
Now I ask you again, sir: will you reconsider that, and will you 
please advise me as to how you’re going to improve safety in the 
work place by having your department involve itself in an 
education process for both the employers and employees in 
Saskatchewan so that the work places will become safer as a result 
of this legislation, rather than us simply saying, well we passed a 
nice bill and ain’t the world hunky-dory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite uses 
a term “resources” again, and I indicated earlier what he really 
mean is, “spend more money.” And I would challenge the member 
opposite to tell me whose resources we should put into this. From 
whom should we take these resources and put them into this 
particular situation? 
 
I’ve indicated earlier that our officers and my department are 
doing an adequate job with the 5 per cent increase in the budget, 
the hiring of the additional people. And in effect the passing of this 
legislation and the introduction of this system will make it easier 
for the officers that are now in the field to do their jobs because 
they will have all of the information on the chemicals available. 
They will also have the power of this Act, and therefore we have 
already started training seminars to introduce them to this new Act 
and we’re really down to one point here. The member opposite 
says we should spend somebody’s money on this. I don’t know 
who these ghosts are that are going to pay for the extra money that 
we don’t have to spend. We’re not about to waste anyone’s 
money. We are going to do the job with the money we have 
available and we are doing an adequate job at this time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: Mr. Minister, if you’re looking for extra resources, 
why don’t you talk to your buddy, Peter Puck — I mean, he’s got 
20 million bucks of Saskatchewan  

taxpayers’ money and he’s still doing away with jobs in this 
province — if you’re looking for extra resources? 
 
My goodness gracious, you’ve increased, you’ve increased your 
budget for occupational health this year by less than half that your 
good buddy, George Hill, makes as president of SaskPower! I 
mean, if you’re looking for suggestions to find resources, we can 
spend a whole lot of time talking about that, but that’s not the 
point here, Mr. Minister. The point is one of political will. The 
will of your government to not only pass a Bill and say, my 
goodness now, we have done a wonderful job, we’re introduced 
the work place hazardous materials information system just like 
every other province in Canada — and we’ve gone along with that 
— but we’re really not going to do anything about it; we’re just 
going to limp along like we’ve done before. 
 
I find your answers, Mr. Minister, less than encouraging, and I’m 
afraid that you have just reinforced the greatest fears that everyone 
in the province of Saskatchewan has related to the introduction of 
WHMIS. WHMIS has been a welcome initiative, but the greatest 
fear that everybody has is that you’re not going to increase your 
resources to make it work. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess . . . I don’t know if there’s any more point in 
haranguing about this any longer. You and I can stand up and we 
can go on for hours. And I can say that you should be putting more 
effort into work hazardous material information system to make it 
work, and you can stand up and say, no, we’re doing a lovely job; 
we don’t need to. I guess we can go back and forth and do that for 
ever. I don’t know that we win anything by doing that. 
 
Let me ask you another question then, Mr. Minister. It is the 
requirement in this province that every work place that has more 
than 10 employees is required by law to have an occupational 
health committee. How many employers in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister, have more than 10 employees and how many 
occupational health committees exist within the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: Mr. Chairman, members opposite introduced 
this concept of committees where you have more than 10 
employees and it’s up to the employees to serve on this 
committee. And the members opposite, when they passed this law, 
made it mandatory that there be a committee at every work site 
where there are more than 10 employees. Our current calculations 
are there are about 4,000 employers in this category and that there 
are about 1,200 committees. The problem we’re having is that 
there’s not much interest from the employees at those other work 
sites to serve on these committees and keep them organized. 
 
(2030) 
 
And so you that you have, in the past, passed a law that we have 
continued that says they have to have these committees, but I 
don’t really know how I’m going to make them serve on these 
committees and make them function. You certainly wouldn’t 
expect me to get injunctions requiring the employees to serve on 
these committees. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2186 
 

So they’re having a difficult time on some work sites where the 
employees seem to be satisfied with the safety conditions. Twelve 
hundred have active committees and the other 2,800 employers 
and employees don’t seem to be very active in this field. We try to 
encourage them to get their committees going, but they’re having 
a difficult time finding the employees to serve on these 
committees. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you didn’t agree with the 
concept . . . You are bringing forth in this House a Bill to amend 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act. That is what we are 
doing here tonight. If you did not agree with this concept, it was 
within your authority to eliminate that requirement from the Act 
— you didn’t. I can only therefore assume, sir, that you consider it 
to be a good idea. 
 
Now, sir, you have said, we’re going to bring in WHMIS, we’re 
not going to put any extra resources into it, and you said earlier 
that we’re going to work with the occupational health committees 
and safety committees. Now you’ve just finished telling me that in 
the province of Saskatchewan only about 30 per cent of those 
employers, those work sites that are required by your law — 
you’re the government — are required by your law to have 
occupational health committees, only about 30 per cent of them 
actually do. You’re not going to put any extra resources into 
educating employers and employees to introduce WHMIS, but 
somehow we’re going to do this through the occupational health 
and safety committees, but only about 30 per cent of them got it. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you stand in your place and, with any sense 
of responsibility at all to both employers and employees in the 
province of Saskatchewan, say that that’s really quite an 
acceptable scenario to introduce this legislation, this welcome 
legislation and have any hope at all that it’s going to be effective 
for the working people in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to 
harass employees to serve on committees when they themselves 
don’t seem to feel an urgent need to organize their committees and 
sit on their committees. I’m not going to harass them to organize 
their committees. I’m going to encourage them to have 
occupational health and safety committees, but some of these 
employees feel that there’s not a great deal of danger. They may 
be office workers. They may not feel that they’re in a very 
dangerous situation. So surely you don’t expect me to harass these 
employees to the extent that I’m always chasing them around, 
requiring them to sit on these committees when they’d rather be 
doing something else. There must still be some freedom in this 
country . . .(inaudible interjection). . . And yes, you passed the law, 
and I think the law that you have committees is a good idea. We 
probably should make them voluntary. But to the extent that we 
can get employees to participate, we will, but I’m not going to go 
around harassing employees if they’d rather do something else. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am most . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pleased. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Pleased, as the member opposite says. I am  

most pleased to know that you are not going to be personally 
chasing around secretaries in the province of Saskatchewan, 
getting them to organize occupational health and safety 
committees, and I say that quite facetiously. 
 
I simply have a difficult time understanding, just understanding 
how you, with the plan that you have in place, or maybe more 
accurately, the lack of plan that you have in place, have really 
carried out any kind of sense of responsibility to the benefits that 
can come through the work hazardous material information 
system here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You’ve said you’re not going to, despite the fact that there are not 
occupational health committees in 70 per cent of the work places 
and there are other hazards, Mr. Minister. And we’ll talk about 
those later, because you’ve not addressed those in making 
amendments to this. There are hazards in the work place besides 
chemicals. You and I both know that. There’s lots of reason to 
have occupational health committees. Perhaps more than anything 
else the fact that only 30 per cent of the work places that should 
have them by law — only 30 per cent exist — says that your 
department is not doing its job in terms of education, education in 
the work place, both employers and employees, and pointing out 
the potential for occupational health and safety risks so that those 
people will be aware of them and work together, employer—
employee working together for a safer work place. 
 
Let me ask you, Mr. Minister: what plans does your department 
have in place to monitor, to monitor the requirement to introduce 
the work hazardous material information system as outlined and 
defined in your Act, and to enforce that? What are your plans 
there? You’re not planning to do any education, not planning to do 
any education; you’re not planning to work with anybody that 
doesn’t have an occupational health and safety committee. For 
goodness sakes, Mr. Minister, what are your plans to enforce the 
WHMIS requirements as stipulated in this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, our 
communications officer and our toxicologist will provide a help 
line where you can call in and get instant information sort of thing 
and track down the necessary information on hazardous 
chemicals. 
 
In addition, we’re offering seminars to both employers and 
employees and to occupational health and safety committees 
doesn’t mean that they have to have one functioning. But we will 
offer the seminar to the employers or the employees where they’re 
interested in the seminar. 
 
In addition, with the additional information system in place as a 
result of the passing of this Act, our officers will be in a better 
position to monitor and advise with respect to the dangerous 
chemicals. And we will concentrate in the high-risk areas. It 
certainly would be a waste of money to concentrate in an industry 
where there are no chemicals in the work place, so we will 
concentrate on the high-risk areas. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2187 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, will it be your department’s plan to 
provide every Saskatchewan employer a complete list of 
controlled products and the directions for dealing with them? And 
will it also be your department’s intention that those lists will be 
required to be made available to employees, to all employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the 
opposition is missing the whole point of this particular Bill and 
system. There are approximately 580,000 chemicals in use in 
North America under various names and solutions. That’s why 
you need this kind of a system where they will be kept track of on 
a computer centrally in Canada. 
 
And it is our intentions, first of all, they should know — the 
members opposite should know that the intention of this Act is to 
require the suppliers to put on the chemicals the nature of the 
chemical and the dangers involved. 
 
Secondly, we will be preparing a booklet to deliver to employers 
and employees listing how this program works and what the 
benefits are and how this system functions and how it can be put 
to use. So as much as possible we’re going to do this, but it’s 
probably impossible to satisfy the opposition with respect to how 
much money should be spent on this whole thing. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, we could go back to your 
friend Peter Puck again, but I’ll let the temptation pass and 
proceed in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about occupational health and safety. 
 
Mr. Minister, what will be the consequences for employers in the 
province of Saskatchewan if they do not comply with the 
requirements in the Act? I will refer you also, in asking the 
question, specifically to section 32 of the Act, which starts out, 
"Every person who . . ." And let me ask at the same time, Mr. 
Minister, whether section 32 of the Act applies both to employers 
as well as to employees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I think, since the member 
opposite isn’t a lawyer, he can be excused for not knowing that 
“person” legally means every legal entity, which would include 
employers and employees, because they are all legal entities. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m afraid you missed the 
thrust of my question. I wasn’t asking you for a law lecture. What 
I was asking you, simply, Mr. Minister, is what will be the 
penalties or what will be the consequences for employers in the 
province of Saskatchewan who do not comply with the Act as 
you’ve laid it out here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, this Act matches up with a 
federal Act. So first of all, the federal Act has a maximum $1 
million fine or two years in jail or both — either or both. The 
provincial Act, the fines have not been changed. They remain at 
$2,000 for a first offence, $5,000 for a second offence and/or two 
years in jail. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If we can move to some 
several items, Mr. Minister, that you chose not to  

deal with when bringing amendments to The Occupational Health 
and Safety Act, and if there are, you’re undertaking initiatives that 
don’t relate to legislative requirements, I’d appreciate knowing 
that; if you’re not, I’d also appreciate having an understanding as 
to why you’re not as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, related to the protection of safety of workers who 
work alone or in relative isolation, I understand that that is covered 
by regulation 62 which is being proposed by your department to 
be deleted. And I’m aware, Mr. Minister, that there are a good 
number of workers who fill into that category in the province of 
Saskatchewan: people who are, as I say, working alone in relative 
isolation; social workers who visit clients; in some circumstances, 
corrections workers; game wardens; highway traffic officers; gas 
station and convenience store operators. With your government’s 
willy-nilly attempt to keep stores open 24 hours a day, eight days a 
week, Mr. Minister, there are more people working in convenience 
stores at all hours of the night. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you please advise me as to why it is that your 
department seems to be giving serious consideration to 
withdrawing regulation 62? Or if you’re not, then what you are 
intending to do in that regard to provide protection to workers who 
work alone or in relative isolation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the question’s out of order. 
It’s not related to this particular Bill at all, but I will advise the 
member opposite that the provisions in regulation 62 will be 
continued in other provisions in the regulations. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that it is not the 
intent of your department in any way to change the requirements 
in that regard? You’re quite satisfied with the way it is now, and if 
so, why then, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we haven’t amended the 
regulations yet, so hypothetical, I told them there was no intention 
to change the concept for that provision. We haven’t amended the 
regulations yet. We’re talking about a Bill here, not about 
regulations that we haven’t even amended yet. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, is it your intent, when you amend the 
regulations then, to in some way improve the protection of 
workers who are working in relative isolation or alone? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we intend to continue 
protection for workers who work alone. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well that statement, Mr. Minister, will frighten a 
great number of people in the province. I can just feel a shiver 
going down the back of a good number of people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s move to another area, then, and that’s the . . . 
You will recognize that it’s a basic principle of The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act that workers do have the right to refuse 
work that they consider to be  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2188 
 

dangerous. You will be as well aware, Mr. Minister, that standards 
do exist for some occupations which can be described as unusually 
dangerous, but that there are a whole lot of occupations which — I 
think we would all admit — do have some risks or dangers about 
them for which it seems that your department is either having a 
difficult time defining when danger exists, largely because, I think, 
there are not criteria or standards that are written down to which 
people can refer in trying to make decisions. I refer to people again 
such as health care workers or social workers or corrections, 
workers, Mr. Minister, for which there really are no standards at 
all. 
 
Is it the intent of your department, either through this — well 
obviously not through this legislation . . . Let me put the question 
this way: why, through this legislation, was there no addressing of 
that particular issue, or do you have plans through regulation again 
to make some improvements for workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, the question is 
out of order. I’ll give a general answer, but the answer will be out 
of order as well. But if we’re going to go off on a tangent that has 
nothing to do with this Bill I can say that we will do everything 
possible to protect workers in all situations. There has to be a 
balance between service to the public and protection of workers, 
and it’s always a matter of someone has to decide what’s 
dangerous and what isn’t. 
 
When you talk about health care workers and prison guards I 
would say, you know, some occupations are more dangerous than 
others. Being a police officer may be more dangerous than being a 
secretary. On the other hand, being a truck driver may led to more 
deaths than being a police officer. So you have to weigh all these 
things. That’s why we have boards; and that’s why we have courts 
to make those decisions; and I can’t make a decision here on every 
hypothetical question that the member opposite asks. So his 
question again is out of order. I’ve tried to answer his hypothetical 
out-of-order question as best possible. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would admit that your answer 
is out of order, but perhaps not in the same context that you 
suggest. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is your department therefore not attempting to 
more clearly define the standards for making the decision about 
when work is dangerous in other than the traditional categories 
that already exist such as forestry and so on? Why is your 
department not undertaking the initiative to more clearly define 
dangerous work in other areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we will make amendments 
as occupations change, as society changes. Some of these dangers, 
for example, the danger of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome) in the health care system, where I’ve had a few phone 
calls from concerned people, some of these dangers are not fully 
understood yet scientifically. So when we get all of the scientific 
information and the degree of danger and some of these new types 
of dangers even in the health care system, we will make 
amendments accordingly. 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, you will be aware that the 
department provides for an employer the right to appeal a notice of 
contravention. But there is, as a matter of fact, no right to appeal a 
decision made by your department when the original issue brought 
to your attention, for example, the refusal of work on the ground it 
is believed to be dangerous. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is it that you did not, in bringing forth these 
amendments to the act, bring forth an initiative which would 
provide for employees or for workers an opportunity to appeal a 
decision made by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — This particular amendment deals with 
WHMIS. We haven’t reviewed all of the possibilities with respect 
to the Act, but every worker knows that every occupation has 
some degree of danger. You try to minimize that as much as 
possible, but somebody still has to go down manholes to clean out 
sewers; somebody still has to mine coal. You try to make these 
occupations as safe as possible, but you can’t say simply because 
something is dangerous that the job will not be done. If it’s 
dangerous to go down into a sewer because there’s sometimes 
sewer gas; if it’s dangerous to go into a trench, yes, you try to limit 
the risk. You limit it as much as possible, but certainly you cannot 
stop society because some things are dangerous. Farming is 
dangerous. We’re not going to stop farming and we’re not going 
to stop eating. So there has to be some balance between what’s 
dangerous and what’s practical for life. And we try to make things 
as safe as possible and we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, some of my colleagues are 
suggesting that I should get danger pay for serving as critic for 
yourself, here. 
 
But setting that aside, Mr. Minister, the issue I was asking you, 
very simply, is why you did not, when making amendments to this 
Act, introduce a mechanism by which workers who bring an issue 
to your department and have a ruling do not have the right to 
appeal. That does not exist today and I ask again why you didn’t 
do that; why you didn’t provide for that opportunity for workers to 
appeal to some other authority when a decision is made by your 
department with which they do not agree — to be able to appeal to 
another party? 
 
You’re a lawyer, and I think you’ll agree that’s a basic principle of 
justice when dealing with governments. And why did you not do 
that here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the member 
opposite could confer with his House Leader or his leader and tell 
us what the logic was for not putting it in there in the first place, 
then I will consider that logic and decide whether their logic — 
not putting in those appeal procedures initially — was proper 
logic. And if I disagree with their logic, then I will make the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, you happen to be member of 
Executive Council of a government that has the responsibility — 
and I won’t say any more than that — but has the responsibility of 
governing this province for the last six years. You were the 
Minister of Labour. This is  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2189 
 

your department. This is your Bill. I’m asking you why you didn’t 
do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Probably for the same reason that they 
didn’t do it. So we’ll give it some thought. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I encourage you to give it more 
than thought and I would be most happy to consult with you 
regarding suggestion for improving occupational health and safety 
in this area and others. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is another area of concern to a large number of 
people in Saskatchewan today and this comes back to your 
somewhat facetious remark earlier this evening that there aren’t 
occupational health committees in a lot of places that employ only 
people who are working in offices. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will be aware that over the recent years many, 
many people in our society have become much more concerned 
about the potential negative impact of video display terminals. 
And again, that’s another issue that is not addressed in this 
amendment to the Occupational Health and Safety Act. Mr. 
Minister, could you please explain to me why not and what you 
are doing to attempt to provide protection from the risks of 
exposure to video display terminals, particularly for women who 
may be pregnant, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to video 
display terminals, we have searched the world literature and the 
world research on these articles. There are 3.5, I believe, million 
video display terminals in operation in Canada, 20 million in the 
United States, probably another 15 million in Japan and there’s 
probably in the world in excess of 100 million video display 
terminals. So there’s considerable research done in this area. 
 
We’ve searched that research and we’ve examined all of the 
arguments made in that regard and we have come to the 
conclusion that the research does not indicate that these terminals 
are dangerous to health. The terminals, though, do strain eyes to 
some extent. There are some problems with comfort and location 
of the terminals, and when we are preparing the new regulations 
we will take into account in the regulations, video display 
terminals and make some provisions. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well I encourage you to do so, Mr. Minister. 
You’ve made the point very well, that there are a large number of 
people — largely predominated by women, Mr. Minister — who 
are exposed to video display terminals. And it is certainly an area 
that does require some updating by your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, before moving off of item 1, just one last question 
I’d like to ask you. It’s stimulated by the fact that on occasion — it 
is not a frequent occurrence but, Mr. Minister, every now and then 
in this province one does pass a crew that is doing some work on 
the highways in this province. It’s a rare but welcome experience, 
Mr. Minister, when that happens. But I am advised, Mr. Minister, 
that your director has eliminated or substantially reduced the 
requirements of road construction crews to put flag persons at 
appropriate  

distances around those construction crews. 
 
I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, in light of the great hyperbole with 
which the Minister of Highway likes to tell us that we are to 
anticipate construction over the months to come — although I 
must admit I’ve missed a great deal of that activity so far — what 
are you intending to do by way of requiring flag persons to be 
located at both ends of that construction and intermittently 
throughout? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll be addressing those 
questions in the regulations. We find that too many flag persons 
have been injured in the past. And you’ll notice the initiatives of 
our government with respect to reducing speeds to 60 kilometres 
and having a safe zone. I thought I saw the notorious government 
advertising that the members opposite complain about all the time. 
The notorious government advertising which they complain was 
advertising to slow down, watch for highway workers, to slow 
down in the orange zone I believe it was. 
 
The members opposite complain. The members opposite hoot and 
holler and complain about government advertising, but they can’t 
realize that informational advertising is necessary. 
 
I might also remind the member that we will try and get the 
systems where you don’t need flag persons standing out there, but 
you have automatic lights and things of that nature. But I have not 
noticed any shortage of flag people nor have I noticed any 
shortage of safety devices for them. They are in coloured suits — 
orange, I might say, bright orange. They are well equipped. They 
have radios. 
 
There’s the bridge being constructed on No. 10 and the Trans-
Canada Highway at Balgonie. I go over there regularly. There are 
people flagging at both ends of it. They are communicating with 
two—way radios. There are large electric signs powered by 
portable generators with arrows flashing that are about 8 feet wide. 
There are orange markers of all sorts all over the place. And I 
noticed that one or two people still did get lost and not get into the 
proper lane. But you cannot provide for every eventuality, but as 
much as possible. 
 
You members of the opposition should drive out of Regina once in 
a while and should probably drive out to Balgonie and look at the 
safety precautions being taken at that bridge construction site. And 
I can see that, you know, you would have to be in a position of not 
being allowed to be on the road before you missed the signs, the 
flag people, and all the flashing lights. And that is another example 
of safety. 
 
And we will continue with the government advertising, 
advertising the safe zone where you must slow down. We will 
continue with other government advertising directed at safety. So 
the members opposite, when they talk about government 
advertising, should watch the content and take note that 
informational advertising, with respect to the safety of workers 
and the safety of the public, is taking place every day. 
 
(2100) 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2190 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, if I belonged to a government 
that does as little road construction work as yours, I’d put great big 
signs and flashing lights in front of every project that I undertook 
as well. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, I’m sometimes inclined to think when I 
see the ads on TV to slow down when you’re entering the orange 
zone as you described them, which I quite agree with that 
initiative, but it sometimes, I must admit, causes me to chuckle 
because it seems to me that that is also intended to encourage 
people to slow down and notice these things, because quite frankly 
highway construction workers in Saskatchewan have become a 
tourist sight. They’re right in there with historical sights and 
historical events because we don’t see a lot of them in recent 
times. 
 
And I would encourage you, Mr. Minister, I would encourage you 
to try and so something about the fact that people across 
Saskatchewan are saying that if your government believed in 
honest advertising they’d take down the signs that say "Lights On 
For Life", and they’d put up new ones that say "hang on for life", 
if you are going to ride on the roads in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, with having had our exchange here in terms of 
our opinions about the frequency with which it’s appropriate to 
have highway construction workers protected by flag persons, 
may I simply encourage that as you’re reviewing the regulations, 
that you will give some consideration to improving the safety of 
those workers by improving the requirement for flag persons on 
the sight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, at least this government 
spends money on highways — that government spent $600 
million building potash mines in New Brunswick to compete with 
our own mines. For $600 million we could have built a lot of 
highways, I tell you, Mr. Chairman. They built potash mines in 
New Brunswick; we build highways in Saskatchewan — that’s the 
difference. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just can’t resist one final 
response. Any year now, when you increase your Highways 
budget, you’re going to come up to the level of the Highways 
budget of the New Democrat government in 1982, and maybe the 
people of Saskatchewan will have the pleasure of driving on roads 
that are both safe and comfortable. It was at one time in this 
province a matter of pride, I would say, Mr. Minister, and has 
become anything like that now. You can tell when you’re entering 
the province of Saskatchewan from any other jurisdiction because 
the road gets pretty rocky, and the car starts bouncing as soon as 
you hit that borderline. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if you drive in Manitoba 
you will note that the Socialist highways don’t have shoulders, and 
that’s the kind of base they’re built on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Just a brief 
explanation, if you would, item (e) in the definitions, adding the 
definitions to the words “sell” and “:supplier”. It’s unclear to me 
as to why these additions are necessary. Is there an intent here that 
they somehow fill cracks between the former definitions of 
employer and self-employed? In order to understand your Bill, I’d 
just appreciate a very brief explanation on that point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, we’re trying to make our 
legislation consistent with the federal legislation, and that’s the 
terminology they use. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, also just in the definition section. 
Mr. Minister, I’ll refer you to — it’s at the top of page 3, the 
phrase, “A reference in this Act to an Act of . . . Parliament” and 
so on. Now I notice, Mr. Minister, in the explanatory notes that 
that refers to the definition of discriminatory action. I wish that if 
you would please simply clarify for me whether this definition at 
this particular point in the Bill, does that mean that the only 
recourse of workers to discrimination is to appeal to the 
enforcement of an Act of the Parliament of Canada? 
 
In other words, does there have to be a federal enforcement of 
discrimination? What is this, I guess, basically is the question, and 
does it require that workers in Saskatchewan will somehow have 
to make appeal to federal legislation for some kind of protection? 
This is quite unclear to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Which subsection were you referring to 
there? Was it (e)? Was that subsection (e) you were referring to? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I’m referring to . . . Your numbering 
of your Bill is difficult to follow. It’s section 3, the last item in 
section 3. 
 
It says, “A reference in this Act . . .” and so on. It’s at the top of 
page 3. And when I look at your explanatory notes, it’s linked in 
to the phrase, to the definition of discriminatory action. That is 
unclear to me as to why that is being done in the Bill or what it 
means. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, because this Act 
follows a federal Act and refers to it, we have to have that 
subsection. If the federal Act were amended, then this Act would 
still be in force and in effect and would not necessarily be invalid 
just because of an amendment to the federal Act. The federal 
amendment would be incorporated into this Act. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I refer you in clause 4, if you will 
look at page 4 of your Bill, what in your Bill is described as 
(e)(iii). It says: 
 

the chemical or biological identity of any ingredient of the 
controlled product that (and I underline this part) the employer 
has reasonable grounds to believe may be harmful . . . 

 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2191 
 

Mr. Minister, would you please describe for me what criteria are 
used to determine whether the employer has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the material may be harmful. What are reasonable 
grounds? Has your department laid out any standards in that 
regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, section 5.1 is a rather 
lengthy section and you have to read it in its entirety, and 5.1 
refers to (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e). It has, I believe, six categories 
that are requirements. And the (e)(iii) on the top of page 4 of the 
printed Bill is what we call a catch-all clause, and you will note 
that it goes beyond those chemicals that are automatically covered 
by WHMIS and can cover anything that would fit into that 
category, but that is not on the computer database. And if you see 
. . . if you read the wording carefully, you will see that the criteria 
there is not whether the employer believes it to be harmful to a 
worker, but whether the employer has reasonable grounds to 
believe. So that it’s not a question of the employer deciding. It’s if 
the employer had reasonable grounds to believe and should have 
believed, then it’s a requirement. It’s not subjective but objective. 
So with that respect it’s a more stringent requirement than the 
member possibly anticipated. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you for that explanation, Mr. Minister. 
And it simply reinforces the importance of the resources necessary 
to enforce the Act if you want to get the true safety effects that 
you’re intending in the Act. 
 
Just one final question on item 4, Mr. Minister. It’s referred to in 
your printed Bill as item 5.2, and let me just read the phrases here 
that I would like an explanation from you on: 
 

An employer shall, with respect to any controlled product in 
a place of employment controlled by him, provide, (and this 
is the phrase I would like explained) as soon as is practicable 
in the circumstances, any information (etc.) . . . 

 
And then it ends up, Mr. Minister, at the end of that by saying: 
 

. . . information (that’s necessary for) . . . making a medical 
diagnosis of, or rendering medical treatment to, a worker in a 
emergency. 

 
You may want to introduce an amendment here to bring this up to 
snuff with the Queen’s English, here, Mr. Minister. But my 
questions are this: again, what are the criteria for determining 
whether the information is made available by an employer as soon 
as is practicable in the circumstances? How does your department 
determine that? And, also, related to only “in an emergency,” what 
about long-term exposure to substances, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the labels, by law, 
are required to have the emergency telephone number on them, so 
that this section simply indicates that, as soon as possible, the 
employer is to get that information and turn it over, and practical is 
a . . . or practicable is a term that is objective, and it means as soon 
as possible under the circumstances. 
 
I would, though, on that topic, take the member’s  

recommendation that we add an “n,” and it would move the House 
amendment. I’m sure the member opposite will agree by consent 
the House amendment without any further technicalities. With 
respect to the last . . . before the word “emergency” in the last line 
of 5.2(1), that there be a House amendment to say “in an 
emergency” rather than “in a emergency.” 
 
An Hon. Member: What about long-term exposure . . . (inaudible) 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: —The member asks if information with 
respect to a long-term exposure can be got out of the system by 
phoning the telephone number and getting it out of the computer 
database, and it will be available to virtually everyone. It’s in the 
emergency that you need it quickly. 
 
I do move the House amendment, I think I have consent from the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Minister officially move the amendment, 
verbally. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: —Mr. Chairman, I officially move the 
amendment in the last line of 5.2(1): 
 

amending the word “a” to “an,” the second-last word of the 
last line. 

 
Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank my 
officials for their assistance on this particular Bill and, in 
particular, for their many months of diligence in putting this 
system together in co-operation with the federal government and 
other provinces. I am certain that employees will benefit greatly 
from this Bill. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to thank the 
officials for the information that they assisted in providing to this 
Assembly this evening, and I would want to wish them every 
success, Mr. chairman, in enforcing the WHMIS to make the 
Saskatchewan work place a safer place for all Saskatchewan 
workers. I wish for you that you will be able to do that as 
effectively as possible with the limited resources available to you. 
 
(2115) 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me is Art 
Wakabayashi, deputy minister of Finance; Len Rog, the executive 
director, revenue division; Gerry Kraus, the provincial 
comptroller; and Bob Blackwell, associate deputy minister, 
treasury board division. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2192 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to ask 
a few questions in respect to the tobacco tax, but I want to make a 
couple comments initially, Mr. Minister, and that is the general 
concern that the public has had since you became the Finance 
minister. And it has been taxes, taxes, and more taxes. We’ll be 
getting into the massiveness of the tax increase that has been 
levied against the people of this province. And even in this last 
budget you increased the flat tax and you increased the tobacco 
tax, but at the same time what you found convenient to do is to cut 
the corporate income tax. And the people of Saskatchewan, I may 
say, Mr. Minister, are getting sick and tired of the increase in taxes 
— more taxes. 
 
You promised to eliminate the E&H tax in the first term of your 
office, but what did you do? You increased it massively — 40 per 
cent increase. And that has been the history of your tenure as 
Minister of Finance. We have the flat tax — another Bill that is 
going to be increased yet another $50 million from the pockets of 
the people of Saskatchewan. In 1987-88 there was over $263 
million of increased taxes. You cut the property improvement 
grant, and still you are gnawing away at the consumer in 
Saskatchewan, the ordinary people of Saskatchewan. And 
constantly we hear: but we got everything moving; things are 
booming; we’re privatizing; we’re building Saskatchewan; we’re 
creating jobs; and things are moving ahead. 
 
The question that one has to ask here . . . (inaudible) . . . Yes, well 
let’s see the buffoon from Souris-Cannington, the Deputy Premier. 
Well I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of 
more increases. While we’re not going to vote against the increase 
in taxation here, I’ll tell you this, that the people of Saskatchewan 
are sick and tired of more increases in taxation, and at the same 
time, the same time, while you start giving to the corporate friends 
— the friends of the Tory party — concessions. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that here again is another 
consumer tax. If you look at the taxation that was charged here in 
this budget, you find, first of all, that there was the flat tax increase 
up to 2 per cent. What other tax did they increase? Yet another 
consumer tax. And what did they do in respect to the corporation 
income tax? They decided to cut it 2 per cent. They wanted a level 
playing field, as the Minister of Finance said. 
 
Well what I want to ask the Minister of Finance in respect to the 
tobacco tax: you’re raising somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
$18 million with this addition of taxation on the consumer. It has, 
all will know that in respect to tobacco and the use of tobacco, that 
is, first of all, that they’ve indicated that it’s addictive; and 
secondly, they have indicated that in respect to health costs that 
tobacco is probably increases the health costs more than any other 
product that is sold on the market. 
 
And therefore if you are, in fact, increasing the taxation as a 
deterrent to the purchasing of tobacco products, that’s one thing. 
And secondly, if you are, in fact, serious about  

the concerns in respect to tobacco, the question that I want to ask 
you: are you allocating any of the $18 million that you are 
collecting in the increase in the tobacco tax towards any form of 
campaign against smoking or any educational program for young 
people. 
 
And in society today it is generally accepted that the group that is 
using cigarettes the most is young teenage girls, more than any 
other group in society. And I was wondering what percentage of 
the $18 million that you are raising in the extra taxation here that 
you will be allocating specifically to a campaign against the use of 
smoking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, let me first correct when the 
hon. member makes some comments about taxes and very 
pointedly ignores the rather significant tax increase to large 
corporations through the corporate capital tax surcharge, and, of 
course, does not take into account that any reductions in the 
business tax do not take place until 1989. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like the people of this 
province to be aware that the New Democratic Party voted against 
the tobacco tax increase. And I would just like to read into the 
record some comments. And this is a letter from the Canadian 
Medical Association, Athol L. Roberts, M.D., president: 
 

I am sure that you will agree that it is rare indeed for 
someone to thank you for a tax increase. On behalf of 
Canadian physicians, that is precisely what I wish to do. 

 
I’m going to refer to a letter from the Canadian Cancer Society, 
Saskatchewan Division, Mr. George Thomas, executive director: 
 

Dear Mr. Minister: On behalf of the volunteers and staff of 
the Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Cancer Society, I 
wish to thank you most sincerely for the 25—cent a package 
increase in the tobacco tax in your recent budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to the Non-smokers’ Rights 
Association, letter to myself, dated April 29: 
 

As an organization deeply concerned about the tremendous 
economic and human costs associated with tobacco use, we 
wish to thank you for your timely decision to raise your 
provincial tobacco tax. 

 
I have a brief, Mr. Speaker, that was forwarded to me by the 
Saskatchewan Interagency Council on Smoking & Health, and 
their logo has the phrase “healthy life-styles.” And many of the 
members of this, or the allergy foundation, the Canadian Cancer 
Society, the Continuing Medical and Nursing Education, 
Department of Social & Preventive Medicine, Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan conference of the Seventh Day Adventists, 
Saskatchewan Lung Association, Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, Saskatchewan occupational health association, 
Saskatchewan Health Care Association, and I can go on and on, 
Saskatchewan registered nurses, Saskatchewan community health 
clinic — all, Mr. Speaker, urging me in  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2193 
 

a brief to increase the tobacco tax. And, Mr. Speaker, I want all of 
these organizations to know, for whatever reason, and I don’t 
think there is a valid reason, the New Democratic opposition voted 
against the tobacco tax increase. 
 
The hon. member asks what moneys are being spent to discourage 
people from smoking. Let me advise the hon. member the very 
program referred to in question period the other day, about a 
winning life-styles which the public will see in the not too distance 
future, will deal with that question and the broader question as to 
healthy life-styles. And I refer to the broader question referred to 
in the Saskatchewan Inter-agency Council on Smoking and 
Health. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the public will see in the very near future, where 
certainly a portion of the tobacco tax revenues are going to — and 
yes, I did say a portion, Mr. Chairman — because historically 
tobacco tax revenues have gone into general revenues and we 
should very much keep in mind that approximately a third of the 
total budget is for health and health-related activities. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, you will see some results. I know 
you’re opposed to it but you will see some results in the very near 
future on health styles and where some of this money is going. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would like to ask the minister: can you indicate 
whether the tobacco tax revenue is going into a general revenue of 
consolidated fund, or whether you have designated a specific 
amount towards the educational process encouraging young 
people particularly not to engage in the use of tobacco products? 
 
Can you indicate . . . You talked that there will be some future 
plans made, some apportionment, and maybe one-third. But I’m 
asking you today: is it the policy of the government, out of the $18 
million that you’re taking as additional funds, is there any specific 
allocation in respect to programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, Mr. Speaker, the tobacco tax revenues 
have never been a targeted tax nor have the revenues from the 
Liquor Board. They have flowed through to the Consolidated 
Fund, that’s been the case for certainly through the past 
administration and certainly this administration. It’s not a targeted 
tax, but I can suggest to the hon. member, as I have indicated as 
was evidenced in question period the other day, that there will 
very soon be a promotional campaign certain using revenues 
flowing from the Consolidated Fund to deal with healthier life-
styles. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well do you have any objections, Mr. Minister, to 
specifically targeting some of the revenues which you receive in 
respect to the tax on tobacco directly and making a commitment to 
the people and all the associations that you were talking about that 
have written to you encouraging you to continue to increase the 
taxation on tobacco? Are you in a position to further support them 
in the effort of getting people to quit smoking and using tobacco 
products? Are you prepared at this time to indicate a specific 
designation, and if not, why not? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if you’re asking me generally on 
targeted taxing, in principle, I don’t object to it. 
 
(2130) 
 
Historically the tobacco tax and liquor tax revenues have not been 
targeted, but certainly the increase in expenditures, for example, 
on liquor or alcohol-related activities — we’ve got Whitespruce 
and major increases to SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Commission) in the province, so they have flowed through 
the Consolidated Fund into a specific target. 
 
Having said that, the overall revenues from tobacco will be in the 
range of some $99 million. I suppose we could debate for some 
time what would be an adequate amount from that to the direct 
prevention of smoking or discouragement of smoking. 
 
I’m more inclined to accept the Saskatchewan Interagency 
Council on Smoking & Health when it would like to see, first of 
all, the increase, and then certainly it would like to see the money 
spent, not targeted, but for public health education. And I suggest 
to the hon. member that they are looking at the broader question, 
as we are, in terms of our life-style promotions that we’ll soon be 
beginning. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well you’re indicating, Mr. Minister, about $99 
million is the total revenue from the tax on tobacco products. I’m 
wondering whether you could indicate whether you have a 
ballpark figure as to the amount that you are intending to spend 
towards preventative use of tobacco this year. You’re not prepared 
to use it, target a certain percentage of the 99 million. Can you 
indicate, and can you give me a breakdown of the specific 
programs that you have in place, and the designated amount that 
you propose to spend this year in respect to decreasing the use of 
tobacco products. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, I don’t have that for the hon. member, 
and I would hate to take the thunder from the Minister of Health. I 
know the hon. member will have an appropriate opportunity to ask 
those specific details of the Minister of Health. 
 
I should advise the hon. member, as all groups concerned about 
the issue of smoking, are very much aware that an increase in the 
tax itself is now becoming a deterrent to smoking. And our 
indication is that although we will increase revenues, that 
consumption will probably drop in 1988-89 — and this is an 
estimate — roughly 7.7 per cent. 
 
So it’s one of those situations, and I think many can make the 
argument. I know a former member of this Assembly, Mr. Faris, 
very much made the argument that increasing the price of alcohol 
would reduce consumption. So we have the very fact of the tax 
increase itself having some, I think, significant impact in reducing 
the use of tobacco. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well it’s pretty obvious, Mr. Minister, that you 
don’t have a direct commitment in respect to decreasing the use of 
tobacco products, because as you have indicated . . . and you use 
the legislative committee  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2194 
 

that was set up in the ’70s, Mr. Faris, where strong evidence was 
indicated: one, that pricing would — and I agree with you — 
pricing would help to discourage the use of the product, either 
liquor or tobacco products; and secondly, what was urged in 
respect to the use of alcohol at that time and during that legislative 
committee, all-party committee, was that a percentage of that 
raised from either liquor, or tobacco in this case, should in fact be 
designated. 
 
What I’m indicating to you here is that I would prefer, and I think 
that the people of Saskatchewan would be encouraged that if you 
would, in fact, target some percentage of the revenue that you 
receive in respect the taxation on the tobacco products towards a 
campaign against smoking the use of tobacco products. But I want 
to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Murray, let’s you and I quit voluntary. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, pretty soon we’ll have to, Jack. 
 
I just want to ask the minister whether or not there is any particular 
problem relative to the taxation problems of cigarettes, other 
tobacco products here in Saskatchewan, relative to the two 
neighbouring provinces in so far as any, for a better word, a black 
market infiltration of quantities of tobacco products from Alberta 
or from Manitoba. 
 
Certainly I can indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that the price of 
cigarettes and cigarette products in Manitoba — and I had an 
opportunity to check that tonight — are considerably less than 
they are here in Saskatchewan, in Alberta. And I was just 
wondering whether or not there is . . . while you may be increasing 
the taxes, one, for revenue, and two, as you say, as a potential 
deterrent to the use of tobacco, I was wondering whether or not . . . 
whether it’s being circumvented from the standpoint of large 
quantities being brought in from Alberta where the price of 
tobacco commodities are considerably lower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suppose, if I can refer to your first comments 
on whether the government would be prepared to target, I’ve 
indicated my personal views that conceptually I don’t have 
difficulty with targeted taxing. I do think we do have the history 
on both tobacco and liquor that it does flow through the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 
I suppose I could throw the question back to the hon. member and 
. . . Would you tell me how much higher the tax has to go and 
what type of program it would take to cause you quit smoking? 
And I suppose I could use that as some type of reference point to 
see what I need to continue to have some success. 
 
We don’t have a problem because on the eastern side, and I think 
the hon. member understands that, because the rates are fairly 
close — Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 
 
With regard to Alberta, there is a problem that we can’t quantify 
obviously, but there’s some indication that perhaps the problem is 
less than it was, say, three years ago. You may recall that a year 
ago Alberta had significant increases in its tobacco taxes and 
liquor taxes  

which brought it much closer to Saskatchewan and British 
Columbia, for example. So certainly there is a problem. It’s 
difficult to quantify. I don’t believe it’s as great as it was a couple 
of years ago before Alberta had significant increases in its tobacco 
and liquor taxes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to that, is there any legal 
restrictions for transporting liquor or tobacco from an adjacent 
province? Is there anything legally that restricts it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The Act itself provides penalties, and these 
are long-standing, of fines up to $5,000 for individuals and up to 
$10,000 for retailers who are convicted of unlawfully importing 
cigarettes. 
 
In addition, a person caught in the act of smuggling may have 
those cigarettes seized and held until the tax and penalty equal to 
the amount of taxes paid. In order to bring cigarettes and other 
tobacco products into Saskatchewan for resale, the person or 
business importing or exporting the cigarettes must be licensed to 
collect the Saskatchewan tax. 
 
An individual can legally bring in one carton of cigarettes from 
another jurisdiction for his or her own use without having to 
account for the tax. So it’s the Act itself that establishes the 
penalties. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to the imposition of this tax, is 
there any consideration made, for instance, with Lloydminster 
where they have the joint borders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In 1982 the tobacco competition assistance 
program was introduced to assist the retailers along the Alberta—
Saskatchewan borders. Now I can go on at some length as to the 
details. I don’t know how much detail the hon. member wants. 
 
There are three zones: A, B and C. Zone A is comprised of those 
retailers located in Lloydminster and Onion Lake, and they receive 
a commission of 100 per cent of the tax, a differential on tobacco 
products between Alberta and Saskatchewan. Zone B are located 
within 24 kilometres of the nearest Alberta competition — for 
example, Alsask, Burstall, Macklin, and Marshall. They receive a 
commission of 50 per cent of the tax differential. And Zone C are 
located between 25 and 48 kilometres of the nearest Alberta 
competition, and they receive a commission of 25 per cent of the 
tax differential. Currently there are 87 retail outlets in the program. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Could you just indicate from ’82 to ’88 what is 
the total increase that you had? I notice here today in this Bill that 
you’ve increased every cigarette by 1 cent per cigarette, and 
there’s a schedule for the other tobacco products. But just in 
respect to cigarettes, what has been the overall increase from ’82 
to ’88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Basically since 1982 it’s gone up $1 a 
package. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2195 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend the Department of Finance, 
1983 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wasn’t here when the minister introduced this 
Bill. I’ve read his notes in respect to it, but just for clarification 
purposes, I want to ask, one, why the intended amendment to The 
Department of Finance Act as indicated here, and is it necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The advice we have is that the amendment 
simply brings into law the practice, the long-standing practice of 
the Assembly. Is it necessary? The officials believe that it’s 
advisable. But certainly the practice has been going on for a long 
period of time. So from that point of view, I suppose you could 
make the argument that it’s not vitally necessary. But there was a 
view of the officials that to make effective, legally, what has been 
a long-standing practice, that the amendments were advisable. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That in effect clarifies what position? What the 
Act previously said and what was being done, what is the 
clarification? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the practice has always been to put the 
special warrants in the supplementary estimates and dealt with in 
the final Appropriation Bill. Technically, I guess, the special 
warrants should have been in the first Appropriation Act, which is 
interim supply. And this simply corrects and brings the Act in line 
with what has been the long-standing practice of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think that going with the long-standing practice, 
or what the Act provided previously, gives a better opportunity of 
accountability or following the practice that has been done. Which 
would give better accountability of the government’s 
expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The view is that there would be far better 
debate with the change, in that you have the opportunity of full 
debate, of course, when we’re dealing with supplementary 
estimates, as opposed to the normal debate on interim supply. So I 
think that there is a better opportunity, certainly, for debate with 
the long-standing practice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Which would give to the members the first 
opportunity to look at special warrants, following the practice and 
amending the Act to what you are doing now, or leaving it as it 
was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Special warrants are passed — they’re public 
anyway — with order in council. I mean, as part of supplementary 
estimates they are all listed at that time, so I’m sure that you will 
have the full opportunity to debate them at that time. And again, I 
assure the hon. member that this does simply bring the Act in 
compliance with the long-standing practice of the Assembly. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee report 
the Bill and thank my officials. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce my 
officials for this evening. To my right, Mr. Jim Anderson, policy 
analyst with the Department of Urban Affairs; to your right, Susan 
Amrud, Crown solicitor with the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Almost — as I said in the second reading 
comments that I made when we let this Bill go to the committee, I 
would not have many questions; in fact, I may just have one. 
Certainly I supported the principle of the Bill. Who would oppose 
the influencing — a Bill that would prevent the influencing of 
election inappropriately? 
 
The one item that I’m concerned about, and maybe the minister 
can explain, is how is it going to be determined whether somebody 
has influenced an election at a municipal level or anywhere else — 
in this case we’re dealing at municipal election levels. What is the 
criteria? I know the minister is going to say the court will do it, but 
I’m not sure that’s sufficient. Can you give us some explanation of 
this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my critic is right. For 
instance, by example, a judge who looked at the Ferland problems 
in 1985 was absolutely convinced that quite a number of non—
residents did, in fact, buy land simply to influence the outcome of 
an election. 
 
I can quote from Justice MacLeod’s judgement of March 4, 1986, 
wherein he stated the only reasonable inference from the evidence 
is indeed that that occurred. I’ll just paraphrase: there’s no other 
reasonable inference for the mayor transferring a $50 piece of land 
to 26 people. It was argued forcefully by the respondents that it 
was conjecture or speculation, but he rejected that argument 
overwhelmingly. It’s crystal clear that the judge was convinced, 
Mr. Chairman, that this questionable practice was going on. 
 
And it’s not unusual for courts to make judgement on the intention 
of the accused. It’s not uncommon for the courts to be given 
authority to make judgements. And judges are often asked to 
determine the intentions, that’s their role. For example, the 
difference between the charge of murder or manslaughter is one of 
intention. And I believe that that’s where it would rest. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2196 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the 
Minister of Education I have with me tonight Mr. Mike Benson, 
the executive director of finance and administration of the 
Department of Education, and Mr. Michael Littlewood, the 
assistant director of education and teacher services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — It is my understanding, Mr. Chairman, that this 
Bill is a consequence of the negotiations with the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) where the teacher dental 
plan is extended now to teachers who are in part-time teaching and 
also teachers of private schools, in addition to the teachers that 
originally had it. 
 
This is a good move, I feel, and I think our members on my side 
feel it’s a good move because it extends the dental plan to more 
and more people in the province. It strikes me as being rather odd 
that you extend it on one hand, which is a good move, but contract 
accessibility in dental services by removing the children’s dental 
plan. 
 
What I wanted to ask the minister specifically was: what is the 
utilization rate amongst teachers on the dental plan for the last two 
years? And could you give me that utilization breakdown by age 
and, that is . . . and if possible, by family, age, right down to, say, 
toddlers, who would be children of teachers. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The figures that the department has for the 
year 1986-87 is a total of 17,143. They inform me that the 
commission does not keep any kind of a data base on breakdown 
of age or family, as you’ve requested. But they also suggest that 
they might be able to get it from the carrier, but they would have 
to consult with them and, in fact, find out if that’s so. And I could 
undertake tonight to have the department indeed do that with the 
carrier and then get back to you with it. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much. Is there a figure for the 
year previous to ’86-87? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I’m sorry, I should have given that to you. 
They don’t have an exact figure with them tonight, but the 
department informs me that it is probably close to the figures for 
’86-87. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much; I will accept your offer 
to give us . . . attempt to get us a breakdown by mail. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave, that the 
Bill be now red a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
(2200) 
 

Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Department of Social 
Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2197 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance 
Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 50 — An Act 
respecting the Control of Distribution and the Consumption of 
Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
grateful for the opportunity to speak to this Bill No. 50 — An Act 
respecting the Control of Distribution and the Consumption of 
Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan, to explain what it means to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to speak against it in the strongest 
possible terms, because this legislation, Mr. Speaker, will change 
the face of Saskatchewan with respect to alcohol. It will flood the 
province with alcohol, it will threaten Saskatchewan families and 
young people, and it will turn liquor stores in this province over 
into private hands and the profit motive. 
 
Now I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by saying that as a Lutheran 
clergyman I have seen firsthand the heartache and the problems 
that alcohol abuse has brought to Saskatchewan families and 
young people. Having lived and served congregations in rural 
Saskatchewan communities in Bruno and in Humboldt, in the 
Aberdeen area, and now in the Laird area, I know what it is like to 
have alcohol problems in small town rural communities. I know 
what it is like from firsthand experience to visit homes that are 
broken financially and emotionally and  

spiritually by too much alcohol; and to console people whose 
marriages are on the rocks, and whose children are abused or 
ignored because of alcohol problems, or to comfort families who 
have lost a son or a daughter because of the problems involved 
with drinking and driving. 
 
And one can only wonder then, Mr. Speaker, why the Progressive 
Conservative members of this Assembly, members like the 
member from Rosthern, for example, or Morse, or Moosomin, or 
Rosetown-Elrose don’t stand up and speak against this legislation; 
why they don’t stand up to the Premier of this province and tell 
him that this legislation is wrong for Saskatchewan families and 
Saskatchewan communities. But these members don’t have the 
courage of their own convictions to give expression to their strong 
religious beliefs and to stand up and speak against this legislation. 
We have not heard one word from them yet. 
 
People across Saskatchewan know only too well what I’m talking 
about when I talk about the problems of alcohol, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
now estimated that some 46,000 people in Saskatchewan have 
chronic, perpetual, problem drinking problems. 
 
And it’s estimated, even more importantly, Mr. Speaker, that half 
of these, some 23,000 Saskatchewan young people between the 
ages of 15 and 24 have problems with alcohol. And I can only say, 
regrettably, that this legislation will do nothing to deal with these 
young people or these people who have problems with alcohol. On 
the contrary, this legislation will do everything to increase 
consumption of alcohol and its spread of its problems across this 
province. 
 
This legislation, in a word, is a disservice to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It is the betrayal of Saskatchewan families by the 
very Premier who purports to be so concerned about alcohol and 
drug abuse. 
 
Yes, well on Wednesday, June 1, the Premier of this province 
officially opened the Whitespruce Drug and Alcohol Treatment 
Centre for youth, outside Yorkton, with much pomp and 
officiousness. What does this same Premier do only two days later 
. . . or earlier, Mr. Speaker? On Monday, May 30, he introduces 
this legislation, Bill 50, to: (1) remove controls on the accessibility 
of alcohol from public consultation or scrutiny by this Legislative 
Assembly and into the closed secrecy of cabinet; and (2) to 
privatize or franchise retail liquor stores across this province. In 
every city, town, and village, to open up sale of alcohol to 
privately-owned stores. One step removed from government 
regulation and responsible control; one step closer to profiteering 
and liquor stores competing for the sale of booze. 
 
And so I ask the people of Saskatchewan: is this what you want 
for your families and for your children? Is this what you want for 
your community? Is this what you want from your provincial 
government? I think not. Indeed, I know Saskatchewan people 
don’t want the sale of alcohol for private profit here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2198 
 

Mr. Koenker: I know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people 
don’t want this province drowning in a sea of booze. 
 
Now it’s very important to point out, Mr. Speaker, that what this 
government says and what this government does are really two 
very different things. The Premier simply can’t be trusted to tell 
the truth. He promised not to attack medicare, and what did he do? 
He cut the prescription drug program for seniors, and the dental 
program for people in rural Saskatchewan. He promised to 
eliminate the sales tax and he increased it from 5 to 7 per cent — a 
40 per cent increase. He promised to eliminate 10 per cent of the 
income tax and he didn’t live up to that promise. He promised that 
Saskatchewan would never again see a gas tax after the 
Progressive Conservatives were elected. And yet he slapped it on 
again last year. 
 
And the same is true, the very same is true when it comes to liquor 
control. The Premier talks about protecting Saskatchewan 
families, but as we have seen, his actions speak louder than his 
words. Already I’ve mentioned the hypocrisy of the Premier 
opening the doors to liquor stores in every corner of every 
Saskatchewan town, and then two days later opening the doors to 
an alcohol treatment centre outside Yorkton. 
 
Well, he’d better do that, Mr. Speaker, because with this liquor 
legislation, his liquor legislation, that centre is surely going to be 
busy treating Saskatchewan young people victimized by their own 
Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And I also want to note that this same Premier, 
this is the same Premier who introduced alcohol advertising into 
the province of Saskatchewan — alcohol advertising, against the 
wishes of churches and families and local school boards. And 
even as recently — yes, even as recently as this last provincial 
budget, this Premier, this Progressive Conservative government, 
increased the flat tax, increased the sales tax, even increased the 
tax on cigarettes. But do you think this Premier touched the tax on 
alcohol? Not a chance; not a chance. Virtually the only tax left 
untouched and not increased was the tax on liquor. 
 
Now why would this be? We all know why. The sale of booze is 
big business, and it means big bucks for this Progressive 
Conservative government that is hard strapped for cash, that has 
mismanaged this province, that runs a $3.5 billion deficit that at a 
10 per cent interest rate will cost Saskatchewan people in the 
neighbourhood of $1 million a day just to pay the interest on this 
deficit for their mismanagement — $1 million a day in interest for 
nothing, every day, because of PC mismanagement. And so where 
do they look for money? To the sale of alcohol. 
 
And I want to refer to revenues from the Saskatchewan Liquor 
Board, so that the people of Saskatchewan can see very clearly 
what’s at stake. 
 
(2215) 
 

In 1982, $48 million was added to the Saskatchewan treasury by 
the sale of alcohol. In ’83, $10 million; in ’84, $79 million; in ’85, 
$71 million; in ’86, $84 million; in ’87, $140 million; in ’88, it’s 
predicted that that contribution of alcohol sales to the treasury of 
Saskatchewan will be one $122.5 million. And for 1989, it’s 
estimated $150 million. There’s big bucks in the sale of alcohol — 
an eight-year total of $805 million, approaching a billion dollars in 
revenue for the provincial government. 
 
But this is only half the story. The other half is that this 
government faces a problem with respect to alcohol sales, and it’s 
not the problem that we on this side of the House are talking 
about, the problem of alcohol abuse; this government faces a 
problem with declining alcohol sales. 
 
And I’d like to quote from a 1986-87 annual report of the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board, the most recent report, that notes: 
 

1986-87 marks the fifth straight year of declining sales 
volume. More specifically, spirit sales were down 5.7 per 
cent in volume from last year, and 17.1 per cent (over) . . . 
since (19)82-’83. Beer sales were down by 3 per cent over 
last year. Wine sales, which include cooler sales, were down 
3.2 per cent form the previous year. 

 
So what’s the Progressive Conservative solution to the problem of 
the fifth straight year of declining liquor sales volume? Don’t 
consult the public about changes to the legislation. Don’t stop to 
think about the impact on young people in rural communities. 
Don’t consider the concerns of clergy and teachers. Change the 
legislation to open up sales. Relax the regulations. Put a liquor 
store in every corner of Saskatchewan. Open up the number of 
licenses. Franchise out, privatize stores to your profit—oriented 
friends. And you know what? The government can make money 
too, at the expense of Saskatchewan youth. 
 
So why does this Progressive Conservative government want to 
deregulate liquor sales? Why would it want to betray 
Saskatchewan families and young people? To reward their friends 
with lucrative patronage plums across the province with liquor 
stores. It’s hard to understand otherwise. 
 
Anyone who’s gone to the United States of America has seen 
liquor stores that are making money. You don’t see liquor stores in 
the United States that are losing money; they simply don’t exist. 
Booze is big bucks, and what this government wants to do is to 
have a proliferation of liquor stores across the province so that it 
can make money at the expense . . . that it can victimize its own 
citizens. Because under this legislation, Mr. Speaker, liquor stores 
and liquor profits will flow to the friends of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. It’s that simple. 
 
And that is exactly what we have seen with past PC patronage: the 
give-away of $10 million to Peter Pocklington; the giving of Paul 
Schoenhals the chairmanship of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2199 
 

 at $100,000 a year; George Hill becoming the chairperson of 
SaskPower — a former sidekick of the Premier of this province — 
at $200,000 a year; and virtually every defeated PC candidate 
given a government patronage job at taxpayers’ expense. 
 
Here we see the real reason behind the Progressive Conservative 
move to change the liquor legislation: to reward their friends, to 
bring in the bucks for the $3.5 billion deficit that the taxpayers 
have to pay for — their mismanagement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say that is unacceptable. Decent people across 
Saskatchewan, people concerned about alcohol abuse, clergy who 
work with families, teachers who work with teenagers say that is 
totally unacceptable for the Government of Saskatchewan to push 
alcohol on its own citizens. This government is the institutional 
equivalent of a drug pusher — pushing alcohol at the people of 
Saskatchewan, franchising and privatizing out the sale of alcohol 
for profit, calling, come and get it — let’s have alcohol for sale in 
grocery stores; let’s have liquor stores with price wards like in the 
U.S.A.; let’s get organized crime into supplying alcohol. 
 
I’m shocked that members of this Assembly, like members from 
Rosthern and Morse and Moosomin and Rosetown and Elrose 
don’t oppose this Premier and this legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Any responsible government would try to curb 
alcohol consumption. Any responsible government would try to 
bring in controls when it brought in legislation. It would not turn 
liquor stores over to their friends. It would not turn the sale of 
alcohol over to the profit motive, as this PC government does — it 
worships the profit motive. It would not move to allow the sale of 
alcohol in every street corner across Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it; I say to the 
people of Saskatchewan, make no mistake about it, this New 
Democratic caucus is concerned about alcohol abuse and 
fundamentally opposed to this legislation which will result in the 
proliferation of alcohol abuse across Saskatchewan and affecting 
Saskatchewan young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: This legislation borders on a crime for the people 
of Saskatchewan, perpetrated by its own government. And I 
conclude by saying then, Mr. Speaker, that I invite the good 
people of Saskatchewan to contact New Democratic members of 
this legislature in this caucus to express their concerns, to share 
their opinions with the Leader of the Opposition, because we are 
pledged to oppose this legislation and to fight the spread of alcohol 
abuse in this province. 
 
And I would like to conclude by saying that I would be pleased 
and honoured to share information on this important issue with 
anyone who would contact me or write me. It’s too important for 
our young people, for our  

churches, for our schools, for our families, for our communities, 
for the whole of our province, not to oppose this legislation. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take a 
moment to commend the member from Saskatoon Sutherland for 
making this delivery on this very, very controversial topic. I want 
to say that the things that he said bear repeating, and I want to take 
some time and repeat some of those things, but not tonight. I move 
that the debate adjourn on this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:23 p.m. 
 
 


