


















































April 26, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 26, 1988 
 

845 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague the 
member for Arm River, I would like to introduce to you and to 
the House, a group of students from Schell School in Holdfast, 
Saskatchewan. There are 20 grade 11 and 12 students. They are 
accompanied by their principal, Mr. Ken Johns, and also, Mr. 
Bill Stetzinko, and bus driver, Ken Ball. I would like to 
welcome these students to the Chamber today. I hope that you 
enjoy the question period and the activity here in the Chamber, 
and I look forward to meeting with this group following 
question period for a brief discussion and some refreshment. I’d 
ask all members to welcome these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you and to everyone in the house 
here today, the first of two groups I’ll be introducing today  
120 students you see here now who are attending the 
Interchange of Canadian Studies group from all over Canada. 
This week these grade 11 students from the 10 provinces and 
the two territories, and their supervisors, have come to Regina 
to be hosted by the Regina students and educators. They are 
taking part in the Interchange on Canadian Studies. 
 
The Interchange on Canadian Studies, Mr. Speaker, is a 
national organization which provides opportunities for young 
Canadians to meet and to hear prominent speakers and to share 
ideas and experience on matters of significance to Canada 
through student conferences and travel exchange. It’s a 
wonderful opportunity for them. This week they are talking 
about the disappearing 49th parallel, with the focus on free 
trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accompanying these 120 students this afternoon 
are Jim Hudson, Richard Kusiak, Elizabeth Dawson, Richard 
Martin, Luc Filion, and Dale Flikel. Please, Mr. Speaker, and 
the members here, let’s welcome these students from the 10 
provinces and the two territories. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  Mr. Speaker, I too would join with my 
colleague from Regina Wascana in welcoming these students 
from all over Canada, the provinces and our two territories, and 
hope that their visit is an enjoyable one and that their 
conference is a fruitful one. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Minister, as well I would like to 
introduce Kevin Doherty who is sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. 
Kevin is the outgoing president of the University of 
Saskatchewan students’ union. I hope that your exams went 
well, Kevin. And I must say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all 
members of the legislature, that during Kevin’s term as 
president I found him a very articulate  

young man. He never failed to make his point, on behalf of 
students, in meetings with me. But I must say, as well, he made 
them in a very reasoned and sensible way, and I would 
congratulate him. And I can say to you and all members of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, that the students were well served, the 
students in the University of Saskatchewan were well served, 
under his presidency at the students’ union. I would ask all 
members to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition I would like to joining with the 
members opposite in welcoming the students to Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan, in many ways, has been the pioneer in many 
areas  in health care and also in education. And I hope that 
your trip to Saskatchewan, your visit here, will be an 
educational one and that you can take this back to the two 
territories and the other provinces and hopefully inspire the 
people in your own provinces in furthering the goals of 
education. 
 
I, too, want to join with the Minister of Education in welcoming 
Kevin here today and hope that you have a very bright future 
here in Saskatchewan and that the opportunities will be open to 
you in education and in other fields. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of Natural Gas Holdings of SPC 
 

Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. my 
question is to the minister in charge of SPC (Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation), they Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, is it correct that yesterday’s announced 
sale, or the day before’s announced sale by SPC of the natural 
gas reserves amounts to a sale of a 15-year natural gas supply at 
roughly on-third of the market value, today’s market value, 
namely, at a cost of $325 million when the market value is at a 
billion dollars. Will you confirm that to be the case, and if so, 
how do you justify that, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. The 
fact is the reserves that were sold by SaskPower to Saskoil were 
sold at fair market value of $325 million and that fair market 
value is supported on both sides, Mr. Speaker, by fairness 
letters from outside, independent financial advisers and 
consultants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Minister, we have been advised by the federal 
Department of Energy and Mines that the price of natural gas at 
the Alberta border is $1.93 per thousand cubic feet. The value 
of the 510 billion cubic feet is $984 million, or almost $1 
billion, not the 325 million for  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

846 
 

which you sold the SPC reserves. How do you explain those 
figures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Let me start, Mr. Speaker, by saying 
that there will have to be somewhere between 6 and 800 wells 
drilled before we can get it out of the ground. I mean, it . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Gas at the consumer, where it goes into 
the house where you turn on the stove and turn on the furnace, 
has a different value, Mr. Speaker, than gas in the ground in 
undeveloped reserves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I will have a further new 
question to the minister, to the Deputy Premier. I think we all 
understand that the value of natural gas in the ground is 
different than the value of natural gas at the consumer level. I 
am quoting a figure from the federal Department of Energy and 
Mines which quotes that: “the price of natural gas at the Alberta 
border in its raw state is $1.93 per 1,000 cubic feet” which, at 
510 billion cubic feet sold by SPC, means a value of $1 billion 
for which you only got $325 million. 
 
I ask the minister again: are those figures by the federal 
department correct or not correct? If they’re not correct, will the 
minister please table the fairness letter so we can see that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, I can’t nor do I intend to 
speak for the federal department. I don’t know how they make 
their calculation or what it’s based on. 
 
I do know, Mr. Speaker, that based on the fairness letter, and 
the consultants of Coles, Nikiforuk, Pennell Associated Ltd., 
that the fairness of this deal is supported by their analysis and 
their professional reputation. I don’t remember the names of the 
people who did the fairness analysis for Saskoil. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this deal is supported by fairness letters on 
both sides of the deal by outside, independent financial 
consultants  $325 million for these undeveloped reserves, Mr. 
Speaker, that they want to sit dormant and deplete themselves 
through leakage so that they will be of no value to anyone down 
the road, Mr. Speaker, so that they will . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  They’ve been there for a million years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Well, he says they’ve been there for a 
million years. he wouldn’t believe they were there; they 
wouldn’t do anything to encourage people to search for gas in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, that we do have a developed gas 
industry in Saskatchewan, there is a leakage problem.  

When you drill a hole here in porous material, it can sneak over 
here in that material, Mr. Speaker, and that’s called leakage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, I agree with you; there’s a 
leakage problem, and the leakage problem is with you and your 
government and all the money that you’ve given away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Look, Mr. Deputy Premier, this is not a 
figure that I pulled out of the air; this is a figure which a 
responsible agency of government has given us. if you dispute 
that figure, I ask you and the Premier of this province to table 
those fairness letters and to table those independent consultant 
reports because I say to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, that you have 
given away, at one-third of the value, $1 billion of natural gas 
reserves, and that’s unjustifiable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, I will check with the 
officials at Power to see if those letters can be tabled. I don’t 
anticipate any problem about tabling the letters. I don’t see any 
problem, but I’ll check. 
 
Let me make the observation, though, Mr. Speaker, that when 
we tabled all of the information that they asked for relative to 
the Weyerhaeuser deal, they then fell asleep; they then fell 
asleep. You didn’t hear any more empirical, supported by the 
documents, information from those folks. All you heard was the 
rhetorical garbage that you continued to hear until today when 
my friend and colleague, the minister of privatization, picked up 
a $32 million . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. 
 

Privatization of Sask Utilities 
 

Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to either the 
Deputy Premier or the minister in charge of privatization. May I 
just say very briefly that if those consultants’ papers are 
documented and they justify and can be justified on the basis 
that you say so, fair enough. I make the accusation and I want to 
see those statements as you’ve indicated. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier, however, 
deals with the larger policy of privatization. We were told on 
October, 1986 by your Premier, and subsequently by the 
minister of privatization that, “We have no intention of selling 
SaskTel now or in the future. The company is not for sale and 
will not be sold.” This refers to SaskTel. 
 
There was a statement about a month ago saying that 
SaskPower was not up for sale either. The reality is that 
portions of SaskTel have been privatized, and now we see 
portions of SaskPower being privatized. I’m asking the Deputy 
Premier, who do we believe here? Is SaskPower  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

847 
 

up for sale, or is it not up for sale? Yes or no, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Speaker, the reserve is not the utility. 
The reserve is an undeveloped resource. By selling the reserve, 
Mr. Speaker, we hope to develop the resource, or at least to 
have the Saskatchewan-based private sector oil and gas 
company develop the resource. That, Mr. Speaker, will generate 
revenue for the province through royalties. It will generate jobs 
through the drilling of 6 or 800 wells over the next five years. It 
will, Mr. Speaker, have a net effect of having a $30 million 
enhancement to the bottom line of SaskPower. 
 
Those are very positive numbers, Mr. Speaker, and all of it 
supported, Mr. Speaker, by fairness letters from outside, 
independent financial advisers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier, and I’d ask the Deputy Premier to listen 
carefully to the question to be able to give us a clear answer on 
this. 
 
First of all, $325 million dollars today might prove to be a very 
bad deal if we’re paying a billion dollars tomorrow from 
Ontario to buy our natural gas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  But that’s not the question. My question to 
you, Mr. Deputy Premier, is this. Several weeks ago your 
minister of privatization assured the people of Saskatchewan, in 
effect, that there would be a fence around SaskPower and 
SaskTel, that they weren’t to be privatized. In reality, by the 
sell-off of the natural gas reserves, in reality of what’s 
happening to SaskTel, that seem to be a blatant untruth, that 
there is no protection around SaskPower and SaskTel. 
 
I want you to tell this House clearly, as clearly as you can, that 
SaskPower and SaskTel are not on the chopping block. Is that 
the case or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, if it weren’t for the 
initiatives of this government since 1982, we may well have 
been looking to Ontario for natural gas. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, they haven’t been very successful in finding reserves 
to develop in Ontario either. But since 1982 . . . And maybe if 
we went down there and helped them design some policies to 
encourage exploration and development, they might be more 
successful. However, I doubt that because the exports tell me 
that the geology of Ontario doesn’t lend itself to that. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the utility and the reserve . . . I can 
remember back  I don’t know what year it was  when 
members opposite invented this thing called Saskoil and chased 
all the private sector in the oil patch out of the province. At that 
time, Mr. Speaker, they took reserves owned by SaskPower and 
gave them to Saskoil. So what are they talking about, disposing 
of reserves, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have one last final new  

question to the Deputy Premier. I suspect that it’s rather in vain 
hope, but I’ll put it to the Deputy Premier as clearly as I can 
again. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier: on behalf of your government, 
who do we believe? The minister of privatization would have 
the public believe that SaskPower, SaskTel and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) are not up for sale. On 
the other hand, the actions of your government by this natural 
gas give-away and by the attacks on SaskTel go the other way, 
that it is for sale. I ask you: will you tell this House now that the 
minister of privatization is incorrect or, in the alternative, that 
there will be no more give-aways for SaskPower and SaskTel in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, there have been no 
give-aways. We at SaskPower . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, ho, ho, you know. Mr. Speaker, they get real sensitive 
about this when some of our successes come home to haunt 
them, like the Weyerhaeuser success that my colleague’s going 
to talk about later today, and like the success that you will see 
the disposition of this gas reserve come home to haunt you one 
more time. 
 
When we drill 600 wells . . . 800 wells over the next four or five 
years, Mr. Speaker, that’s as compared to two or three wells, 
gas wells in the whole province 1981, the last year that that 
administration was looking after the store here, Mr. Speaker. 
We are a long, long way from the dark days of the NDP in the 
energy sector, and we’re going to continue to develop our 
resource sector, Mr. Speaker. And we think this one is a good 
deal for SaskPower, for Saskoil, and for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

Privatization of Education 
 

Mr. Rolfes:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister of privatization, or the Minister of 
Public Participation. Mr. Minister, you seem to be quite willing 
to tell the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association a lot more 
about your privatization agenda than you are willing to tell the 
public or this legislature. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are quoted in the Saturday Star-Phoenix as 
saying that we will not privatize the vast majority of education 
in this province. Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: what 
parts of education are you prepared to privatize? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s correct; I have a 
number of speaking engagements around the province at 
various occasions, and from time to time I do put out certain 
things that may be candidates for a public participation, for 
discussion, and for people to give us their input as to what they 
think of these candidates. 
 
I did mention with the manufacturers’ association that possibly 
there might be some public participation in the liquor boards, 
certain aspects of some of the functions of land titles, and I did 
say there could be some candidates of education. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

848 
 

At this point in time I want to assure the people that, as the 
Minister of Education has on many occasions, that the delivery 
of the school system is certainly not a candidate for that. We do 
have some private schools, as you well know, Mr. Speaker  
private schools that have been in this province for some time  
and I believe the critic would support that they deliver a good 
quality of education. 
 
But I don’t want you to be standing up here and trying to 
mislead the public or to scare them in any way, shape, or form, 
that there’s some great plot to privatize education. There can be 
some aspects of clerical functions, things of this nature, in 
various . . . (inaudible) . . . that could be candidates for public 
participation. I think it’s only right that those type of things 
should be put forward for a complete public suggestion and 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I hear your denials and I hear all that rhetoric, but we 
heard that same thing about SaskTel and SaskPower, and now 
we see the action of your government. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: you said that health 
care would not be privatized, and yet you’ve privatized the 
dental care program. Mr. Minister, who are we to believe? Are 
we to believe you or are we to believe the Deputy Premier on 
this issue of privatization? 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister: what parts of education are you 
planning on privatizing, what parts of education? You said the 
vast majority of education would not be privatized. that means 
that you are planning certain parts of education to be privatized. 
I ask you again, come clean with the people of Saskatchewan; 
tell us now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Tell us now. What is your agenda, and what 
parts are you planning to privatize? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, that just illustrates 
exactly the point of the opposition. Either they don’t understand 
or they choose not to listen to what is being said. I have said all 
along that there are certain aspects of various functions of 
government that are under scrutiny for public participation  in 
fact, most of the things. 
 
There are some areas that will not be touched, such as the 
delivery of health care. But certainly the member opposite  
and I heard the Leader of the Opposition  try to mislead. If 
they listen and look back at the statements that I made regarding 
the utilities, the utility functions of SaskTel and SaskPower, I 
indicated that those were not candidates. 
 
But I did say, at the same time, take for example many of the 
functions of SaskPower, and the minister will tell you the same 
thing, that the underground . . . the rural gas delivery has been 
done by the private sector since its inception. The private line 
installation, the fibre optics, so many aspects of these things 
have been done by the private sector and perhaps will continue 
to be. 
 

Mr. Rolfes:  New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we’re 
not misleading the people on this side of the House. It’s you and 
your other ministers that are misleading the people of this 
House. Mr. Minister, you go in one part of the province and tell 
the people one thing, and the deputy minister goes to another 
part and tells them something else. 
 
I’m asking you again, Mr. Minister: Mr. Minister, you were the 
one that was referring to private schools. I’m asking you right 
now: is it your plan to underfund the universities and our 
post-secondary education and parts of our university? Is that 
your secret agenda, and is that why our students aren’t able to 
get into some of our programs in our post-secondary education 
because you plan to privatize parts of those schools? Is that 
your plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 
 

Privatization Policy  General 
 

Ms. Atkinson:  My question is to the minister of 
privatization. Now, Mr. Minister, your privatization ideology is 
beginning to come clear to the people of Saskatchewan. In 
1985, you privatized Saskoil; our deficit went up, and our taxes 
went up. In 1986, you privatized PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company); our deficit went up, and our taxes went up. In 1987, 
you privatized the school-based children’s dental program; our 
deficit went up, and our taxes went up. 
 
And now, Mr. Minister, in 1988, you’ve privatized SaskCOMP, 
Sask Minerals, parts of SaskTel and parts of SaskPower. Our 
deficit is at $3.7 billion, and our taxes have gone up. 
 
My question is this: won’t you admit, Mr. Minister, that your 
ideological approach is total lunacy and that it will not lead to 
further tax decreases and a further decrease in the deficit? Will 
you admit that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, the comments of the critic 
opposite just again reinforce the complete misunderstanding 
when she says this is some type of ideologically driven 
exercise. If it’s ideologically driven, then it’s ideologically 
driven in New Zealand and in China and in France and in 
Russia. And if you look all around the world, you’ll see 
governments of various political stripes looking at this type of 
public participation. 
 
And she’s criticizing Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker. Later on 
today I think I have some very interesting news to share with 
the people of Saskatchewan regarding the Weyerhaeuser 
transaction that they were so critical of. 
 
I heard them today with the SaskPower sale to Saskoil  
exactly the same rhetoric that they said about Weyerhaeuser. 
And in a few moments, Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll find out a 
completely different story about the  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

849 
 

Weyerhaeuser transaction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Probably the strongest public 
participation action of this type in north America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  A new question to the minister of 
privatization. Mr. Minister, you claim that your PC 
privatizations won’t cost jobs and won’t cut services. You’re 
wrong on both counts, and let’s take a look at your record. You 
privatized Saskoil, and 25 per cent of the labour force was gone. 
You privatized the parks, and jobs were lost and services cut. 
You privatized the highways operations; jobs cut and services 
gone. People cant’ drive down the highways. You privatized the 
school-based children’s dental program; hundreds of jobs lost 
and a valuable service lost to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you is simply this: when will you stop your 
attack on the jobs and services of the people of this province, 
and why don’t you stop this new economic fad of privatization 
which absolutely makes no sense to the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this is complete and 
utter nonsense. I was at Weyerhaeuser three weeks ago myself. 
I say about 600 people working there, building the paper plant. 
Now if that isn’t job creation, I don’t know what it is. I know 
when the paper plant is in place there’ll be 150 brand-new jobs 
 a half a million dollars coming into Prince Albert in wages. 
 
Let me tell you, the 800 wells that are going to be drilled, that 
Saskoil from this transaction . . . Well there’s going to be a few 
guys working to drill those wells. Now that’s job creation. 
 
And she talks about 28 jobs in Saskoil. When I see 600 new 
jobs building a paper plant because of a privatization 
transaction, and I hear SaskPower is going to drill 600 to 800 
wells . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Saskoil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Saskoil, let me tell you, to me that’s 
diversification, that’s development, and that’s job creation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  New question to the minister of privatization. 
How is the sale of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington, public participation for Saskatchewan residents? 
How is that public participation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a ministerial 
statement that I’ll be sharing with the House in a few moments. 
I think if the critic would just wait a  

couple of minutes, I will certainly indicate to her of what. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Give us a little tip. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, I guess. I could give you a little bit 
of an idea . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well I think she asks, how did the sale of 
PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser Canada indicate some public 
participation. Well I’ll tell you what kind of public 
participation. I had the good fortune today to go with the 
Premier of this province to prince Albert to a hotel just full of 
people, all smiling, all happy, and we received a cheque, a 
cheque for $30.5 million, benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  And that’s public participation because 
that money can be used to build hospitals and schools and all 
the things that the people want  roads, parks, and so on  
and I believe that’s public participation, that’s building, that’s 
diversification, and that’s what we stand for in . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  A new question to the minister of 
privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. It’s difficult to hear the member 
for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
claim that your PC privatization strategy means public . . . or 
means ownership for Saskatchewan people, but that’s not true, 
and let’s look at the record. Saskatchewan people used to own 
the SaskPower coal reserves but you privatized that to Manalta 
Coal of Alberta. Saskatchewan people used to have a significant 
share in SED Systems in Saskatoon but you privatized that to a 
company in Ontario  70 jobs lost  and then we bought back 
the bricks and mortar for 10 million. Saskatchewan people used 
to own Sask Minerals but you privatized that. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. The hon. member, while she has a preamble, she’s 
raising a great deal of information in those preambles which is 
inviting a very long question, and I ask her to get to her 
question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  In view of the fact that Saskatchewan people 
used to own Saskatchewan Minerals which is now owned by 
companies in Ontario and Quebec; in view of the fact that 
Saskatchewan people used to own a pulp paper mill that is now 
owned by a company in Tacoma, Washington  
Weyerhaeuser; in view of the fact that Saskatchewan assets 
have gone . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m going to give 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana an opportunity now to simply 
put her question. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

850 
 

Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Minister, in view of all of those facts in 
relationship to privatization in this province, will you stop 
selling the assets of Saskatchewan people? Will you stop giving 
those assets away, Mr. Minister? Will you stop your 
privatization strategy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  No, Mr. Speaker, we will not stop any 
privatization initiative for public participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  We will continue on with developing and 
building. And I see the Leader of the Opposition, he doesn’t 
share the opinion of the critic. He is on record as saying he 
supports it. The last leader of the opposition, the Hon. Allan 
Blakeney, said, many of these things, their time is over as 
Crowns; it is time to look at different types of delivery. 
 
We will continue to do that, and when we can see profits of 
$30.5 million coming in over a 20-month period, and another 
33 million to come in the not too distant future, you bet your 
like we’ll continue that type of action on this side of the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Payment from Weyerhaeuser to Government of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve taken the liberty to 
deliver the text of my statement to the critic and to the leader of 
Liberal Party. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to announce to my 
legislative colleagues and the people of Saskatchewan that the 
Saskatchewan division of Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. today 
presented a cheque for $30.5 million to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this payment is in addition to the 
236 million debenture which will come into effect once the 
paper mill is operation later this year. 
 
the sale of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser two years ago marked a 
major public participation initiative in our province. Under the 
terms of the sale, Weyerhaeuser’s profits at the Prince Albert 
operation were to be returned to Saskatchewan taxpayers. From 
the time of the sale to the end of 1987  that’s a 20-month 
period, Mr. Speaker  the province has earned $63.5 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, that represents 63 . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that represents 63.5 million to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, compared to a loss of 26 million over the 20-month 
period preceding the sale. 
 

Today’s payment of 30.5 million represents the first 
installment. The remainder will be paid from the future cash 
flows. 
 
And the good news continues, Mr. Speaker. At an investment of 
250 million, Weyerhaeuser has build a world-class paper mill 
which will be operational later this summer. 
 
As of March 16, 1988, there were 692 men and women 
employed at the paper mill construction site. Eighty per cent of 
them are Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, those are jobs for 
Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, 80 per cent of materials for the 
construction of the new paper mill will have been delivered by 
Saskatchewan suppliers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  The spin-off of this new investment has 
provided Saskatchewan people, business, and industry with new 
jobs, investment, and economic growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when complete, the new paper mill will create 
over 150 permanent jobs for Saskatchewan men and women. 
These positions will inject 500,000 of monthly wages directly 
into the city of Prince Albert that will stimulate growth and 
development in the local economy. Job creation through new 
investment, Mr. Speaker  that is public participation. 
 
In coming to Saskatchewan, Weyerhaeuser has shown itself as 
an excellent corporate citizen that is firmly committed to our 
province, making donations to the city of Prince Albert, the Big 
River nursing home, the Prince Albert United Way, the Prince 
Albert Raiders hockey scholarship fund, and funding a 
pre-school service for its employees. Weyerhaeuser has shown 
its strong dedication to the city of Prince Albert, its employees, 
and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today all members of the legislature were 
presented with a Saskatchewan-grown white spruce seedling, 
compliments of Weyerhaeuser Canada, Saskatchewan Division. 
Like this seedling, Mr. Speaker, the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill 
and paper plant in Prince Albert promised future growth and 
benefits for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sale of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser in 1986 used 
public assets to create new investment and jobs. In two years 
Weyerhaeuser has successfully turned a pulp mill losing 
$91,000 per day into a booming, profitable operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, new investment, 
employment, growth, new technology, new markets and  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

851 
 

new revenues are all part of public participation initiatives and 
represent what Weyerhaeuser has brought to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s announcement affirms the commitment 
that Weyerhaeuser has to Saskatchewan people and the 
development of our economy. And more than that, Mr. Speaker, 
it is a shining example of what can be accomplished in 
Saskatchewan through public participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take 
a few minutes to respond to the minister’s comments. I note he 
indicated that Weyerhaeuser had taken two years to turn that 
business around. Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, that they had a little help with the industry as a whole 
in pulp and paper prices. And if you don’t understand that, then 
I think you’d want to take a little closer look at what’s been 
going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  What the minister as well failed to 
mention is that the people of this province are going to be 
building 32 kilometres of roads as part of that agreement every 
year for the next 20 years . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  And in case over the din and the roar 
from the other side I wasn’t heard, I’d want to repeat that the 
people of this province are going to be building 32 kilometres 
of roads for 20 years for that particular corporation that’s going 
to cost us millions of dollars. I would want to suggest as well 
that the minister knows full well it was sold for probably over 
$100 million less than what it was worth. 
 
And I’d want to also say that, consistent with the way this 
government has run Crown Corporations since 1982  I will 
admit that PAPCO had some problems and was losing some 
money under the hands of this administration; that’s not unlike 
any Crown corporation you’ve had your fingers on as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  What I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, 
and I speak for the people of this province, that in 1980 and ’81 
that mill made millions of dollars that were returned directly to 
the hands of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  And I’m not convinced that we can say 
the same for this deal that you’ve cut and what the results of it 
are. I say what you’ve done today is you’ve confirmed that it’s 
a bad deal for the people of the province, and the industry 
considers you to be a joke for the kind of deal you cut to sell the 
mill. And you can’t deny that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

Mr. Lautermilch:  When you unload an asset for over a 
hundred million dollars less than what it’s worth, how can you 
consider it a bad deal? And you stand up here and chirp about 
getting are turn of $30 million dollars, not even a third of how 
much you sold it for less than what it should have been sold for. 
 
And there are some questions that you haven’t answered as 
well, Mr. Minister. I’d like to know what PAPCO’s total profits 
were in 1987, because you haven’t told us, and we would like to 
have known what PAPCO made. We on this side of the House 
know that pulp and paper was up 25 per cent last year, and that 
every major pulp and paper producer in the North American 
continent made record profits. So it’s nothing new and it’s not a 
surprise. 
 
And we’d like to know why you sold the assets when the pulp 
and paper prices were depressed  and the whole industry’s 
profits were depressed  why didn’t you wait until you could 
have made a reasonable price for the sale of the assets. I said 
before that in ’87 the pulp and paper prices increased by 25 per 
cent, and this year they’re expected to rise further, so I would 
expect we could see yet more profits from that . . . from 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
But what I ask you, Mr. Minister, is: how much are the profits, 
and who got them? Did the people of this province get 100 per 
cent of the return on the profits, because you never made that 
clear today, Mr. Minister. And I say to you that the people of 
this province deserve the profits from that particular 
corporation. And if your idea of public participation is to give 
away in this kind of a deal over a quarter of a billion dollar’s 
worth of assets, well I say to you that you’ve had a problem in 
prince Albert selling that, and I would suggest it will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Minister, the spokesman for 
Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Gainer, has admitted in a news . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. I’m sure the hon. member has a 
great deal he could say about the ministerial statement; 
however, I think I have given him sufficient time  more than 
the minister had  and I would ask him to conclude his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, in concluding, I would just 
want to say that Weyerhaeuser knows they were fortunate to 
buy the mill under the conditions that they purchased it for. I 
don’t believe that the majority of the people of this province 
believe that 
 
And there are two questions that this minister never answered 
today: what were the total profits in 1987, how much were the 
profits; and who got it? 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 5  An Act to declare a Day of Mourning for 
Workers Killed or Injured in the Course of their 

Employment 
 



 
April 26, 1988 

 

852 
 

Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
declare a Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured in the 
Course of their Employment. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 2:46 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 2  An Act respecting the Use of the French and 
English Languages in Saskatchewan / Projet de loi No 2  Loi 
relative a L’usage du francais et de l’anglais en Saskatchewan 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:48 p.m. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Government Inaction in Solving Problems Faced by 
Saskatchewan Families 

 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion 
of my remarks I will be moving a motion to condemn this PC 
Government of Saskatchewan for, among other things, a 
betrayal of Saskatchewan families by virtue of its attacks on 
medicare. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to condemn this Premier and this 
government in the strongest possible terms that are 
parliamentary, because never has there been a more appropriate 
time to condemn this government on their medicare record than 
after last Friday’s attacks on the sick and those who need 
medication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know that last Friday morning a 
Saskatchewan family came into this Legislative Assembly 
seeking help from their government with respect to their 
medication expenses. And they were attacked, by no accident, 
or no mistake, in very calculated and deliberate terms, by the 
premier of this province, and equated with criminals. Here was 
a family who needed $130 worth of medication: some, a 
prescription for the wife who had whiplash as a result of an 
accident, some of the prescriptions for a 10-year old daughter 
who is allergic to sunlight and was missing school  in fact 
missing exams. They came seeking help from the government. 
And did they find it? No. 
 
What did the Premier do? Not only did he avoid offering this 
young family his own assistance, but he ignored their personal 
need. And he launched into an attack on this family, and others 
like them, and equated Saskatchewan people who need 
prescription drugs with pushers and sellers of drugs out on the 
street. And, Mr. Speaker, this is nothing other than a 
fundamental attack on medicare and a frontal attack on the 
people of Saskatchewan who are sick and need medication. 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  For the Premier of this province to speak to 
the people of the province, and I quote, to say  you listen to 
this: half the drug problem, half the drug problem addressed 
today in the city of Regina is free prescription drugs. 
 
That is just outrageous, Mr. Speaker, to say that half of the drug 
problem in Regina, or in this province, has to do with the 
prescription drug program. Where does the Premier think that 
he can equate people who need drugs with drug peddlers and 
the like? 
 
This thinking, Mr. Speaker, is the thinking of moral 
Neanderthal  a moral Neanderthal, not the premier of the 
province. And I say, when we get this kind of thinking form 
that Premier of this province, we don’t have medicare, but we 
have “mediscare”  a Premier who wants to scare the people 
of Saskatchewan, a Premier who reads an article in the 
newspaper about a drug bust by the Regina police. And what 
does he do when presented with a family who legitimately 
needs prescription drugs? He scares the people of the province; 
he scares people into believing that the problem with the drug 
plan is that people are abusing it to peddle drugs on the street. 
Well that’s total nonsense. 
 
The same Premier, after having given one and a half to two 
billion dollars’ worth of royalty breaks to the oil companies 
during his first term of government, comes back to the people 
of Saskatchewan in his second term and says: we can’t afford a 
health care system; we can’t afford prescription drugs for 
everyone. And he tries to scare people  that’s mediscare. 
 
He latches on to public concern about AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome) by telling the people of the province that 
the whole health care system is in danger of collapse and could 
fall victim to this wild epidemic, again to scare people. That’s 
not medicare, that’s not medicare from the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, that’s mediscare  scare people about the 
ability to control costs of health care; scare the public about the 
monumental imminent collapse of the health care system. Scare 
the public at every opportunity, but don’t care about what’s 
happening to individual Saskatchewan families like the one 
who came into this Legislative Assembly last Friday afternoon. 
Don’t care about what’s happening to the woman who has 
cancer and has to wait five months for diagnostic treatment  a 
constituent of mine  and then after she’s diagnosed as 
needing surgery that’s urgent for her life, has to wait five more 
weeks for that surgery. Don’t care about those kind of people, 
just scare the public. 
 
And so what we are really seeing, Mr. Speaker, from this 
Premier and the government opposite, is the privatization of 
health care, the privatization of health care by pushing the 
provision of medical services and their expense back on to the 
backs of individual Saskatchewan families and households. And 
this is in complete keeping with this government’s credo or 
creed which is namely laissez-faire capitalism, rugged 
individualism. 
 
Fundamentally, there is no public responsibility or public 
morality from the members opposite. That’s all been  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

853 
 

abrogated and abandoned to the individual. People can take care 
of themselves, whether they’re sick or whether they’re healthy, 
whether they’re rich or whether they’re poor. Their health, says 
this Premier, is dependent on their own circumstances; it’s their 
own private concern, not the government’s. That’s the 
foundation underlying all the cut-backs that we’ve seen this past 
year  the privatization of public health care. 
 
And what are the operative principles of privatization, this 
attack on the medicare system? There are two fundamental 
principles, both very simple. The first principle of privatization 
is that your health care is predicated on your health. Your health 
care is predicated on your health. As long as you’re healthy, 
you’re okay. You’re okay because you don’t need medical 
attention, but God help you if you get sick. Yes, God help you, 
because this Premier and this government sure won’t help you. 
You’re on your own. 
 
And so when you see someone like the Shepherd family, who 
can’t afford prescription drugs, come into this Assembly and 
ask for assistance from their government, or you see my 
constituent contact me because of her wait to get diagnostic 
treatment and then another five-weeks wait to get surgery for 
urgent cancer, people begin to whisper to themselves, there but 
for the grace of God go I, because this Premier and this 
government certainly won’t help them. 
 
And really, Mr. Speaker, what is more frightening, when we 
stop to think about it, than the proposition that our health care is 
fundamentally predicated on our being healthy. That’s 
Neanderthal morality, the morality of this premier and of this 
government; it’s the selfish ethic of the strong; it’s the PC ethic. 
 
And the second principle of mediscare or privatization of 
medicare says that it’s not simply that you’ve got to be healthy, 
but you’ve also got to be wealth as well. The second principle 
of privatization is very similar to the first, and that is that your 
health care is really predicated on your wealth. You have 
money, you’ve got health care  or should we say that with a 
little bit of qualification  you’ve got all the health care that 
money can buy. 
 
But if you don’t have money, you’d better not get sick, and 
you’d better not get into an accident, and you’d better not have 
any hereditary disease or health problems, because you won’t 
be able to afford them, the medication for these problems, or the 
hospital and health services, or to go out of province to avoid 
waiting lists. And there are now 11,000 people waiting in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not medicare. That’s an attack on medicare. 
That’s mediscare. That’s the privatization of health care. It’s the 
selfish ethic of the strong, and it abandons people to their own 
resources if they have them. 
 
Illness or accident or heredity, Mr. Speaker, is no respecter of 
person, of individual person. Any one of us, at any time, 
anywhere, might need medical care for reasons totally beyond 
our control, and that medical care should not be dependent on 
our ability to pay for it out of our own pockets. 
 

(1500) 
 
And I say the kind of thinking which says that that is the case, 
which privatizes medical care and sickness and relegates health 
care to the ability to pay, is characteristic of this government 
opposite. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that New Democrats 
stand fundamentally opposed to this approach to health care; 
they say that there is a better way than the privatization of 
health care by foisting it on the backs of individual families. 
 
There is a higher morality than that of the Neanderthals, than 
that of the Premier of this province, than the selfish ethic of the 
strong surviving, and that way is medicare, the way that the 
people of this province have known for the last 25 or 26 years, 
until it’s been under attack the last year and a half. That way is 
medicare, universally funded, universally accessible, a way 
which says we share our collective responsibility in the 
provision of health care to and for one another, a way that 
insists that we are our brother and our sisters’ keepers. 
 
And for this Premier, and for this PC government opposite to 
attack the sick and those who need medication and to scare the 
public and to privatize health care is unforgivable political sin. 
And I think it’s high time for the Saskatchewan people to go on 
the attack against this PC government and to let them know that 
they are as good as gone, that they are dust, that they have 
committed the unforgivable political sin in attacking medicare 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  . . . and that the Saskatchewan people will, 
ever under any circumstances re-elect them to govern the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Speaker, I want to share just very briefly, 
in conclusion, a story garnered from personal experience in 
going door to door during the recent by-elections in Elphinstone 
and Eastview. 
 
I went up to a door and met a man of about 55 year of age who 
wanted me to know about the importance of the medicare 
system to him personally. So concerned was he that I 
understand his predicament and his past year’s battle with 
cancer that he led me through the back door, through the 
kitchen and into the living room, and showed me a little table, a 
TV tray, where he had arrayed 25 to 30 plastic vials where his 
medication was kept. 
 
As he showed me his medication and talked about his 
circumstances, he related the story of going to get a prescription 
for himself and standing in line behind a very elderly gentleman 
of about 75 years of age who, when he presented his 
prescription and learned that it cost $15, looked into his own 
wallet to find out that there was only $10. The elderly 
gentleman was wheezing and coughing, about to collapse; he 
told the druggist that he didn’t have the extra $5 and turned to 
leave. and this gentleman who related this story said that he 
then went into his own pocket and paid the extra $5 for that 
elderly gentleman. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

854 
 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I say that story is a condemnation 
of every member opposite in this government. And so I would 
like to move, seconded by Kim Trew, that this  by the 
member for Regina North: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its failure to resolve the farm debt crisis 
facing thousands of Saskatchewan farm families, and its 
betrayal of Saskatchewan families by its attacks on 
medicare, its underfunding of education services for 
Saskatchewan young people, and its unfair tax increases. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to second 
this motion condemning the government for failing 
Saskatchewan people in these times of desperation. 
 
Farm debt, Mr. Speaker, is well over double what it was in 1982 
when the government opposite took office. It now totals nearly 
$7 billion. This affects tens of thousands of Saskatchewan farm 
families who face this debt crisis daily. 
 
For the least unfortunate, the farm debt crisis simply means that 
farm management decisions are dictated by cash flow or, put 
another way, dictated by their lack of cash flow, and they can’t 
afford many of the inputs they need to run their farm effectively 
and to manage their farm in a manner that they can maximize 
production and maximize profits. For the more unfortunate 
farmers, the government simply has nothing at all to offer. 
Nothing. No solution, no ideas, and certainly no hope. 
 
The two central issues, Mr. Speaker, facing our farming 
community are low commodity prices and high debt, as I’ve 
just outlined. In the recent budget, neither of these concerns are 
addressed. There’s nothing in the budget for Saskatchewan 
agriculture, nothing for rural communities, and nothing for 
Saskatchewan families. Instead of showing understanding for 
our farmers during their difficult times, the PC government has 
betrayed them, cut their services, and aggravated the farm debt 
which has more than doubled under their stewardship. 
 
Let’s review the previous commitment to Saskatchewan farm 
families. This government has a cut in the budget of the 
Department of Agriculture of 25 per cent; it’s eliminated the 
property improvement grant; it slashed the farm fuel rebate 
from 21 cents to nine cents per gallon; it’s phased out the land 
purchase program; it’s phasing out all provincial funding for 
agriculture fairs and exhibitions. That funding has very long 
standing throughout rural Saskatchewan, and many, many 
people are very upset with that particular cut. 
 
It’s been cancelling travel grants and clinic operation grants for 
veterinarians, and it’s cancelling grants to the University of 
Saskatchewan for feed testing and soil testing. Instead of 
devising a good, common sense agricultural strategy, this 
government continues to advance harmful and foolhardy 
practices. 
 

Rural people really want to know why there’s no increase at all 
for revenue sharing for rural municipalities, yet again; and the 
Highway’s budget is nothing more than a cruel joke. They boast 
about the $110 million being spent on highways  
maintenance and upgrading  and they fail to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, to come clean and say that is less than the last 
budget that was presented to this legislature before they took 
office, and it’s now six years later and they’re still spending 
less. 
 
And the facts, Mr. Speaker, speak far louder than words. 
Despite all the grand rhetoric about these millions of dollars 
spent on highways, the hard truth, according to the Minister of 
Highways, is there’s 85 kilometres fewer roads being repaired 
this year than there was last year. 
 
The school-based dental services for rural families was 
eliminated last year, and it’s not even mentioned this year. 
 
But perhaps the biggest betrayal of all is the government having 
broken faith with Saskatchewan farm families when they 
unexpectedly  and, I might say, unfairly  changed the rules 
of the farm production loan program. Nearly 58,000 farm 
families have been double-crossed, double-crossed by this PC 
government, when they changed the rules in mid-stream. They 
found that the government’s 1985 promise of “hassle-free cash” 
was nothing more than a hollow promise, and it certainly now 
adds to the growing list of broken promises. 
 
It was an opportunity for the PC government to show some 
understanding and common sense in keeping farm families on 
their land, and they didn’t do it. They offered, instead, farmers 
an extended 10-year repayment plan, but at a higher interest rate 
 nine and three-quarters per cent instead of the 6 per cent  
and the only way farmers would qualify for it, Mr. Speaker, is if 
they signed over all of their personal assets so that the first 
claim on all of this property, including personal assets, goes to 
the government. 
 
Farmers were caught over a barrel. Many of them had simply 
no choice but to sign the agreement and hope for better times, 
hope for change in government, hope for some new ideas and 
some solutions so they can get on with doing what they do best 
 that putting the crop in the ground and husbanding that crop 
right through to harvest, being amongst the best farmers in the 
world. That’s what Saskatchewan farmers are; that’s what they 
want an opportunity to do. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers no longer wonder why the Premier and 
his caucus suffer from a huge credibility gap. They found out 
that the PC government believes in double standards. This 
government has demanded the last collateral that farmers have 
on the face of the earth, plus all their future interests. But it 
doesn’t ask a penny in security from the wealthy or from large 
corporations or from it’s political friends. 
 
Alberta millionaire Peter Pocklington gets a gift of $22 million 
from this government, and 10 million of that is a pure gift  10 
million is a pure gift. the Weyerhaeuser corporation can skip 
payments on its quarter of a billion,  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

855 
 

or $248 million loan, any year it doesn’t make a profit. 
 
It’s simply, Mr. Speaker, a question of priorities, simply 
priorities. Saskatchewan farm families are in a crisis today, a 
financial and an economic crisis and a mounting debt crisis. 
And all this government’s come up with are vague ideas  
equity financing they call it  which brings back nothing more 
than tenant farmers and absentee landlords. That’s really some 
commitment. 
 
In the throne speech we learned that, and I quote, “farm debt is 
of crisis proportions.” Then it went on to say, and again I quote: 
 

 . . . people in Saskatchewan have learned to live with 
adversity. The tough times come and the tough times pass 
. . . 

 
Some comfort, Mr. Speaker, some comfort. 
 
This PC government has offered farm families no help and no 
ideas, no solutions, and certainly no hope. It’s turned its back 
on them, and that is a shame. 
 
Saskatchewan farm families, Mr. Speaker, expected more. The 
government instead has delivered a farm debt that has more 
than doubled in their six years. As I’ve mentioned, no solutions, 
no ideas, and no hope. 
 
The Conservative attacks on medicare, as mentioned by the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland just previously, are seen 
through daily. We see things like the prescription drug plan 
changes; loss of school-based children’s dental plan; 15,000 
people on the waiting lists for hospital surgery between 
Saskatoon and Regina; we continue to suffer cuts in education 
services offered at all levels; and massive tax increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to second this motion condemning the 
government for its failures in these important areas to the 
people of Saskatchewan. This government is clearly turning its 
back on Saskatchewan farmers. It has totally failed to resolve 
the farm debt crisis. It offers no ideas, no solution, and no hope. 
It has betrayed Saskatchewan families by attacking medicare 
and underfunding education services, and it has delivered 
massive tax increases, so that if you have an income of $25,000, 
you pay $1,500 more today than you did six years ago. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great honour for me to second this 
motion condemning this callous and careless and uncaring, 
bankrupt government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Martin:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really enjoy being 
up here today after the announcement by the Minister of Public 
Participation on the $30.5 million from Weyerhaeuser. Mr. 
Speaker, over the next 20 months we’re going to have 
something like $60 million from Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Weyerhaeuser  I should remind the people again out in 
television that this was a plant in Prince Albert that was losing 
$91,000 a day. And the opposition, the NDP, said  

we would never . . . you could never make it work. The reason 
of course they opposed it, because they didn’t have the smarts 
to put the deal together. 
 
(1515) 
 
The Minister of Health  and I congratulate him on that  
when he was the minister in charge of government Forest 
Products, put the deal together to sell PAPCO to the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation of Canada, who have offices in 
Kamloops and other parts around the country. And so it’s a 
pleasure for me to congratulate them on that announcement 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to participate in this 
debate and to condemn the NDP for introducing such a 
time-wasting and foolish resolution. 
 
For 10 long years, NDP years, they betrayed the farmers of this 
province. For 10 long years the NDP neglected our health care 
system. And in the last, since 1982, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has increased health spending 63 per cent. Today 
we spend $1.2 billion a year on health, and it may be the largest 
per capita in the country. If it isn’t, it’s second only to Alberta. 
The people of this province are well served by the health care 
system. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure in the last few weeks to attend the opening 
of many dental clinics around the province, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s a real pleasure to go to these because often, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re held in, say, the Legion hall or the local hall. The other 
day I was out at Wawota  talked to some of the people at 
Wawota for the opening of the dental clinic out there. 
 
The dentist is coming up from Carlyle and will service the 
community of Wawota for their dental needs. And he’s not just 
servicing the children  he is indeed servicing the children, a 
professional dentist servicing the children, free dental care of 
course for the children  but he also will service all the people 
of the community. The elderly people, the senior citizens, and 
the farmers, and everybody in the area now have a dentist at 
their disposal in Wawota. That is progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, instead of servicing . . . instead of providing 
dental care in the rural areas to, say, 160,000 students, that is 
young people, we’re now servicing probably . . . well in the 
neighbourhood of a million people will have access to dental 
care throughout this province as a result of this initiative. So 
rather than look after 160,000 youngsters who go to school, the 
entire population will have access to a dentist, will be within 
miles of dentist. That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We made a commitment to rural people of this province to 
provide dental care to them, Mr. Speaker, and indeed we’re 
doing it. Every day, every week, we’re opening more and more 
dental clinics around this province  Cut Knife, Wawota, all 
over the province, something like 30. 
 
So the people of this province know that dentists will be 
available to them in rural Saskatchewan, not just in the cities 
that the members of the opposition are concerned about. They 
don’t care about the people of the rural, and  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

856 
 

history points that out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those in opposition have the nerve, such utter 
contempt, to the people of Saskatchewan that they’ve 
introduced a self-serving an sanctimonious resolution that we’re 
debating here today. The arrogance of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, 
knows no bounds. 
 
But don’t make no mistake about it, the people of this province 
are on to them and have been for quite a few years. For 10 years 
Saskatchewan’s NDP administration looked on farmers as 
tenants like they do in other socialist states. The land bank was 
the order of the day, state ownership of farms took priority over 
the family farm. The family of crown corporations was 
honoured by the NDP while the family farm was neglected. 
 
And when double-digit inflation hit in the late 1970s and part of 
1982, the NDP administration sat back and let Saskatchewan 
farmers sink into debt. And we’re suffering that today, Mr. 
Speaker. All you have to do is look at the other side of the 
assembly, there are virtually no rural members in the NDP 
opposition caucus, and for good reason. The farmers in the rural 
communities know who supports them and in turn they support 
our Premier because they know that he’s a man that goes to bat 
for them, whether it be internationally, nationally or locally, and 
has proven that for the last few years. 
 
The farmers of Saskatchewan rejected the NDP in two elections 
and they will do so in the future, my friends, they will do so in 
the future. The Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative 
government has earned the trust of farmers because of our solid 
commitment to agriculture. 
 
And we will see that today, Mr. Speaker, when the results of the 
Manitoba election come in, how the farmers of rural Manitoba 
feel about the NDP, because the NDP, whether in Manitoba, 
whether in Alberta, whether in B.C. or kingdom-come, are all 
the same. No new ideas. It’s the same old story, the same old 
socialist ideas that everybody in the world is throwing out. And 
by the way, when the NDP are thrown out of Manitoba today, 
that’ll be the last socialist state in North American and good 
riddance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Martin:  Our Premier and agriculture minister has 
shown great leadership in protecting farmers in these difficult 
times and they know it. Our Premier has been at the forefront of 
backing farmers all the way. Every budget since 1982 has 
contained effective measures, protective measures, for our 
farming community; to strengthen our farming sector and 
current budget, for example, contains such pro-farm measures 
as $30 million for agricultural development fund, extended 
repayment option for the production loan program, and 
maintenance of the farm oil royalty rebate program. As I said, 
Mr. Speaker, this government is vigorously defending farmer 
on all fronts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me talk for a moment about the health care. 
The respected Justice Emmett Hall in a report on medicare 
stated that when the NDP were in office here in Saskatchewan, 
the NDP allowed Saskatchewan’s health  

care to become the third worst in Canada. Respected Justice 
Emmett hall in his report said that the NDP government, 
through the ‘70s into the early ’80s, allowed Saskatchewan’s 
health care to become the third worst in Canada. Health care 
suffered under the NDP despite their sanctimonious statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care in the NDP years were years of neglect 
and the people of this province know it. In this legislature in the 
opposition are two member who once served as NDP health 
members. I remind them of their shameful conduct, their 
shameful neglect of the health care system. I remind those 
opposite that it was the NDP that refused to take off extra 
billing on health care. I remind the NDP that it was the, they, 
who put a freeze on nursing home construction in this province. 
The NDP put a moratorium on nursing home construction in 
this province. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been the privilege and the 
responsibility of this government to create in the neighbourhood 
of 12 to 1,500 new special care home beds throughout this 
province. And the people living in those homes, the elderly 
people of this province, know who has done the work for them. 
 
And I think of my constituency, Regina Wascana, when I go out 
and ride my bike through this park, and I ride right by the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre. I’m reminded of a story that an 
elderly farmer once told me just a few years ago when he used 
to come and visit his wife who then was in the Wascana home 
care centre, which when I was a boy growing up in this area 
was a reform school. The NDP turned it into a nursing home. 
And he drove up there one day to visit his invalid wife in the 
Wascana home care, the small little building that it was then, 
and he sat there in his truck waiting for his wife to come out 
and he looked across the field and he saw the Tommy Douglas 
building that . . . I mean it’s a magnificent building, but he 
thought to himself, this is what the NDP stand for. The NDP 
stand for building buildings of a . . . magnificent buildings for 
their employees, the people they put into positions, and they 
neglect the sick as you sat out by the Wascana Rehabilitation 
Centre. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we will be opening the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre, a $65 million project in this province, 
one of the finest rehabilitation institutes in North America. And 
I hope that the NDP will be there, particularly the members 
from Regina, would be there with me and the Minister of 
Health and the premier when we take great joy for accepting the 
responsibility of looking after the people in this province who 
need rehabilitation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we built a health care system that is a model of 
excellence. We can take pride in the fact that this government 
has increased health spending by a record 68 per cent in the last 
six years. We are equally proud of the fact that since a 
Progressive Conservative government came into office, 
Saskatchewan’s health care budget is at its highest in history. 
 
As an aside, I remind the Assembly that in a speech to the 
Canadian Hospital Association, the leader of the Opposition, 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Time has expired. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

857 
 

Mr. Koskie:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member that just spoke 
indicated that speaking and addressing this vital concern was a 
waste of time. And having listened to him for 10 minutes, I can 
assure you that he did waste our time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie:  In this province here, I say, Mr. Speaker, there 
is a major crisis facing Saskatchewan, not on one front alone, as 
I indicated the other day, but on two fronts. 
 
And the first front, the crisis in agriculture, as I indicated, in 
their own report they indicate that we’re losing farmer after 
farmer in rural Saskatchewan, and we’re depleting our young 
farmers. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that evidence indicates that 
this government has absolutely refused to address this crisis in 
agriculture. 
 
And I look in the Star-Phoenix, and I see an article indicating 
what’s going on throughout this province. “This farm family’s 
dream is sadly over.” And in the picture on the report there is a 
young couple with four young children. Their dream is over; 
their farm is gone. And this government sits by idly as they give 
off money to the oil companies and allow our farmers to go 
bankrupt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated last day that in this province the 
farmers of Saskatchewan have a debt of over $6 billion. We 
indicated that the chartered banks is about 1.6 billion  this is 
the end of ’86; federal government, 1.5 billion; provincial 
government, 1.5; credit union, 0.9 billion; and others, 4 billion. 
 
This is a staggering debt that has been laid on the backs of the 
farmers of Saskatchewan and this government stands idly by 
and indicates that it can no longer address the problem because 
the problem is too big for its treasury. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, it wasn’t too big a problem when it came to 
feeding Peter Pocklington $22 million. It wasn’t too big a 
problem when it comes to the Pioneer Trust bail-out. They had 
lost of money then. It wasn’t too big a problem when they gave 
$1.7 billion to the oil companies from ’82 to ’86. They had lots 
of money. But when it comes to protecting family farms, this 
government says, it’s too big a problem. 
 
And worst of all, they won’t even go to their friend, Brian 
Mulroney, the Prime Minister, and ask him to participate in a 
program of restructuring the debt, saving the family farms, 
saving a generation of young farmers. As a wheat pool 
representative said the other day, unless some drastic action is 
taken immediately, what we’re going to do is to lose many of 
our young farmers, and as a consequence we’re going to be set 
back for 10 to 15 years with very few young farmers. 
 
And the statistics indicate that the number of young farmers 
have drastically decreased on the farms from 1981 to ’86, those 
under 35 years of age. Those were the new generation farmers. 
And this government has stood by idly and refused to assist the 
debt crisis. But what is worse, Mr. Speaker, when you take a 
look at the management of this province, you see that not only 
the farmers are not getting help, you see that this government 

is attacking ordinary people across this province. 
 
Because of its fiscal mismanagement, this province now has 
accumulative debt of $11.8 billion dollars. Just the 
Consolidated Fund alone is $3.7 billion. And the service of debt 
is $330 million, that’s almost $1 million a day just the to service 
debt. And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that represents 
a tax on the people of Saskatchewan  those are taxes. 
 
When this government took the credit card of the people of 
Saskatchewan and racked up millions of dollars, billions of 
dollars of debt, they did it to elect themselves but not to correct 
the problems facing society. 
 
And today, besides having this massive debt of $3.7 billion, 
$11.8 billion, they stand up in this legislature and to say to the 
people of this Saskatchewan: we are doing such a good job; 
Weyerhaeuser made a flock of money; everything is growing in 
Saskatchewan; privatization is working. Well it’s working, it’s 
working in reverse, because the people of Saskatchewan are 
getting nothing and the big corporations are taking the golden 
egg. 
 
(1530) 
 
But take a look at not only this massive debt that they’ve placed 
on this generation and future generations, just take a look at the 
direct taxes that people are paying at the present time. In the last 
two years, they increased the flat tax, they increased the E&H 
tax, they increased the gas tax. 
 
Last year alone, in the budget brought down by this 
government, $265 million of extra tax. And this year, that 
wasn’t enough. They said, we pour it to them again. And to the 
ordinary citizens and the business community of Saskatchewan, 
the small-business man and the working man and the farmer, 
they said, we’ll get more tax out of them. And this year they 
increased the flat tax again  $51 million. And they increased 
the tobacco tax  $70 million added on to the tax bill of 
ordinary Saskatchewan people. In two years the cumulative 
increase in taxes was $330 million laid on the backs of ordinary 
Saskatchewan people  tax increases. 
 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, that when we take a look at our income 
tax, we have a dual income tax. We have the ordinary income 
tax we pay, and then in their tax reform they laid on a flat tax. 
So we have virtually two income taxes. And today, when we 
compare our personal income tax in this province with the rest 
of Canada, we find at 35,000 we have the second highest 
income tax rate in all of Canada. So we’re going to become 
number one. Another budget and I’ll tell you, we’ll be number 
one. We’ll be the highest personal income tax in Canada. 
 
But they have already attained a number one. We are now the 
. . . have the highest per capita debt in all of Canada. Quite an 
achievement. Quite an achievement by this government  to 
take us from virtually the lowest per capita debt when they took 
over, with $140 million surplus and 11 balanced budgets. They 
have placed on the burdens of this province $11.8 billion  the 
highest per capita debt in all of Canada. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

858 
 

An Hon. Member:  Not true. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  It is true. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
contrast that with what they did for their friends. They have 
some friends, but they’re very few. While they have a couple 
. . . They have corporations, and while they’re placing an 
increased tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan, they 
decided that they would cut the corporate income tax from 17 to 
15 per cent. That cost them about $8 million  a cut of $8 
million. 
 
No money for the farmers, they say, but they could accordingly 
turn over and give to the corporations an actual cut in the 
income tax. 
 
And then the other aspect, they said that we had a few more 
friends out there. We got, oh, the oil companies, and we got 
some of the potash companies, and what we can decide here in 
this budget, what we will do is also give them a resource royalty 
decrease  a resource royalty decrease at a time when they 
can’t give drugs to our seniors. When they took away the dental 
program from our young people, they say to the corporations, 
we’re going to give you a tax cut. At a time when they can’t 
help the farmers, they say, we’ll give a cut in the corporate 
income tax and to the royalties. 
 
The total amount of tax cut this year in this budget was over 
$30 million to the big corporations  $30 million cut, and they 
say to the young children, we can’t supply . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I must inform the 
member that his time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martin:  Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to 
introduce our guests in your gallery and in the west gallery. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martin:  Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, rather. It 
is my pleasure to introduce the other half of the students from 
across Canada and the two territories. Earlier today I introduced 
120; I understand there’s 109 here right now, and they are with 
Allan Christiansen, who is a teacher at Luther, and one of the 
many teachers involved in this program, the Interchange on 
Canadian Studies. 
 
And just to reiterate what I said before, these are grade 11 
students who are here from the 10 provinces and the two 
territories; they are here taking part in the interchange of 
Canadian studies. The theme for this interchange, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the disappearing 49th, or the focus on the free trade 
debate. 
 
And I notice they’ve had their tour, I believe. The other group 
had an opportunity to meet with several members to talk about 
ideas in this province, and I’ll have the pleasure, along with the 
Minister of Environment, to meet these students, I suppose in 
15 or 20 minutes or so, to talk  

about some of the issues. So, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, rather, would the members please welcome our 
students from across the country and the two territories. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
also welcome the students here today on behalf of the official 
opposition of the province of Saskatchewan, Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition. 
 
I had the opportunity to speak with some of the students earlier 
on, and I would like to welcome, in particular, one of the 
students here, a Miss Battiste, who comes from my home town 
of Pictou, Nova Scotia. Actually she’s from Lyons’ Brook, 
which is a well-known suburb of Pictou, Nova Scotia. And I’d 
like to welcome Miss Battiste and all the other students here to 
Saskatchewan. I hope they enjoy their stay here. I hope they 
find their stay informative, educational and fun. And welcome 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Government Inaction in Solving Problems Faced by 
Saskatchewan Families (continued) 

 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an honour to 
stand here today to debate this motion presented by the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland. I trust that our guests will enjoy the 
proceedings as we debate here this afternoon. I also trust that 
the . . . or ask that the Saskatchewan people take very special 
care and listen intently as we discus this motion, because the 
motion that is presented here today is talking about, in the 
opposition’s word, failure. 
 
They’ve been discussing, supposedly, many failures by this 
government. They talk about failure in agriculture and in 
addressing the challenge of the farm debt problem. They say 
there’s failure in the medicare policy and failure in education. 
 
And as I speak this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just 
like to point out to the people of this province some of the 
failures that the members opposite had when they were a 
government  and that is specifically why they are sitting on 
the opposition benches at this time  and also let them know 
what this government has done for this province and for the 
people of this province. 
 
Let us make a quick list of some of the most profound failures 
these issues have ever experienced in the history of any 
province in Canada. Mr. Speaker, I assert that the land bank 
was a colossal failure in its phoney attempt to deal with farm 
debt. And it doesn’t matter where you go in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you will find many farmers and many people 
who became very annoyed when the land bank system came 
into being and complained for many years about the ploy that 
was by the government in order to gain their support and 
respect. 
 
It is evident to all that the policy of no protection from 
exorbitant interest rates was a failure of the first  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

859 
 

magnitude in a pretence of concern for farm families. It is clear, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the failure of the members opposite 
regarding this policy area continues to this day. 
 
What have we heard so far in addressing the farm debt issue? 
What policies have been put forward that would be specific, 
that would indeed reach out to the needs of the farm families of 
this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I haven’t really heard anything positive. They 
have failed consistently, repeatedly, and without hesitation they 
have failed to provide one suggestion, one suggestion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, one hint, even one allusion to a policy in 
agriculture. 
 
And I have to relate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a story that 
one of my constituents told me recently. This constituent 
happened to be viewing some of the proceedings when he was 
in the city, and was very disturbed and very annoyed with the 
way the Leader of the Opposition carried on in this House. 
 
He said he was really concerned, he was really concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, because he believes that what the opposition is doing 
is setting up the farm families of this province for another land 
bank. Farm families in my constituency, when I’m out talking 
to farmers they’re saying, what are you doing about the land 
bank? Are you going to let it continue to simmer there so that 
down the road we may face it again? This person thinks  and 
I say with some justification  he thinks that the opposition are 
hoping that the farm debt situation gets worse and worse. 
 
And you wonder why would he think that. He thinks that with 
all of their talk about the banks while their own leader is out 
foreclosing on farm families, that the opposition will then come 
forward and say, aha! now they’re ready for it, they’re ready for 
another land bank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is not interested in owning land. 
This government is interested in putting the land back in the 
hands of the farmers and the individuals . . . of the individual 
farm families of this province whom we feel can have better 
managed the resource of farming in this province. 
 
We have also witnessed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a deeply 
dangerous failure. It is the failure of the Leader of the 
Opposition to disown the land bank; to say, even come out and 
openly say that the land bank will never again be part of 
Saskatchewan policy under any government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has brought out the fact that they 
say we have failed in the area of medicare and health services in 
this province. Let me just say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 
1982 to 1987 this province has seen an increase from $750 
million to $1.29 billion in health care spending  a substantial 
increase  some 67, 63 or 67 per cent increase in health care 
spending in this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I would invite the members opposite to come out and see what 
has transpired in the constituency of Moosomin; come out to 
the community of Whitewood and area where they were asking, 
for a number of years, for a  

nursing home  or the community of Wawota  two 
communities that have nursing homes today. 
 
And I realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that even though we have 
spent a lot of dollars in the area of health care, even though we 
have spent a lot of dollars in building nursing homes, we are 
aware on this side of the House that there is still a great need for 
more spending. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say to you that this 
government will continue to reach out to meet the needs of the 
people of this province as the dollars are available. We will 
continue to put health care as a priority. 
 
I find it very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people 
within this city, even members opposite representing 
constituencies in the city of Regina, would be able to drive 
around Regina, or maybe go visit a friend or someone in the 
hospital that they know, be able to drive up to the Regina 
general or the Regina Pasqua hospitals and say to the people of 
this province that the Conservative government has not spent 
any money on medicare, has not spent any money on health in 
this province. Regina General, the Pasqua, Wascana Rehab 
Centre  three locations that have seen substantial funding 
increases in spending by this government. 
 
Now why would we spend money just to build a building? 
We’re spending it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we believe the 
people of this province need the facilities, to reach out to meet 
their needs, their needs in health care. 
 
As well, not only did we receive spending and increases in 
health care spending in our constituency in the area of home 
care and care home construction, but I find, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I drive down Parliament Avenue, just before you 
get on the Lewvan Expressway, what do we have sitting to our 
left? A brand-new expansion to the Santa Maria nursing home. 
Drive down Victoria Avenue. What do we see on Victoria 
Avenue? An expansion to the Lutheran care home there for 
seniors. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest that those aren’t dollars being 
wasted; those are dollars being well spent, because people and 
seniors across this province expect this government to reach out 
and help them in their time of need. 
 
But I’ve also found, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are many, 
many seniors in this province, as well, who aren’t expecting the 
government just to do everything for them. Many people in my 
constituency have said, you know, I’ve gone through the ‘30s; 
my family went through he ‘30s; we knew what it was to 
struggle; we knew what it was to not have two nickels to rub 
together; we appreciate the fact that this government cares and 
that this government is willing to build the facilities and put the 
dollars into health care spending so that we can enjoy a healthy 
life. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we can see in the area of education the 
dollars spent in education, the construction of new schools 
across our province, the enhancement of schools, the increase in 
curriculum, the increases in  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

860 
 

spending for teachers’ salaries and new facilities to reach out to 
the needs of the teenagers and young people across this 
province. 
 
One other area I would like to come back to, Mr. Speaker, just 
before I sit down and conclude my remarks. An area that I 
meant to bring up today regarding health care spending was the 
assertion by the opposition, when they were in government, and 
the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, Mr. Speaker, when he 
was Health minister  the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, 
when he was Health minister . . . the members opposite talked 
about a waiting list when they were . . . pardon me, Saskatoon 
South. The members opposite talked about, when they were 
questioned about a waiting list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker:  Order, please. The member’s time 
has expired. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is interesting that 
the member from Moosomin raised today the question of health 
care spending in Santa Maria senior citizens’ home. 
 
I have a little story to relate to the member from Moosomin. I 
met last night with two employees of Santa Maria Nursing 
Home, and they were telling me that this government, in 
making the addition to Santa Maria, had some choices that they 
had to make, and the choices were between spending money on 
two silk trees  two silk trees  trees which are not real but 
which are made of silk and which cost $6,000 each  $12,000 
for fake, silk trees. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the employees at Santa Maria asked for a Lowry 
lift  a lift to help elderly patients out of their beds so that they 
could take them for baths and they could take them out and put 
them in wheelchairs  they were told there’s not enough 
money coming from the government  $12,000 for silk trees at 
Santa Maria, but no lifts to help elderly patients. That’s the kind 
of priorities that the members opposite put in health care. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to speak about health 
care today. Other members have done it on this side of the 
House and are doing an admirable job. I’d like to speak, though, 
a little bit about agriculture. 
 
This government has consistently said they are the saviours of 
the family farm; they are the saviours of farm families; they are 
the ones who are going to solve the crisis in agriculture. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have been saying this 
since April of 1982, and they said it in April of 1983, and they 
said it again in April of 1984, and they said it in April 1985, and 
in 1986 and in 1987. And here it is April 1988, and are the 
problems in agriculture facing the farm families, facing rural 
Saskatchewan solved? The answer to that is evident, by their 
own admission; the answer to that is evident, by their own 
admission; the answer to that is no. The problems of agriculture 
are not solved and they have not been dealt with, they have not 
been dealt with, despite the rhetoric of the government  

opposite. 
 
You know, the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and for 
farmers in Saskatchewan that eating has been pretty poor, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; it’s been pretty poor indeed. 
 
But let’s just take a look. What are some of the problems? Well 
for all of Saskatchewan, urban and rural, one of the major 
problems is farm depopulation. Because as farmers and farm 
families, and as people who live in rural Saskatchewan leave, 
that means that rural Saskatchewan is worse off, and we here 
who live in the urban areas become worse off. 
 
Have the Conservatives dealt with the problem of farm 
depopulation, of rural depopulation? The answer to that is no. 
As my colleague from Quill Lake so ably pointed out, 1,000 
farm families a year, 1,000 farm families a year leave the farm 
to drift who knows where  some into the cities, some out of 
the province, some out of the country. A thousand farm families 
under the PC government of this province have left. They have 
not dealt with the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan. There 
was a problem that they could have done something to try to 
solve; there was a problem that they failed to deal with. 
 
But let’s look at another problem facing Saskatchewan  all of 
Saskatchewan and all of the people of Saskatchewan  and 
that’s the farm debt problem. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that problem 
is not only a problem of farm families; that is a problem of all 
families in Saskatchewan, because it is destroying the very 
social fabric of this province. It is ripping apart the heritage, 
tradition, and history of this province. It is the problem, the key 
problem, which faces the economic movers and shakers and 
policy makers of this province, and they have failed to deal with 
it. 
 
Far from failing to help alleviate the problem of farm debt, they 
have added to the problem. Farm debt in agriculture in this 
province has gone from $3 billion to over $6 billion  over 
double. That problem has doubled under this government. 
 
Have they dealt with the problem? They have dealt with it. 
They have dealt with it by doubling the problem. They have 
dealt with it by doubling the problem; for example, by adding 
$1 billion of farm debt onto the backs of farmers through their 
foolhardy production loan program  a program which 
promised hassle-free cash for farmers, and now which is 
promising farmers nothing more than the chance of losing the 
family farm. 
 
Did they deal with the question of farm debt? Yes, they did. 
They didn’t solve the problem; they added to it, and the proof of 
the pudding is in the eating. They did nothing to deal with that 
problem except add more problems to the backs of family 
farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Did they deal with the problem of the cost-price squeeze, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? That was a problem that was around in 1982, 
and it was around in 1983 and ’84 and up until today, and they 
had an opportunity to deal with that problem. They had an 
opportunity given to them twice by the people of Saskatchewan. 
They were mandated to deal with that problem which is adding 
to the farm debt, which  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

861 
 

is adding to rural depopulation. They were given the 
opportunity to deal with that problem, and they failed to do so. 
 
The same can be said of generational transfer and the problems 
of passing the farm from one generation to the next generation. 
Did they come up with any kind of solution to deal with that 
problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And the answer to that is no. 
Now that’s not quite right. They came up with the farm 
financing equity scheme, a hare-brained scheme rejected by 
farmers throughout Saskatchewan, a scheme which does 
nothing to solve the problems of intergenerational transfer, 
which has been rejected by farmers, as I’ve said. They had the 
opportunity, and they squandered that opportunity over the last 
six years. 
 
We are faced with a drought in this province. Farmers in the 
south part of the province are faced with a drought. Have they 
come up with an emergency relief program? No, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they haven’t even dealt with the problems that are 
facing them immediately. 
 
But what could they have done? The member for Moosomin 
says, well you raise the problems, but you’re negative. I want to 
tell them, I want to tell the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
some of the things they could have done. 
 
They could have pushed on a national level for a national parity 
pricing program which would have guaranteed farmers the cost 
of production, plus guaranteed them a fair rate of return. And 
we saw the spectacle in the House the other day, they member 
from Yorkton getting up and talking about agriculture. But not 
once did he mention support for the concept of parity pricing  
something which would have guaranteed farmers a long-term 
solution to the farm debt problem, along-term solution to the 
cash flow problem on the farms. And that’s the long-term 
solution. 
 
In the short term, and in terms of measures which this 
government could have done, there were a number of things 
they could have done. They could have introduced a 
moratorium on farm foreclosures. They could have gone to the 
banks and the credit unions and the agricultural credit 
corporation, the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation), and they could 
have said: There will be no more farm foreclosures in this 
province until we’ve got the long-term solution in place; we 
will place a moratorium on farm foreclosures so that not one 
more farm family in this province leaves the land. They could 
have done that; they had the opportunity, and they didn’t do it. 
 
They could have said, we’re going to place a moratorium on 
farm debt for those farmers who are facing financial difficulty, 
for those farmers who are near the point of being foreclosed and 
being pushed off the land. They could have said: we want you 
to give them a breathing space; we don’t want you to charge 
them any principal and we don’t want you to charge them any 
interest; we want to put a moratorium on there until we’ve got 
the long-term solution in place, so that farmers can be provided 
with a guaranteed cash flow and so that farmers can get out 
from under the debt load which is crushing the  

life-blood out of agriculture here in Saskatchewan. They had 
the opportunity to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker; they failed to 
do so. 
 
Six squandered years, six squandered years. The problems are 
there. Everyone knows the problems  they’re as plain as the 
nose on all our faces and they have failed to deal with them. 
They have failed to solve those problems and that, Mr. Speaker, 
that is the proof of the pudding. They can talk all they want 
about protecting the family farm, but when faced with realistic 
solutions when faced with alternatives, which may challenge, 
which may challenge some of the notions . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Time has expired. 
 
Mr. Gleim  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure to 
be able to stand here and debate this motion. 
 
I just listened to the member from Quill Lakes saying there’s no 
money for farmers. He should be the last person to say there’s 
no money for farmers. It wasn’t that government over there that 
helped when the interest rates were 23 and 24 per cent, it was 
this government right here. And they have the gall to stand up, 
there’s no money for farmers, and we didn’t help the farmers. 
 
It was that opposition across the way, when they were in power 
for 11 years, they lost 10,000 farmers in the good times and 
they’re talking about times when the economic times are a little 
tough  10,000 farmers in the good times. That’s pretty hard to 
swallow. 
 
The member from Rosemont stands up and speaks about 
agriculture. The first thing on his mind was moratoriums. I 
guess they know all about moratoriums. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Nursing homes. 
 
Mr. Gleim  Nursing homes. They were the ones that put the 
moratoriums on, it wasn’t this government here. 
 
If they want to talk about agriculture, they should maybe do a 
little studying. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Homework. 
 
Mr. Gleim  . . . homework, or whatever you want to call it, 
before they get up and talk about it. 
 
The member from Rosemont can speak from his chair and 
thinks that he knows about agriculture. I just hope he don’t 
come down in the south-west and talk about the drought down 
there, that’s there right now and give an example or has a 
solution, because he never said one thing about a solution. I 
never heard him say one thing we should be doing for a solution 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Moratorium is right. That’s all I 
heard was moratorium. You can leave now. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers, they won’t be fooled by your political 
tricks and the opposition across the way. The NDP has 
introduced a motion in this Assembly that is nothing more than 
a cheap political manoeuvre to score points at the expense of 
the farmers  at the expense of these farmers over here, there 
is none across the way. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

862 
 

The motion before us is a crass and a brazen move to use 
serious problems for farmers to gain political support. It is an 
insult to all the farmers and they will not be fooled by this 
motion. No, they won’t be fooled. 
 
All one has to do is look at the record of the NDP when they 
were in office. How did they treat the farmers? Do you 
remember? I remind this assembly, that it was the NDP who 
forced the land bank on farmers, state control on family farm. It 
was not this government, it was the NDP. 
 
(1600) 
 
In the early 1980s, prior to 1982, when farmers were faced with 
double digit inflation, when family farms were going under 
because of inflation, what was the response of the NDP here in 
Saskatchewan? Let me remind the Assembly what the NDP 
attitude was  probably still is  the NDP government of the 
day, including the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, has said 
there was nothing could be done; it was a federal matter. 
 
The NDP opposed interest rate protection plans for farmers. 
That is why in 1982 overwhelming majority of rural 
Saskatchewan threw them out of the office  threw them right 
out of the office. The NDP years were years of neglect for the 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, let us compare that to the record of 
protection programs for farmers that has been introduced since 
1982. The Saskatchewan conservative government knows how 
important the family farm is to our province. We know that 
farming is a traditional mainstay of our economy. When the 
Saskatchewan farmers suffer, we all suffer; when Saskatchewan 
farmers succeed, we all benefit. 
 
International grain wars, protectionism, high input costs  
these factors all hurt our farmers. These factors have meant 
depressed prices and income. Nobody has recognized that more 
than our Premier who happens to serve as government 
agricultural minister. The Premier has faced problems in 
agricultural with common sense, vision and leadership. Our 
Premier has done that to protect our farmers. Saskatchewan’s 
Premier has fought for farmers on international level where the 
biggest problems originate. On the national level, the Premier of 
our province has fought to ensure agriculture remains the 
forefront of federal agenda. 
 
Most important here in our own province, our Premier and the 
Conservative government has backed Saskatchewan farmers 
with many protective measures to help them weather the debt 
crisis. 
 
With advice from the farming community, this government has 
introduced the production loan program, which has provided 
over $1 billion in low interest rates to the farmers, a program 
which the opposition has criticized. It was not a program they 
put into effect; it was this government here that put it into 
effect; it was this government here that put it into effect. We 
extended it for one year on a three-year basis, then we extended 
it to 10 years. There’s nothing on that form says, as the member 
from Rosemont tried to  

indicate, that it was . . . they had to take it for 10 years. There’s 
nothing on there said they had to take it for 10 years, and as the 
record shows right now, most of them stayed with the 
three-year term and the ones that couldn’t handle it went to the 
10-year term. And they appreciate it. That was an option. 
 
The natural gas distribution program, which lowers energy costs 
of rural Saskatchewan, is another program. The livestock 
industry initiatives like cash advances, which provides $189 
million in operating money to farmers, that is a program that 
has helped the livestock industry in our province. It’s an 
industry that we never had before. It’s an industry that has 
grown from 12 per cent of our animals staying in the province 
and being fed out, to 55 per cent of this day. That is something I 
think the farmers and the agricultural sector really appreciates. 
And they stand up and talk about, we’re not doing anything for 
farmers. 
 
I remind the members of the Assembly that it was 
Saskatchewan’s Premier who led the way in bringing two major 
deficiency payments for western Canada from the federal 
government  another program criticized by the opposition, 
used political politics in it. I’ll tell you what, that was $2 billion 
that was brought here to western Canada. That’s $2 billion we 
wouldn’t have had if we’d have left it up to the opposition  
$2 billion they keep criticizing that farmers didn’t need . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Right on. Farmers will never forget 
that, as the farmers will continue to programs to assist the 
family farm. 
 
As a government we have reaffirmed our commitment to 
protect the family farm and extend counselling assistance for 
program by continuing farm land security board and by 
establish extended repayment option for the production loan, as 
I was saying. 
 
Two more programs, the counselling assistance program, which 
the people across the way laugh about. I noticed the member 
from away north laughed when I talked about the deficiency 
payment. I don’t think he probably even realized what it meant 
and what it meant to the people from the South and from 
southern south of him where he lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan farm community knows that 
this government which took leadership in addressing the farm 
problems financing, we sponsored a two-day symposium. A 
series of public meetings was held across the province. they 
were meetings that we went out and showed that we listened. 
The farmers in the agricultural sector, the business people 
appreciated that. It was something that we went out, we went 
and asked. 
 
We didn’t go out and do it something like the opposition did. 
They went out, they never asked me, they never asked anybody 
in here whether we wanted the land bank. Do you remember? 
They never asked anybody. They said, this is good for you; this 
is how we’re going to do it. Right. And that’s just how it went. 
 
That is one of the biggest things that we got when we were out 
on our financing tour. A lot of them maybe didn’t understand it, 
but they did appreciate that we were out  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

863 
 

there listening, that they could ask questions, meet on one to 
one, or whatever they wanted to do. We took this time on our 
own initiative to go out and listen, and that is something they 
did appreciate. 
 
Farmers will not take this . . . (inaudible) . . . that the NDP 
opposed all farm protection programs the Saskatchewan 
Progressive Conservative government initiated. In November 
and December, when we were out on our tour, people kept 
coming to us and saying, this has never ever happened before, 
that people come out and asked us. They came out and told us. 
We went out there and asked. That is the difference between 
this side and that side. 
 
We all know, for all of us know how little the NDP did for 
farmers in the years gone by. We all know their lack of policies 
for farmers. I want to bring to the attention of this Assembly an 
article from the Regina Leader-Post. It deals with the lack of 
NDP farm policy. 
 
Jim Knisley is the agricultural reporter for the Leader-Post, and 
with your permission, Mr. Speaker, I wish to quote what he 
wrote. The article reads as follows: 
 

Saskatchewan NDP leader said provincial Conservatives 
are employing a hands-off approach to agriculture. 

 
Hands-off approach . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. The time has expired. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 4  Effects of Changes in Health Care 
Services 
 
Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of 
my remarks, I will be moving a motion that: 
 

 . . . condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for 
undermining Saskatchewan health care services by 
altering the prescription drug program, abolishing the 
school-based children’s dental plan, and by allowing 
hospital waiting lists to reach alarming levels. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last year was the 25th anniversary of medicare, 
and it should have been  it should have been, Mr. Speaker  
a year of celebration for medicare. But instead what we saw was 
a year of destruction of our health care programs  destruction 
of our prescription drug program and destruction of our dental 
program, as well as other health care services. We saw a drastic 
deterioration of the health care system, and hospital waiting 
lists reaching unprecedented levels  all in the 25th 
anniversary of medicare in Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, built our medicare 
system, and they’re proud of it. They were leaders in North 
America and in Canada with our medicare system, and it’s one 
of their proudest achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

Ms. Simard:  It took the courage of Tommy Douglas and 
Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney, working with the people 
of this province, to build and expand medical care in 
Saskatchewan; but it took the short-sightedness of the PC Party 
and the PC government to attack medicare and undermine our 
health care programs in the province. 
 
The people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, believe that they 
have a right, they have a right, Mr. Speaker, to good, accessible, 
universal medical services. And that is the way we believe in 
Saskatchewan society and, I would suggest, even in Canadian 
society. And that’s a basic socialist principle, a good socialist 
principle, that medicare would be available to everyone, that 
you wouldn’t be entitled to health care on the basis of what 
income you have, as we are now seeing in the prescription drug 
program. 
 
We wish . . . As a socialist principle, it’s a principle whereby 
we can improve the quality of life of every man, woman, and 
child in this province by providing them with universal, 
comprehensive, accessible medical services. However, 
right-wing extremists, Mr. Speaker, would prefer to see our 
medical care system privatized or diminished, and they prefer to 
see corporations getting huge tax breaks, instead of ordinary 
men and women. And ordinary men and women are made to 
pay for those huge tax breaks and for a deterioration in public 
services. 
 
And that’s what we’re seeing in Saskatchewan today, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re seeing extremist policies that are destroying our 
medicare system, and policies that are moving our medicare 
system to the point where it will be available to those who can 
afford it, something like what we have in the United States right 
now. 
 
And I should point out that in the United States the cost of 
medical care is substantially higher per capita than it is in 
Saskatchewan, and there’s many, many, many thousands of 
people, tens of thousands of people in the United States who are 
not receiving medical attention, notwithstanding the fact that 
it’s costing more per capita. And that’s the right-wing agenda, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s the way we’re seeing this government 
move. 
 
The PC Party talks about deterrent fees, the need to impose 
deterrent fees, another aspect of the privatization of the health 
care system. 
 
And let’s just take a look at the free trade agreement which is 
another movement on behalf of the PC Party. The free trade 
agreement has a provision in it that allows for the privatization 
of the administration of hospitals and nursing homes. It allows 
for, I should say, free trade in the management of the hospital 
administration and nursing homes. And that is what the PC 
government is supporting, Mr. Speaker. And I suggest that that 
opens the door to American corporations coming in and 
managing our hospitals and our nursing homes. 
 
The dental plan is an example of the privatization policies of 
this government. The movement from our school-based dental 
plan to private dentists is a privatization of a highly successful, 
high quality dental plan that we had in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

864 
 

The government was hoping to save money on the dental plan 
inasmuch as they were hoping that school children would not 
use the plan. And I must admit that they have been met with 
some success because I am told that the utilization of the dental 
plan is about 30 per cent what it should be, when prior to the 
privatization of the dental plan, we had a much higher 
utilization. In fact, in Saskatchewan there was something like 
20 per cent more utilization of our Saskatchewan plan than 
other plans across Canada. 
 
(1615) 
 
The privatization of the dental plan is going to cost us 
substantially more in the end. It’s going to cost us more because 
children are not seeing dentists or dental therapists now, and 
somewhere down the line they’ll get cavities and then we’ll 
have to pay for that treatment whereas it could have been 
prevented. 
 
The dental plan is an excellent example, an excellent example 
of preventive medicine, Mr. Speaker, an example of preventive 
medicine that has been destroyed by this government because 
they have made it very difficult for school children to access the 
dental plan and utilization has fallen off substantially. 
 
Saskatchewan men and women know, Mr. Speaker, that health 
is an essential aspect of the quality of our lives, that it’s 
fundamental to our lives and it’s essential to maintain active, 
productive and independent lives. And Saskatchewan people 
want health care to be adequately funded and they’ve spoken 
loudly and clearly in that regard. 
 
And this vision is not a not a new vision. This vision of 
universal, comprehensive, accessible medical care is not a new 
vision. It was the vision of Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd 
and Allan Blakeney, and the vision of Saskatchewan men and 
women, and it is the vision of men and women in Saskatchewan 
today, Mr. Speaker. People still want comprehensive, universal, 
accessible medical care, and it’s the vision of the New 
Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, the government members are trying to spread the 
myth that medical care is too expensive. They’re telling the 
people of Saskatchewan it costs too much, notwithstanding the 
fact that privatized medical care in the United States costs more, 
they’re telling us our public plan costs too much. 
 
Well let’s just talk a bit about the myth of spiralling health care 
costs. The PC government has shifted many of its programs and 
expenditures out of other government departments and into the 
Department of Health, Mr. Speaker. In the budget, they’ve 
shifted spending out of some departments into the department 
of Health. 
 
Some examples are: continuing care, expenditures which used 
to be funded through Social Services; the minister’s salary, 
which used to be funded through Executive Council; and 
routine support services, which used to be funded through 
Supply and Services. And these transferred items now amount 
to more than about 240  

million per year. And these items have been transferred into 
Health, Mr. Speaker, to attempt to pad the Health budget and 
make the claim that health cost are spiralling. 
 
But when we make a straightforward, fair and accurate 
comparison, we see that Health expenditures counted for 26 per 
cent of the total government expenditures in the final three 
years o the New Democratic administration, and in the past 
three years of PC administration it is approximately the same. 
So there has been virtually no increase by this government in its 
percentage of the total budget with respect to Health 
expenditures when you make a fair and accurate comparison, 
Mr. Speaker, between what was being spent before and what is 
being spent now. 
 
So this myth of the spiralling costs of health care is being 
perpetrated by the government deliberately, so it can justify 
privatization of the drug program, privatization of the dental 
program, privatization of the management of nursing homes and 
hospitals, and who knows what other aspects of privatization 
they will engage in health care in the next year or two. 
 
But first of all, they want to attempt to convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that health care costs too much. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have been speaking to the people of Saskatchewan 
over the last few weeks in travelling the province and meeting 
with them. And they are telling me that they believe they have a 
right to high quality, accessible medical services, and they 
believe the government has an obligation to fund it. 
 
This cut-back in health care services in the prescription drug 
plan, the long hospital waiting list, the lack of funding for the 
administration of hospitals, is causing considerable amount of 
grief to the seniors in our province, Mr. Speaker. And I speak to 
them every day  people who have paid taxes all their lives, 
many of whom have been involved in the war, many of whom 
have raised families in this society and have built Saskatchewan 
up and fought for medicare. 
 
And now they want to get into a hospital, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re looking at a six-month wait, a nine-month wait, a year 
wait, and they’re not getting medical attention  people in my 
constituency, two gentlemen that I spoke to, with blood clots in 
their legs, who stand to possibly have their entire leg amputated 
if it’s not caught in time. One of them has now got into the 
hospital; the other one has still been waiting since I last spoke 
to him, since last December. And not only do they stand to get 
their legs cut off; if this condition persists, it could be life 
threatening. Waiting since last December, Mr. Speaker, to get 
into the hospital, and still not in. 
 
And these people have spent their life building Saskatchewan 
and paying taxes. And I say that’s unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, 
and something has to be done about that. And it’s time that the 
government took a hard look at long hospital waiting lists and 
did something about it. So families in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, are feeling abandoned by this government. In time of 
need when they’re sick, they’re feeling abandoned. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

865 
 

And let’s look . . . the government talks about, well, it costs too 
much money, you know, we just don’t have this money; where 
are we going to pull this money from? Well I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, where did they pull $1 billion from for a political 
project on the Premier’s back doorstep? Where did they pull 
that $1 billion from, Mr. Speaker? Where do they pull $20 
million a year on self-serving advertising  $30,000 on an SPC 
advertisement. How many hospital beds could have been kept 
open? At something like 300 or $400 a day for a hospital bed, 
30 minutes of Mr. George Hill to get involved in self-serving 
advertising on TV for some $30,000. 
 
Let’s just talk about where the money is going and what this 
government’s priorities are, Mr. Speaker  $84 million a year 
on empty office space, $34,000 a day. Let’s talk about how 
many hospital beds could be maintained, Mr. Speaker, with the 
$34,000 a day on empty office space. Let’s talk about that, and 
see where this government’s priorities are  some 23 million 
to the Saskoil sell-off and another 22 million in gifts to 
millionaire, Peter Pocklington, one of their Tory friends from 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And this from a government that 
promised to reduce income taxes by some 10 per cent. 
 
And the rest of us, Mr. Speaker, the rest of us are made to pay 
for these give-aways. We pay in cut-backs to services, like the 
prescription drug plan and the dental plan. We pay in long 
hospital waiting lists. We pay in flat tax, an increase in this 
unprecedented Tory flat tax. We pay gasoline tax at the pump 
when they, people of Saskatchewan, were promised that never 
in the history again would there be a gas tax in this province as 
long as there was a PC government. Well so much for their 
promises, Mr. Speaker. We’ve paid in utility rate increases of 
some 47 per cent in the last six years. 
 
It’s the people of this province that are paying for this 
mismanagement and this incompetence and these give-aways. 
It’s the people that are paying. And they’re not only paying in 
unprecedented tax increases, they’re paying in drastic cuts in 
services. 
 
Our seniors are paying when they cannot get into the hospital to 
get the medical attention that they need, Mr. Speaker. Our 
seniors are paying. People are paying when they can’t afford to 
get prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker. People pay for that. 
 
And the dental program. Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about that a 
little bit more. The studies done on the dental program indicated 
that it was the best of its kind in North America. It was a highly 
accessible program, and it was a high quality program. And in 
order to implement their agenda to decimate the dental program, 
they had to fire some 400 dental workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Four hundred dental workers lost their jobs, and I understand 
that very few of them have been re-employed. The most recent 
figures I got, which were some time in March, I believe, there 
were only 50 that had received employment. And out of that, 
only about half of them had permanent and full-time 
employment; the rest were only  

part time. 
 
So I ask you, what are the rest of the dental therapists and 
dental workers doing? Well I know that one of them was told 
by the member from Shaunavon that she should go on welfare 
 a farm woman who was supplementing farm income by 
being a dental therapist  and she was told by a PC member 
when she phoned him and asked him what she should do, to go 
on welfare. To go on welfare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s how this government stands up for the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s how this government stands up for 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they believe 
in as far Saskatchewan families are concerned. That became so 
evident in their decimation of the dental plan, and putting over 
400 dental workers out of work  exactly what they felt about 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  And so the Premier admitted his mistake, Mr. 
Speaker. He said there would be a new, exciting rural plan. 
Well it hasn’t come yet, Mr. Speaker; we’re still waiting for this 
new, exciting rural plan. Over 300 communities were being 
served by the school-based dental clinics, and I understand only 
a fraction of those communities have dental services now. And 
perhaps we can look at that in a little more detail. 
 
Let me give you the dental plan update, Mr. Speaker. In the 
constituency of Arm River  the community locations before 
the decimation of the dental plan  there were 12 community 
locations being served. Now in Arm River there are only 2; 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, there were 9 being served before the 
decimation of the dental plan, now there is only 1 being served; 
Athabasca, there was 1 and now there’s zero; 
Bengough-Milestone, there were 15 communities being served 
and now there’s only 1; Canora, there were 9 communities 
being served and now there’s only 2; Cut Knife-Lloydminister, 
11 communities were being served and now there are 2 only 
being served; Estevan  I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I’m down a 
line here; the printing is pretty close  Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, there were 10 being served and now 
there’s only one. 
 
(1630) 
 
In Estevan there were 7 locations being served and now only 1 
is being served; Humboldt, 8 were being served and now only 2 
locations; Indian Head, 12 community locations by dental 
therapists, after, 4; Kelsey-Tisdale, 9 before, after, 3; 
Kelvington-Wadena, 9 before, after, 3; Kindersley, 7 before, 
after, 2; Kinistino, 16 before, after, zero; Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, 14 before, after 9; Maple Creek, 8 
before, after, 1; Meadow Lake, 8 before, after, 3; Melfort, 6 
before, after 1; Melville, 9 before, after 2; Moosomin, 8 before 
after 3; Morse, 6 before, after zero; Nipawin, 8 before, after 1; 
Pelly, 4 before, after 1; Prince Albert-Duck Lake, 3 before, after 
1; Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, 10 before, after 1; Quill Lakes, 11 
before, after 3; Redberry, 10 before, after 1; Rosetown-Elrose, 8 
before, after 1; Rosthern, 11 before, after 3; Saltcoats, 9 before, 
after 2; Shaunavon, 9 before, after 1; Shellbrook-Torch River, 9 
before, after 1;  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

866 
 

Souris-Cannington, 11 before, after 3; Thunder Creek, 10 
before, after zero; Turtleford, 10 before, after 5; Weyburn, 5 
before, after 1; Wilkie, 8 before after 3; community locations, 
before 330, after 71. And that’s as up to date as we can get, Mr. 
Speaker, at this time. 
 
With the prescription drug changes, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 
a situation developing in Saskatchewan where families are 
having to make a decision between putting groceries on their 
table or buying prescription drugs. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s a bunch of nonsense. 
 
Ms. Simard:  And someone over there says that that’s a 
bunch of nonsense. Someone over there says that’s a bunch of 
nonsense. 
 
Well, we say an example in this legislature last Friday of a 
family who chose to buy groceries instead of prescription drugs. 
And they can continue saying that’s a bunch of nonsense, but 
let me tell you, there are many hundreds and hundreds of people 
out there who know otherwise and who resent the fact that 
every time we raise this and try to bring it to your attention, that 
you say it’s a bunch of nonsense, because they are insulted by 
those comments, because they know it’s not nonsense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  And if you want a little political advice over 
there, you’d better start taking their concerns seriously. 
 
The PC Party has talked about rising drug costs, Mr. Speaker, 
the PC Party’s talked about rising drug costs, and this is 
creating problems. Let’s just take a look at rising drug cost, and 
let’s talk about the drug patent legislation that this government, 
the PC government, approved and was involved in spearheading 
to the extent that they wrote a written approval, as I understand, 
to Brian Mulroney. 
 
The increases in drug prices  this is an article coming out of 
the Winnipeg Free Press on January 22, 1988: “Increases in 
drug prices outstrip rise in consumer price index.” Do you know 
why, Mr. Speaker? “Some manufacturers (and I’m quoting 
from the article) are trying to impose price increases before the 
price review board comes into effect.” It has to do with the drug 
patent legislation that is going to be coming into effect. There is 
some provision in there for prices of drugs to be reviewed. Well 
the manufacturers, I am told, are rushing to increase their prices 
before this drug price review goes into effect. And we don’t 
know exactly what the percentage of increase is, but it’s been 
substantial. 
 
And we said in this House that this is the sort of thing that was 
going to happen, that there would be substantial increase in 
drug prices as a result of the drug patent legislation. And it’s 
happened, Mr. Speaker  it’s happened. And we’re paying for 
that, and our seniors are paying for that, and our sick people are 
paying for that. And that government supported that initiative 
 they supported that initiative; that’s what they stood for. 
 
I think that it’s very  it’s pretty hard for them to start  

complaining about rising drug prices when they supported an 
initiative that would result in rising drug prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The drug plan, incidentally, has been slashed some $26 million 
since 1986. The new PC drug plan has created substantial 
hardship to the people of Saskatchewan and, as I’ve said, we 
see it every single day. But there’s been nothing in the budget, 
there’s been no movement on the part of this government to 
attempt to rectify the hardships that are occurring as a result of 
the new PC drug plan. 
 
If I can just give you some more evidence or facts that indicate 
the sort of problems that people are facing, and I’m quoting 
now from a letter written by a family physician here in Regina 
to a paper called Pulse: 
 

A moderately severe asthmatic patient’s average cost for 
the usual drug regime is approximately $150 a month. 
That is $150 a month for one asthmatic person in a family. 
Because asthma is a disease that tends to run in families, 
some families will have more than one affected member. 

 
That gives you an example of what people are paying for drugs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The doctor goes on to talk about the cost of oral contraceptives 
and the fact that many women are having difficulty, from poor 
families, paying for oral contraceptives. And she goes on to say: 
we already face a crisis in unplanned pregnancy; pricing birth 
control beyond the reach of low-income women is a sure and 
certain formula to make things worse. 
 
As a backdrop to the issue of how changes in Saskatchewan’s 
drug plan affects women’s health, the most telling figure is the 
fact that one is four people in this province live in poverty. The 
1985 Statistic Canada low-income cut-off for a single 
individual is 810 a month. Seventy per cent of minimum wage 
earners are women, earning approximately $756 a month on 
minimum wage. Even without dependants, a woman on 
minimum wage lives significantly below the poverty line. Add 
children to this, Mr. Speaker, and it’s clear that extra money for 
medication is beyond the reach of many of the working poor. 
They must choose between food or medicine for their children 
or food. For anyone to suggest otherwise shows just how 
profoundly out of touch they are with the realities faced by 
low-income people on a fixed budget. The drug plan changes 
are causing great personal hardship to thousands of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
As this is written by a physician, Mr. Speaker, who sees these 
people every day, and yet they have the audacity to shout across 
that floor and tell us that it’s not true. 
 
Hospital waiting lists in this province, Mr. Speaker, have 
reached unprecedented levels  unprecedented levels  and I 
believe it was around 10,000 patients at the end of February of 
1988 in Saskatoon alone  in Saskatoon alone. 
 
We’ve seen summer bed closures, and I understand that the City 
Hospital is going to have to close another 35 beds, or so we’ve 
been informed. I also understand that  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

867 
 

the new wing that was opened in Saskatoon is not yet 
functioning, and we don’t know where the money’s going to 
come from. The paint is still drying, I guess, so we’ve heard. 
 
The waiting lists, the hospital waiting lists in this province are 
absolutely intolerable and unacceptable and this government 
has to start moving to clear up these hospital waiting lists. I 
have spoken to a doctor in town who has to make decisions on a 
daily basis as to what case is more life-threatening and who is 
more likely to have serious problems, if not life-threatening 
problems, if he doesn’t operate. He’s having to juggle 
individuals every day. 
 
And so we have people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and it 
may be his job. The member from Wascana says, that’s his job. 
It may be his job, but the fact of the matter is, is that the waiting 
lists are so long that there are people waiting for urgent surgery 
from last December. And it may be his job, but you’re making 
it very difficult for him because you’re not funding health care 
adequately, and you’re not taking these problems seriously. 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  And the member form Wascana may not take 
these problems seriously, but I hope that if ever has to go into 
the hospital for some urgent surgery that he’ll bear in mind this 
discussion here today in the House. 
 
And so what does the government do? What about specialists in 
this province, Mr. Speaker? We have seen . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, please. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have seen 
specialists leave from the Plains Health Centre as a result of a 
freeze on the funding to the university education portion of the 
hospital. 
 
An Hon. Member:  It should have happened years ago. 
 
Ms. Simard:  We saw a number of specialists leave  and 
the member over there from Saskatoon says it should have 
happened years ago. I can’t believe the insensitivity, the 
arrogance, and the absolute incompetence of the members 
opposite  it should have happened a long time ago. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Was it the member from Mayfair who 
said that? 
 
Ms. Simard:  Yes, it was the member form Mayfair who said 
that  that it should have happened a long time ago. So you 
know, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know what the government 
is doing to address this problem with respect to specialists in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I expect in estimates to have some answers on that question, 
because we’ve seen a situation Saskatchewan where people are 
waiting for months and months and months to get in to see an 
ophthalmologist. We have seen specialists leave the province as 
a result of cut-backs to the plains Hospital. And we are in the 
situation in Saskatchewan where we have drastic need for  

more specialists in the province, and we’re having difficulty 
getting them to come here. I suggest that this government’s 
attitude towards health care isn’t encouraging physicians and 
specialists to come to Saskatchewan. 
 
The government has said, Mr. Speaker, that they are increasing 
the health care budget by some 5.6 per cent. The truth of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, it’s only 3.5 per cent since last year, but 
if you look over the last two years and use the figures from ’86, 
you see that it’s only 2.4 per cent over those two years  not 
what they would choose the public to believe  at a time when 
inflation in Saskatchewan is at something like 5 to 6 per cent. 
At a time when inflation is that high, they aren’t even matching 
inflation, Mr. Speaker, and that’s their commitment to the 
families of this province, to the sick and the elderly. It’s some 
commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to move the motion, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon South. And I move the motion. 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for undermining Saskatchewan health care 
services by altering the prescription drug program, 
abolishing the school-based children’s dental plan, and by 
allowing hospital waiting lists to reach alarming levels. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I take a 
great deal of pleasure this afternoon to participate in this debate, 
particularly, Mr. Speaker, being a former minister of Health. 
And a number of accusations that have been made opposite, I 
will  in the little time that I have, and on another occasion, 
Mr. Speaker  prove to the members opposite and to the public 
of Saskatchewan that they were much better off under our 
administration than they are under the present administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say that they have a 
commitment and a dedication to the four pillars of medicare, the 
four pillars as they are outlined and understood by many people 
here in Canada. Those four pillars, for the edification of the 
members opposite, are: accessibility, comprehensibility, 
universality, and publicly funded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those four principles have been accepted not only 
here in Saskatchewan but in many other provinces in Canada. 
And until 1982 it was pretty well accepted that no one dared 
undermine those four pillars of medicare. And the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, in the 1982 election, the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, made guarantees and promises that they 
would not erode those four pillars of medicare. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have seen time and time again . . . and as 
the member from Regina Lakeview, as she moved this motion, 
indicated very clearly, three basic moves by this government: 
the eroding of the prescription drug program, virtually the 
destruction of it; the abolishment of  
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

868 
 

the children’s dental program, Mr. Speaker, the best 
preventative dental program in all of North America  I will 
prove that again by a study that was done about 10 years ago, a 
little over 10 years ago; and thirdly, Mr. Speaker, by the 
scandalous hospital waiting lists that we have in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member form . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Mr. Speaker, could you draw the member to order, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite says that I approved of 
waiting lists. I want to say to the members opposite, when I was 
the minister of Health in 1979 to 1982, the waiting lists in this 
province were about one-quarter of what they are today  
about one-quarter. And not in the wildest imagination did I ever 
expected that we would have 15,000 people on the waiting lists 
in Saskatoon and Regina. Not in the wildest dreams could I 
have imagined that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I said that we must have a short waiting list, 
I simply meant that you can’t have your hospitals standing 
empty. Of course not. But no one, no one ever expected that a 
government would allow the waiting list in the city of 
Saskatchewan to get up to over 11,000 people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, a spokesman for the Conservative Party in 1980 said 
this: “Birkmaier critical of patient cut-back during summer.” 
This was in 1980, Mr. Speaker, when I was the minister of 
Health. I want to read that again: “Birkmaier critical of patient 
cut-back during summer.” 
 
Now let me, for everybody’s edification: do you know how 
many people were on the waiting list at City Hospital? One 
hundred and sixty-two persons in July; 227 in August. Today 
we have well over 3,000 people on the waiting list at City 
Hospital. And where is Alderwoman Birkmaier today? Is she 
critical today of this government? No, Mr. Speaker. Hospital 
waiting lists at City Hospital have gone up 13 times what they 
were when I was the minister of Health, and not one word from 
Alderwoman Donna Birkmaier  not one word. 
 
If it was critical, Mr. Speaker, that hospital beds couldn’t close 
in the summer of 1980 with 227 people on the waiting list, how 
important is it, Mr. Speaker, that we have additional funds 
today when we have over 3,000 people on the waiting list in 
city Hospital? Where are the alderpeople. Where is alderman 
Cherneskey, a well-known Tory supporter? Where is he, on the 
waiting list in Saskatoon? Not one word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medicare and hospitalization has been under 
attack by this government ever since 1982. But we have really 
seen the true colour of this government right after the 1986 
election when they attacked the prescription drug program, they 
abolished the children’s dental program, and they simply did 
not fund adequately the hospitals in this province. 
 
And consequently, Mr. Speaker, we have not just the NDP 
being critical of the government opposite. Let me read some 
headlines for you; “Health cuts hurt patients.” It was a doctor 
saying this. Provincial health cuts wound the patients who are 
waiting for care, say doctors from Saskatoon’s three hospitals. 
But the government says  

applying more money isn’t the cure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me go on. Cancer patients, who in 1978, in 
1978 used to wait about over a month, says Barry Gilliland, 
president of the City Hospital medical staff. They could be 
waiting two months, rather than one, and eventually someone’s 
going to die if health services are continually trimmed to 
balance hospital budgets and beds are closed. That’s what the 
doctor said about the government opposite. 
 
That’s one, Mr. Speaker. Let me continue. Here’s another. The 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is taking great 
strides at destroying our medicare system, which was the envy 
of the world. We didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your 
continued efforts in preventing the Premier and his cabinet 
minister from eroding the health care system to a point from 
which it will never recover. That was written by R.A. Brady, 
chairman of public relations committee of the chiropractors’ 
associations of this province. That was his comment. Those 
were not our comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say again, here’s another. Health plans will 
die without cuts, says McLeod. 
 
And the members opposite say that they support medicare, they 
support hospitalization. I say to the members opposite, there is 
nothing better than the actions. Your rhetoric isn’t going to buy 
the people of this province any longer; you’ve got to show more 
by your actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me go on. Woman waited 13 months for 
surgery. Thirteen months for surgery, and the members opposite 
say that they are providing a first-class hospital and medicare 
system in this province. What a farce, Mr. Speaker. What a 
farce. Thirteen months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me go on. Waiting lists at hospitals blamed on 
lack of funds. And that’s not us saying it; doctors saying that. 
Bed closures crux of problem. Who says that? Dr. Barry Maber. 
 
And I haven’t got time, Mr. Speaker, to go into detail as to what 
he has to say. Here’s another one: nearly everything wrong with 
PC’s hospital policy. Now Health minister, George McLeod, 
however, doesn’t seem to see any great problem with the 
situation in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to draw your 
attention to the member who has twice now in the last two 
minutes crossed the rules of this legislature in terms of using 
members’ names and he did it just now. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Chairman, if I breach the rules of this 
House, I apologize to you and to the members opposite. It 
certainly was not my intention. If I did, I apologize. 
 
In my exuberance for the defence of our health care system, Mr. 
Speaker, sometimes I forgot. Mr. Speaker, somebody’s got to 
come to the defence of the people of Saskatchewan, it certainly 
isn’t the members opposite. 
 
  



 
April 26, 1988 

 

869 
 

Because when you have people waiting 13 months or 14 
months  13 or 14 months, Mr. Speaker, waiting to get into 
hospitals or are getting elective surgery, someone has got to 
stand up. And if it isn’t the member from Rosthern  and I 
know, he feels rather touchy and sensitive about this situation, 
but I’ll tell you, there are a lot of the people from Rosthern who 
are waiting and are on the waiting list trying to get into the three 
hospitals in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on: 10,000 people on the waiting list 
and what does the Minister of health say? The Minister of 
Health says hospital waiting lists, not a serious problem. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is the sensitivity of the present Minister of Health. 
And, Mr. Speaker, he had the audacity to condemn me when t 
the hospital waiting lists in this province were one-quarter  
one-quarter of the numbers that he has allowed at the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s go to some other evidence  the hypocrisy 
of the people opposite, the lack of integrity, Mr. Speaker, the 
lack of integrity of people opposite. What did they say, Mr. 
Speaker, what did they say, Mr. Speaker, when they’re running 
for office . . . when they were running for office? Gordon Currie 
campaigned. He said, we will eliminate dispensing fees on all 
drugs prescribed for senior citizens  we will eliminate all 
dispensing fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did the member from Morse have to say? 
The member from Morse says, expand drug plan to include all 
prescription drugs; provide adequate funding to hospitals to 
allow them to operate at normal levels year-round. That was a 
commitment from the member of Morse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, oh here’s one, the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, one very familiar to you, sir. What will 
we do? We will improve and revitalize health care by 
expanding the drug plan. Mr. Minister, the member from 
Kindersley must have copied it from the same article. He also 
said that we would expand the drug plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have one  a guarantee  a guarantee in 
this one . . . really, Mr. Speaker. This is from the member form 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, and he says, the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan will abolish the unfair 
deterrent fees for prescription drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Canada have a right to ask the people, the politicians, to be 
honest with them. If they make a promise, at least try and carry 
it out. 
 
And we have heard time and time again, before the 1986 
election, that they would not tamper with health care; they 
would not privatize health care. And what did we see 
immediately after? They did exactly the opposite. Is it any 
wonder that people have no more faith in politicians? We have 
at least, Mr. Speaker, should make an attempt to carry out the 
promises that we have made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a lost more that I wish to say on this 
particular topic, and I wish to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson:  I was going to raise a point of order, 
but I won’t. I’ll just point it out that wishing to adjourn debate 
and moving to adjourn debate are two different things. I move 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 
 


