


















































May 5, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 5, 1988 
 

1087 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce, through you and to the Assembly here, 75 
students from the Tisdale School in Tisdale. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Maureen Donald, Lois McGill, 
Marjorie Hanson. They also have chaperons, Mrs. Hartman, 
Miss Hainstock, Mrs. Mievre, Mrs. Sangster, Mrs. Wallington, 
and Mrs. Hunt. They have their bus drivers along with them; 
they have Daniel Knudtson and Tom Mowat. 
 
They’re here today visiting the legislature to see the 
proceedings of our legislature. I’m sure that they will find it 
both enjoyable and interesting. They come from the north-east 
part of the community, Mr. Speaker, where we call it the hub of 
the North-east  the entrance to the North  where tourism 
and hospitality is at its best. And certainly these students and 
their families represent that. I ask all the members to join with 
me in welcoming the Tisdale students here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the House, 
four students from the “Quiet” high school, that is grades 10, 
11, and 12. The “Quiet” high school is an alternative form of 
education for those returning to high school. Congratulations on 
returning to high school. 
 
They are accompanied by Wayne Sawka. They work out of 
Miller Collegiate, and it’s delightful to have you here today. I’ll 
have an opportunity to speak with you  have pictures and 
speak with you  in the Speaker’s board room. I wish that all 
members would join me in welcoming these students from the 
“Quiet” high school. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 
and through you to all the members of this House, a young 
gentleman and his cousin. This happens to be one of my wife’s 
relatives, Reg Argue. He’s with the Canadian forces and he’s 
stationed in Calgary. he’s in the city at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
visiting his grandmother who is gravely ill. 
 
Would all the members of the House join me in welcoming him 
to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Policies Affecting Saskatchewan Residents 
 

Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to my caucus, I have to say that. 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
yesterday the voters in Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon 
Eastview took a careful look at your government’s record, and I 
think it’s safe to say they rejected it, and rejected it 
overwhelmingly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is 
this: Mr. Premier, in view of your destructive changes to the 
health care system, the high imposition of taxes on individual 
people and not corporations, the lack of jobs for our young 
people, the inattention to our small-business people, and 
perhaps more importantly, the lack of hope for Saskatchewan 
people  in the light of those by-election results, will you tell 
the House today, definitely, that you’re prepared to abandon 
these reckless, harmful policies which affect our families so 
badly, and adopt a new set of programs in line with the wishes 
of the people of our province, and if so, what your timetable for 
doing so will be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would first say 
congratulations to the Leader of the Opposition on the success 
of the by-elections. I have experienced both sides of 
by-elections and general elections, and I would say to the hon. 
member that I can appreciate the fact that this might have been 
his turn and he’d earned a chance at a little success, and I 
congratulate him  and I mean that. 
 
With respect to policies as a result of by-elections, Mr. Speaker, 
I can say to the hon. member two things: one is, we are 
obviously working extremely hard to modernize the various 
kinds of facilities that we have in Saskatchewan and, indeed, 
across the country, and that applies to technical school, that 
applies to education, it applies to new hospitals, it applies to the 
prescription drug program and several others. 
 
I can understand why people might have some concerns as a 
result of changes. Obviously our concern, whether it’s for 
senior citizens or families or those that are in cancer facilities or 
others, is to provide the best facilities we can. That takes some 
change, and as I’m sure that you know, we want the best 
technology that we can use any place. 
 
We are going to do that, and you ask me how fast we are going 
to do that  as fast as we can. You will see a technology with 
respect to health care in terms of prescription drugs and others 
be brought in as fast as we can make sure that it will do the job 
for people and be effective in reducing things that might have 
been an irritation, and I grant you that with respect to rebates. 
But also we want to make sure that we can address the 
incidences of drug abuse, and we’re going to look at that very 
carefully. So our policies will be initiated here as quickly as we 
can. 
 
Finally, just let me say, you know, a by-election is a 
by-election. There would be, I think it was 63 percentage of 
people, 63 per cent voted in Regina and 69 per cent in 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1088 
 

Saskatoon. Obviously there’s a large percentage of people who 
just frankly decided to stay home and not vote at all. You can 
say, well they were all yours; I could say, they were all mine. 
It’s probably neither one would be true. But obviously 
by-elections are a reflection of a point in time. 
 
I’ll take it seriously; I’ll look at it very carefully and look at 
ways that we can implement the modernation of all kinds of 
programs and policies here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the 
Premier. I listened with special care to his answer, and to be 
quite frank with you, Mr. Premier, I hear you telling me and the 
people of Saskatchewan that you’re going to stay the course 
with these so-called changes. You describe them under 
technological reasons and for other reasons, but it’s staying the 
course. 
 
The answer, Mr. Premier, means programs which will continue 
to hurt people who need, for example, the drug plan to be 
restored back to the way it was; to hurt our students. What in 
the world does it take, Mr. Premier, what more does it take, 
short of a general election to make you and your government 
understand and accept the fact that people in the province of 
Saskatchewan  to use but one example, the drug care plan  
don’t equate the universal drug care plan with your 
condemnation  rightly so  in a different area about drug 
abuse. What in the world does it take to convince your 
government that what the people of Saskatchewan want is a 
caring, compassionate government first and foremost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I would think that 
the hon. member would acknowledge that the efficient and 
effective prescription drug program that would provide good 
health care services to the public is important, as well as an 
address on drug abuse, because young people will tell us across 
Saskatchewan, indeed Canada, that drug abuse is a problem. 
And the police tell us it’s a problem. Young people tell us, 
health care officials tell us it’s a problem. 
 
So both of them . . . Mr. Chairman, I would say to the hon. 
member, both have to be addressed by this legislature  both 
do, and we will. The new technology that we’re looking at can 
provide very efficient, effective, low-cost service to the public, 
and I believe that you would understand that  without rebates, 
without rebates. And that’s exactly what you’re asking for. We 
can do that and, mark my words, we will. And it’s going to take 
the courage to get a hold of it, and we have  at some cost, 
granted  but we’re going to take a hold of that. 
 
At the same time I will ask for your co-operation on addressing 
the whole question of drug abuse because young people today 
are facing the problems of drugs and crime, and society is. And 
we’re going to have to address that. And I’m sure you’re aware 
of it. If you read any newspaper any day of the week you’ll find 
it across North America and right here at home in Regina and 
Saskatoon, and in our cities and towns and villages. 

So I can say to the hon. member, I’ve listened before to 
by-election results, and I have responded. The same happened 
in Regina North East, and I listened carefully, and I did 
respond. I’ve been through by-elections myself, and you 
watched me lose a by-election, and perhaps maybe your interest 
today is just reflected in what you learned at that time. 
 
I’ll say, I’m going to listen; I will respond. We will be 
thoughtful, we’ll be careful, and we’ll provide the best health 
care and the best education and the most competitive society we 
can to build the kinds of jobs we want for people of all ages. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, I must tell you frankly that your answer is 
discouraging. I understand the circumstances that you’re under 
this morning after the by-elections, and I don’t say this in any 
sense of victory. I know what by-elections mean. There’s a 
general election to be fought. But even you, sir, must admit that 
the massive vote from two ridings which are so disparate in 
their ethnic and economic and social background, convey a 
serious message to you. 
 
And your answer today, sir, is discouraging, to put it mildly, 
because you confuse two issues and you’ve told the House that 
you’re not going to change your policies. 
 
You talk about courage. My question is this, Mr. Premier: if 
you say courage, why don’t you have the courage, why didn’t 
you have the courage to tax the oil companies, $2 billion of 
which, by the way, they have escaped with by free money? To 
tax the oil companies, that would have been courage. Instead of 
picking on the ordinary farmer and the labourer and the 
working person, tax those oil companies to finance the drug 
plan that the people of Saskatchewan had before and want 
today. Now that’s courage! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, we 
can see why a general election is a lot different. It’s one thing 
for you to stand in your place after winning in downtown 
Regina and Saskatoon and condemn oil companies. Across rural 
Saskatchewan people work in the oil patch, and it’s not their 
fault we have drug abuse. It’s not their fault that we have 
problems with respect to health care. Okay? So don’t blame 
them. 
 
What I’m saying is that we have to address the problem across 
society, and I can only point out to the hon. member, we will 
address it, and you mark my words, with respect to the 
prescription drug program, we will address it as quickly as we 
can and you will see the new technology. 
 
But if you want to quickly revert to the old political battles that 
we’ve got to blame the oil patch for everything, I’ll tell you 
that’s one of the reasons that you just might not win in rural 
Saskatchewan where we have resources and people who are just 
as much part of Saskatchewan as you 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1089 
 

are, sir  just as much. 
 
You can’t just keep picking on people. Everybody in this 
province has the right to have access to health care and the right 
to education and the right to participate, and they don’t need 
you picking on them any more than they need me picking on 
them. So between the two of us, if we want good health care, 
we want good education, good prescription drug programs, and 
good resource development, and, Mr. Speaker, if we want jobs 
. . . okay? 
 
Why would you blame the oil patch when we’ve got the largest 
job creation project in Regina’s history here, and it’s oil? And 
you stand up there and say, well if you just took from the oil 
companies. I’d say, sir it takes the entire community to build, 
and that’s our attitude over here, and clearly it’s not yours over 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  I believe we’re getting into somewhat of a 
debate forum and I would ask the hon. members to recognize 
that. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, I don’t blame the oil companies. If they can get a 
$2 billion deal from your government or any government, that’s 
their business. I blame you, sir. 
 
If you’re talking about jobs for farming people and for business 
people and for working people in the cities and a drug plan that 
everybody needs, and you’re saying at the same time, this is a 
period of restraint, I blame you, sir, and your government for 
giving away  you didn’t have to raise that tax one penny  
for giving away $2 billion. 
 
My argument to you, Mr. Premier, is this. Forget about even . . . 
and my question to you is this, sir  forget even about the drug 
plan for the moment. What abut redirecting your policies in all 
of the other areas: the $34,000 a day in wasted government 
office space, the tax increases, the flat tax increases, the sales 
tax increases? How about bringing this house of yours into 
order and start having an efficient, properly run government 
that’s competent and compassionate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I just say to the hon. 
member, it didn’t take you too long before you shifted onto 
blaming the oil companies, and now it’s on . . . then that didn’t 
last, so you went on to space. 
 
I would say to the hon. member: he knows that almost half the 
space that we have in government, extra space, is for a new 
drug rehab centre for young people  long overdue, long 
overdue. And we bought that facility, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker, we bought that facility from the federal government to 
address the drug and alcohol abuse problem in this country and 
in this province. It will be the first centre in western Canada for 
drug rehabilitation for young people. And he condemns us for 
that. 
 
See, Mr. Speaker, he has one thing on his mind  one thing. 
It’s like the member from Saskatoon Nutana  one 

thing again. He forgets the rest of the public; he forgets the 
young people. He forgets the fact that if you address that 
prescription drug program and ask people to think, that you can 
reduce abuse, and they’ll acknowledge that. Many will come up 
and say: but I want a system without rebates. But they say, 
thank goodness somebody got us to think about the abuse, and 
we will address it. 
 
I’m saying to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members opposite: 
we will have new technology; we will have a brand-new drug 
and rehabilitation centre in Yorkton. Those facilities will be the 
finest you’ll find anywhere in Canada. And the people will be 
proud of them, and the people of Yorkton, the people of Regina, 
and the people of Saskatoon, because that takes courage to 
address that kind of problem, not just rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have one last final question 
in this area to the Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s a little bit hard to 
know how one can accept the description of office space when 
one has to simply walk in downtown Regina or Saskatoon to 
see the special lease-back arrangements, which we’ll discuss in 
Executive Council estimates, that have been arranged between 
your government and private developers, lying empty. 
 
But my question to you is this, Mr. Speaker . . . to you, Mr. 
Premier, is as follows. I don’t mean this in any personal sense. I 
frankly think you’re too busy as Premier and as Minister of 
Agriculture; you do not have control of this government. Your 
factual answers display that today, the very last one. You don’t 
have control of it. 
 
Look, my question to you, Mr. Premier, is very simple. Why 
don’t you do everybody a favour, including yourself and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan; 
appoint a full-time Minister of Agriculture; become a full-time 
minister of the Executive Council or the Premier so that you can 
find the solutions to the real problems of real people and 
ordinary families. How about doing that, as a positive 
suggestion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, you can see why the 
results in a general election might be different than a 
by-election. Those are the issues that you ran in in 1982 and 
you ran on in 1986  hit the oil companies; we’re going to run 
on the Crow; we don’t know anything about agriculture. You 
put those three things up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. member, we have to 
look at all of society. We are going to address agriculture. 
We’re going to encourage people to invest in oil. We are going 
to encourage people to make changes and have modern 
education and health care facilities and technology. And we’re 
going to do that. 
 
And I will say to people both in Elphinstone and in Saskatoon 
Eastview and across the province, we will respond quickly and 
fairly and accurately to the concerns they have with respect to 
health care or prescription drug. At the same time we will be 
building brand-new facilities for young people, for drug and 
rehabilitation. We will be building brand-new facilities for 
people in education and health care across this province, the 
finest you’ll find any 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1090 
 

place in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cut-backs in Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, throughout two by-elections people in 
Saskatoon Eastview and Regina Elphinstone expressed 
concerns to us that families have been expressing to us across 
Saskatchewan. People feel betrayed by your cut-backs in health 
care. Your elimination of the school-based children’s dental 
program and your destruction of the prescription drug plan have 
caused severe hardship and were wrong. The long hospital 
waiting lists are wrong and cut-backs in health research is 
wrong. 
 
You’ve hurt Saskatchewan people, Mr. Premier. You’ve caused 
hardship to Saskatchewan people and you’ve imposed a heavy 
and stressful burden on people who need health care. Mr. 
Premier, have you heard the message and are you prepared to 
stop your cut-backs to health, all cut-backs to health? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we heard yesterday 
that it was all the government’s fault because there was line-ups 
at our cancer facilities, and obviously we found out that’s not 
the case. 
 
Today the hon. member raises the fact that the school-based 
dental program was the issue in Regina Elphinstone or in 
Saskatoon Eastview. And it’s not, and she knows that. And 
there are more and more dentists going into rural Saskatchewan. 
We fully fund the program, as she knows, fully fund it. And 
people can take their children from ages five to 13 to any 
dentist they like and we pay for it. It didn’t come up as a 
campaign issue. So she can raise it if she likes. If she wants to 
campaign in rural Saskatchewan, fair enough. 
 
And with respect to the drug program, I’ve already said, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to find the finest  and we’re going to 
design and implement the finest drug prescription . . . 
prescription drug program and technology here in the province 
of Saskatchewan that they can look to any place in North 
America  no rebates, fast turn around, low cost, and address 
drug abuse at the same time. And I’m sure even the hon. 
member will be proud of it when we initiate it here in this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Premier, if you think the school-based 
dental program is not a problem in urban ridings, you’re wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  Sir, your health care policy has failed. There’s 
absolutely no question about that. And the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t trust you when it comes to health care, Mr. 
Premier. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  They don’t want rhetoric. They don’t want 
gimmicks. They don’t want more studies, Mr. Premier, and 
they’ve sent you that message and it is clear. 
 
Do you now have the compassion and the determination to 
change your health care policies and change them immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, I would only 
say to the hon. member, she knows that the amount of money 
that this administration is spending on health is very, very large, 
and it’s up over 68 per cent above what the NDP spent. 
 
I would also say, Mr. Speaker, if she would look . . . She says 
that there’s this massive change in public opinion. I would only 
say to the hon. member that it looks like the NDP picked up 14 
percentage points in Saskatoon Eastview and they picked up 6 
in Elphinstone, and that’s, Mr. Speaker, when 40 . . . almost 40 
per cent of the people don’t even participate in the by-election, 
don’t even participate at all, and she’s saying that the whole 
issue was the school-based dental program. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously if you want to extend your case 
from two by-elections to the general population, and 
particularly the rural Saskatchewan with respect to the dental 
program, I’d be very surprised. 
 
And if you ask people, are we spending money on health care or 
building hospitals or new facilities, I think they know that we 
are. And I said the new prescription drug program is going to be 
implemented as quickly as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Confidentiality of Patient Information 
 
Mr. Swenson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
for the Minister of Health. Yesterday the member from Nutana, 
on page 1058 of Hansard, alleged that she obtained information 
from the cancer clinic in Saskatoon in regards to a patient. 
 
As a current patient of the Canadian Cancer Society, I would 
like to ask the Minister of Health to assure me and my fellow 
patients that no information will be given to that member or any 
other member of the public about my treatment schedule, the 
number of times I visit, the drugs I take, or anything else. 
 
And I would just like that assurance from the Minister of 
Health, Mr. Speaker, that that information is sacred and is 
between me and my physician and the people in the Canadian 
Cancer Society. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, let me simply say that the 
information, the kind of information, personal information that 
patients have in any part of the health care system obviously  
obviously, I say  must remain 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1091 
 

and must be of confidential nature. 
 
I took note of the . . . I watched with interest as I was reading 
the page 1058 here of yesterday’s Hansard where the member 
said, “I spoke to the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic this morning 
about this case,” and all I will say, Mr. Speaker, after reading 
that I asked my officials to look into this matter and to 
investigate the matter. 
 
I have nothing more to report than that, Mr. Speaker, but it is 
serious and it does merit some investigation by the people in the 
Department of Health. I would like to assure the member and 
all cancer patients in this province, indeed all patients in this 
province who access health care facilities, that their information 
deserves to be confidential and will be confidential, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Tax Reform 
 

Mr. Koskie:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to also address 
a question to the Premier. And from your answers, Mr. Premier, 
I think the by-elections have taught you nothing; it’s the same 
old lines. 
 
I want to refer, Mr. Premier, to your government and your 
office continuing indicating . . . talking about tax reform. But 
for ordinary people in Saskatchewan what that has meant to the 
farm families, to working people, your tax reform has meant 
increases: property tax increases; the PC gas tax which you said 
you wouldn’t reimpose; your 40 per cent increase in the sales 
tax which you said that you would eliminate; your PC flat tax 
 a double taxation in personal income tax. 
 
Mr. Premier, it seems to me that the people of Saskatchewan 
sent a message yesterday, and what I want to ask you; will you 
acknowledge that they sent you a message, and in fact that 
they’re sick and tired of being abused with excessive taxation at 
the same time that corporations are given tax relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker, to respond to the hon. 
member I will just remind him of a couple of things. First is that 
we are the second lowest taxed province in all of Canada. And 
it is published in the budget and obviously, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t charge health care fees and other jurisdictions do. And 
when you pull this together  all the taxes that are in there  
we are the second lowest taxed province any place in Canada, 
and we’re proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, we’re the only province, the only province in this 
country that does not tax gasoline, if you save your receipts. In 
Alberta there’s a five cent gas tax, in Manitoba it’s seven or 
eight cents, no rebate mechanism, and all the rest of the country 
does; but Saskatchewan, you can get your tax refunded with a 
rebate. 
 
We have no tax on clothes under $300, Mr. Speaker. We have 
no tax on utilities like power bills and we brought that in. 
You’ll see that most, most employees will have a benefit, an 
increase in their take-home pay as of July 1 because of tax 
reform, Mr. Speaker. And you’ll also find out that we are 
generating more tax from industry and 

from the private sector and from resources than the previous 
administration. 
 
So you put that together, and the fact that we have increased our 
expenditures in health care from 700 million to 1.2 billion as a 
result of what we’re doing in industry, Mr. Speaker, I would say 
I am very happy to report to the Canadian public and to 
Saskatchewan people, we have very competitive tax levels here 
in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, you need a new line. And I’ll tell you what you 
need more than that, you need a new philosophy, a philosophy 
of respect for the people of this province  that’s what you 
need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, are you aware that every time that 
you’ve talked about tax reform, what has happened is that the 
taxes have gone up for ordinary citizens and corporate taxes 
have you cut . . . you slashed corporate taxes and you increase it 
on ordinary people of Saskatchewan. I ask you: are you aware 
that the people are trying to give you a message that they are 
against these vicious tax increases on ordinary Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And therefore I ask you again, I ask you . . . my question to you 
therefore is this: have you heard that message? Are you going to 
listen to the people of Saskatchewan, and will you bring in 
some tax relief to ordinary Saskatchewan people as opposed to 
the corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, let me make two points: the 
first is that it is a little interesting that the member from Quill 
Lakes just hopped on the band wagon of the leader of the NDP 
and said the same old thing, that it must be those corporations 
and it must be the oil patch and it must be some other things 
that have caused the problem. They’ve done that in two general 
elections and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order, order. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just say, you 
can’t blame  please don’t blame the small business or oil 
companies or resource people for the problem. You tried that in 
’82 and ’86 and in the 1984 federal election. So don’t blame 
them. And you tried that before. 
 
The second thing, let me point out, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 
provided lower tax  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. The Premier can’t 
answer if he’s interrupted, and I ask for the co-operation of the 
members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 
putting the opposition in its place. They’re gloating a little 
today and I can understand that. I will give them their day for 
their smiles. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1092 
 

Let me just add to the hon. member that we have reduced taxes 
for low income people. They will see further reductions as of 
July and further reductions next year in 1989, so the 
combination of tax reform will show up July 1 and well into 
1988-89 for low income people particularly, as a result of tax 
reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 16  An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons 
who Perform Work of Gas Installation or Sell Gas 

Equipment 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the licensing of persons who perform work of gas 
installation and sell gas equipment. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17  An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 
Installations and Gas Equipment for Consumers 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Inspection of Gas Installations and Gas 
Equipment for Consumers. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 18  An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installation and Material 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Inspection of Electrical Equipment, Installation 
and Material. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19  An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Statute Law. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
rise on a question of privilege pursuant to rule no. 6 of the Rules 
and Procedures of this Assembly. And in accordance with that 
rule, I have sent notice to you setting out the substance of the 
allegation of breach of privilege, and as a courtesy I have 
copied the opposition House Leader as well as the alleged 
member in breach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will briefly set out the facts in question, and I 
will also address the issue of promptness in my raising this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Before the minister goes further, I would 

like to just point out to him that this is not an opportunity for a 
debate. And I will have to ask the minister and the opposition 
critic that they speak narrowly to the question of privilege 
raised by the minister. It is not an opportunity to debate the 
entire issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be brief 
in my remarks. You will know, Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday of this 
week a motion was argued in the Court of Queen’s Bench in 
this city. The action involved the member from Regina Victoria 
as plaintiff and the Government of Saskatchewan and the hon. 
members from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden and Kindersley as 
defendants. On Tuesday afternoon the presiding judge 
dismissed the action and, to illustrate the frivolous nature of the 
action, ordered the member from Regina Victoria to pay court 
costs. 
 
In arguing the motion the member in question claimed a special 
status, claimed a special status, Mr. Speaker, to bring this action 
in capacity, in his capacity as chairman of the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am advised that the member opposite had no 
such authority to bring this action before the courts, Mr. 
Speaker. I am advised that no motion was passed by the Public 
Accounts Committee to that effect. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
respectfully submit that the member from Regina Victoria is in 
breach of the privilege in bringing this matter before the courts. 
He has misrepresented his authority to the court in representing 
that he took court proceedings under his office as chairman of 
the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member attempted to use his authority given 
by this legislature for purely personal and political reasons. In 
this regards, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that the judge, 
on page 10 of the transcript, called that member’s actions 
deplorable in attempting to use the courts for cheap, political 
purposes. 
 
It is unfortunate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  The hon. member must stick to the privilege 
itself which reads: 
 

that the member has committed a breach of privilege in 
usurping or misusing the authority given to him as 
chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. 

 
That is the narrow issue being discussed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
serious matter, Mr. Speaker, and I will reduce my comments to 
just a very few. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
opposite had no such authority given to him by the Public 
Accounts Committee, and that was a breach of his position, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is indeed a prima facie case 
of privilege, and I would ask you to rule on it accordingly. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise on this 
matter that has been raised by the minister, and I want 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1093 
 

to make a few brief points on the question of privilege that he 
has attempted to raise here today. I must say that I did get an 
advance copy of the letter, Mr. Speaker, and I certainly 
appreciate that. 
 
I want to say at the outset that I believe that all members of this 
Assembly share my view that a question of privilege is a very 
serious matter and ought to be addressed as such by this House. 
 
The issue of privilege has been developed over the years by 
parliament and by this legislature, and has been defined by the 
learned parliamentary authorities. And Beauchesne’s, Fifth 
Edition, article 16, to which I refer to you, Mr. Speaker, as you 
consider the minister’s comments, defines privilege in the 
following way: 
 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights 
enjoyed by each House collectively . . . and by Members 
of each House individually, without which they could 
not discharge their functions . . . 

 
Beauchesne’s goes on to say, in the same article that: 
 

The privileges of Parliament (and I quote again) are . . . 
enjoyed by individual Members . . . and by each House 
for the protection of its members and the vindication of 
its own authority and dignity. 

 
And moreover, the same authority at article 76, Mr. Speaker, to 
which I again refer you, says that a breach of privilege in 
committee may only be dealt with after a report from the 
committee. 
 
And so I therefore submit to you, sir, that there are three basic 
tests that must be applied in a case such as this, and only if one 
of those tests has been met is there a case for a point of 
privilege. I submit to you that not one of those tests has been 
met. 
 
First, the minister has failed to demonstrate that his ability to 
function as a member has in any way been reduced or even 
affected. 
 
Secondly, the minister has failed to demonstrate that the 
authority or dignity or capacity of this legislature has in any 
way been affected or weakened. And third, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is not, himself, a member of the Public Accounts 
Committee and has failed to demonstrate that the integrity or 
the capacity of the committee has in any way been affected by 
the actions of which he complains here today. 
 
And so I therefore submit to you, Mr. Speaker, with all due 
respect, that the minister has failed to establish that there is a 
prima facie case of privilege in this instance. 
 
I have one brief further point to make, sir. The minister alleges 
that the member for Regina North somehow wrongly identified 
himself to the court as the chairman of the Public Accounts 
Committee of this legislature. The facts are these. My colleague 
for Regina Victoria is a member of this legislature and so 
identified himself to the court. He is the chairman of the Public 
Accounts Committee and so identified himself to the court. In 
identifying himself to the court, he did so accurately, 

correctly, and properly, and at no time did the member claim or 
imply that he was acting on behalf of the committee or with its 
authorization. And the minister has failed to demonstrate 
otherwise. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, keeping my remarks brief, I find it 
extremely regrettable that a government that has resolutely 
refused to provide the Public Accounts of this legislature for 
more than a month now . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 
just like to also remind the member for Regina North East, as I 
reminded the minister  as I reminded the minister  that the 
remarks must be addressed specifically to the issue of privilege 
which has been raised. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I shall do so, 
although the member opposite did not. And I simply say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that the argument provided and the efforts by the 
government opposite is ill-founded, undefensible, and is simply 
a desperate attempt at trying to cover up the fact that the Public 
Accounts have not been tabled in the House. 
 
And so I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has failed to 
establish that there is any question of privilege here, and I 
would therefore ask you to rule accordingly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker:  I thank the hon. member for the notice of his 
point of privilege which was received in my office this 
morning. 
 
I refer all members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and 
Forms, page 11, paragraph 16, as follows: 
 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights 
enjoyed by each House collectively as a constituent part 
of the High Court of Parliament, and by Members of 
each House individually, without which they could not 
discharge their functions and which exceed those 
possessed by other bodies or individuals. 

 
(And) The privileges of Parliament are rights which are 
“absolutely necessary for the due execution of its 
powers”. They are enjoyed by individual Members, 
because the House cannot perform its functions without 
unimpeded use of the services of its Members; and by 
each House for the protection of its members and the 
vindication of its own authority and dignity. 

 
The role of the Chair is to decide whether sufficient evidence 
has been produced to show that the House or its members have 
been, or will be, impeded in the performance of their duties, and 
whether the point raised by the member is so urgent that the 
House must set aside all of its business in order to debate this 
point. 
 
I rule that the hon. member has not presented sufficient 
evidence to convince me that a prima facie breach of 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1094 
 

privilege exists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 9 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
introduce my officials to the House. Beside me is Peter Van Es, 
the deputy minister of Environment and Public Safety; directly 
behind me, Randy Sentis, the assistant deputy minister; beside 
him Rick Knoll, the director of administration and 
communications. 
 
In the back row we have Nick Surtees, close to the door, 
executive director of public safety division; Michael Hegan, 
executive director of the Emergency Measures Organization; 
Bob Walker, director, environmental assessment branch; Don 
Fast, director, the water quality branch; Larry Lechner, director 
of air and land protection branch; and Ron Barsi, director of the 
mines pollution control branch. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a few remarks in opening 
these estimates. I would like to take this opportunity to explain 
the mandate of Saskatchewan Environment and Public Safety. 
 
The department mandate, in recognition of the transfer of the 
technical safety services branch from Saskatchewan Labour, 
and the Emergency Measures Organization from Saskatchewan 
Urban Affairs is now threefold. 
 
First, the environmental protection: to protect and enhance the 
environment in a manner that promotes the physical, 
economical and social well-being of the people of 
Saskatchewan today and in the future. 
 
Public Safety is to provide and maintain safety standards for 
industry and the general public in the fields of boiler and 
pressure vessel, gas, electrical and elevator installations, 
amusement rides, fire safety, and building standards and 
accessibility. 
 
Emergency measures: to develop and maintain an effective 
emergency response capability at the provincial and municipal 
levels of government to ensure the survival and recovery of our 
citizens and communities from a peacetime emergency or 
disaster. 
 
It is under this mandate that our 1988-89 Estimates have been 
prepared. Before I describe some of our new initiatives and 
major programs, it is very important to clarify that the 
reductions shown in Estimates for the 

department, of 885,000 and 6.8 positions, does not reflect the 
reduction to current programs. The reduction is mainly due to 
the deletion of one-time expenditures that were in the ’87-88 
budget for early retirement positions, salaries and severance, 
and projects for Newcore arsenic clean-up and Operation 
Recycle, which were completed in 1987-88. 
 
Also there was six months provision for operations of the 
electrical and gas inspection program in ’87-88, for which only 
three months provisions will be required in ’88-89 due to its 
proposed transfer to SaskPower. 
 
The total of these one-time expenditures that were deleted from 
our ’87-88 budget was approximately 1.6 million and 10.8 
positions. Therefore the department actually received a total of 
$715,000 and four additional positions in increased funding for 
’88-89. 
 
This increased funding will enable us to implement the 
following new initiatives: the closure of abandoned mines  
this is a new program with 200,000 and one position to initiate 
closure of abandoned mines. We will identify public safety 
problems, develop remedial action alternatives for known mines 
near high-population areas and implement a limited awareness 
campaign in the media. 
 
Policy research and strategic planning section: we will establish 
a policy research and strategic planning section with $150,000 
and two positions. This section will monitor and respond to 
comprehensive multi-sectoral environment and safety issues, as 
well as address the recommendations coming from the national 
task force on environment and economic report. 
 
Regina ground water monitoring: this will involve initiation of a 
three-year ground water monitoring program with annual 
funding of 50,000 to assess water quality of the Regina aquifer. 
This program will be done in conjunction with the city of 
Regina and other interested parties. 
 
The boiler and pressure vessels inspection: a new boiler and 
pressure vessel inspector position with funding of $50,000 has 
been established to undertake federal boiler and vessel 
inspections. These inspections will be in accordance with an 
inspection fee for service contract with the federal government 
which will more than recover our costs. 
 
The emergency measure organization: provision has been made 
for a contractual national emergency agency co-ordinator with 
funding of $35,000. These costs will be 100 per cent refundable 
from the federal government under the joint emergency 
planning program. 
 
Toxic chemical management: this program, with funding of 
130,000, has been established to develop and administer the 
hazardous substance regulations under The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act. The program also provides 
information to the public regarding chemical safety and 
undertakes environmental studies aimed at assessing the 
impacts of chemicals on the environment. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1095 
 

A $200,000 annual grant is also provided to the Toxicology 
Research Centre at University of Saskatchewan to provide 
financial assistance for their operational costs and enable them 
to co-ordinate provincial resources for toxicology research on 
effects of toxic substances on human health and the 
environment. 
 
The pesticide container disposal program was implemented in 
1983 to collect discarded pesticide containers and associated 
residues that could severely damage the environment. Since that 
time, approximately 80 per cent of the rural municipalities have 
established collection sites which are serviced by crushing and 
collection contractors retained by the provincial government. In 
1987-88, 273 collection sites were in operation and 
approximately 700,000 containers were crushed; 74 barrels of 
residue were collected and destroyed at facilities in Ontario. 
Crushed metal and taken to mills in Manitoba. 
 
Fire inspection and fire-fighter training. The fire commissioner 
provides fire inspection of buildings in rural and small urban 
centres, and is responsible for the development and presentation 
of fire-fighting training programs to volunteer units, and the 
examination of plans and specifications for regulated buildings. 
 
A complete level one training program of fire-fighters 
consisting of 17 modules has been completed. During 1987-88, 
58 fire schools and 48 certificate modules were conducted with 
a total of 1,669 fire-fighters attending these courses. In addition, 
a training module dealing with fire prevention, evacuation and 
emergency procedures for institutional occupancy was delivered 
to 108 institutions, with 2,451 persons attending. 
 
During 1986-87, 5,432 building inspections in 331 communities 
were conducted by fire prevention officers, and 861 orders were 
issued to remedy hazardous conditions. In addition, 122 fires 
were subject to investigation, and 1,380 plans and specifications 
reviewed. Funding for this program is continued at 989,023 
positions. 
 
The institution chemical collection program: this program was 
initiated to remove the backlog of unwanted or deteriorated, 
potentially hazardous chemicals from schools and hospitals. 
Since January of 1987, over 300 institutions were visited and 
approximately 15,000 kg of chemicals were removed and 
disposed of. The program was completed in March of 1988. 
 
The Clean Air Act was passed in the last session of the 
legislature to replace and improve upon the existing Air 
Pollution Control Act. New regulations under The Clean Air 
Act are being finalized. The new Act and new regulations will 
be promulgated in the near future. 
 
Uniform building and accessibility standards: the Uniform 
Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act received 
assent in 1987, and certain administrative sections have been 
proclaimed. Further sections of the Act are scheduled for 
proclamation in June of 1988, which will bring into force the 
building and accessibility regulations for construction and 
alterations to buildings throughout the province. These 
regulations 

will provide standards for the design, construction, use and 
occupancy of buildings, and will ensure an appropriate range of 
buildings will be accessible to persons with physical 
disabilities. 
 
The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Act and 
regulations adopt the National Building Code of Canada and 
provide for uniform standards throughout the province. The Act 
and regulations will extend control of building construction to 
many areas where control is lacking, and impose responsibility 
for the administration of these standards to urban and rural 
municipalities. 
 
Environment impact assessments: the environmental assessment 
branch reviewed an unprecedented 77 development proposals 
during the ’87-88 fiscal year. Of these, 55 were received as new 
proposals and 22 were carried over from previous years. Of the 
total 77 proposals: 49 were allowed to proceed without 
assessments; 6 are still undergoing screening to determine the 
need for assessments; and 20 were required to undergo formal 
assessments and reviews; 2 proposals were withdrawn by their 
proponents before reviews were completed. Environmental 
impact statements for eight of the proposals required 
assessments, were submitted, and their reviews completed. 
 
(1500) 
 
Ministerial approvals were then granted for them as follows: 
Prairie Coal Ltd.’s relocation of Poplar River Coal Mine near 
Coronach was given on September 21 of 1987; Cigar Lake 
Mining Corporation’s construction and operation of a test mine 
for the Cigar Lake uranium development was given on October 
21 of 1987; Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s construction of 
a 230 kilovolt transmission line to provide an 
Alberta-Saskatchewan interconnection was given on December 
7 of ’87; Simpson Timber Company’s construction of a winter 
haul road from Sturgeon-weir River to Highway 9 on December 
7 of ’87; Eldorado Resources Ltd.’s expansion to its Rabbit 
Lake uranium development on January 4 of 1988; 
Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation’s construction of 
Highway 41 in the Melfort region was given on February 1 of 
1988; Souris Basin Development Authority’s development of 
the Rafferty and Alameda dams and reservoirs on February 15 
of 1988; and Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s construction 
of the Shand thermal generating station on February 16 of 1988. 
 
Comprehensive reviews of the environmental impact statements 
associated with these proposals were completed before 
ministerial approvals were granted to ensure the developments 
were environmentally sound and able to proceed in an 
environmentally sensible manner. It is important that the people 
of Saskatchewan do not find themselves burdened in the future 
with unnecessary and unavoidable costs of environmentally 
unsound development decisions. 
 
In conclusion, I want to state that our government remains 
firmly committed to the protection of our environment and the 
protection of the people of our province. With these comments, 
Mr. Chairman, I open 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1096 
 

the estimates for questions from the opposition. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to join 
the minister in welcoming the officials of the Department of 
Environment and Public Safety to this Chamber, and to say, Mr. 
Minister, that I’ve been looking forward to these estimates and 
looking forward to a time where I hope we can enjoy a 
co-operative approach to the estimates and to the issues that 
face the department and our province as they relate to the 
environment and public safety. 
 
I had hoped that through our estimates we could spare each 
other long speeches. I don’t particularly, therefore, appreciate 
the precedent that you’ve just set with the opening remarks, but 
we’ll overlook that, Mr. Minister, and hope that that isn’t a 
pattern that’s going to continue in these estimates. We’ve spent 
the last four days listening to long, rhetorical speeches from the 
Premier in his estimates, and I’m hoping we can avoid that kind 
of thing in ours. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think we can certainly agree initially that the 
material we deal with, the area of responsibility of your 
department, is an area of deep concern to everyone in 
Saskatchewan. We’re talking here about the very environment 
in which we live. Some of those concerns, Mr. Minister, I’m 
sure, are beyond any partisan politics, and we’ll want to 
approach them seriously together. 
 
I would like to begin, Mr. Minister, just with some more or less 
general observations and questions in regard to your total 
budget for this year. As I study the proposed budget, it appears 
to me  and past budgets  it appears to me that funding for 
the Emergency Measures Organization up until 1985-86 was 
done through the Department of Labour. So that the $400,000 
we’re now spending in the Department of the Environment was 
formerly, up until 1985-86, budgeted through the Department of 
Labour. 
 
As well, the $3 million that is now budgeted under the 
combined Department of Environment and Public Safety, at one 
time was budgeted under the Department of Labour. And also I 
see in your budget for this year, a figure of $1,022,200 as a 
payment to the property management corporation, again an 
addition to your budget. Are my assumptions and those figures 
correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that comparable figures were 
in our last year’s estimates, since the transfer of Emergency 
Measures came to our department for all of the last calendar 
year and they would be included. For all of those programs the 
figures are in the budget last year and this year. So you do have 
comparable figures then. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What I would like to 
say therefore is that each of these categories have been added to 
your department, not in this current year but since your 
government came to office in 1981-82  that these are new 
items in the department’s budget. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if we take that $1 million or plus that’s now 
going to the property management corporation, the $3.1 million 
that now is budgeted under your department for Public Safety, 
and the $400,000 that’s now budgeted 

under your department for the Emergency Measures 
Organization, we have seen over the past number of years, a 
transfer of $4.5 million to the Department of the Environment. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my research tells me that in 1981-82 the 
Department of the Environment had a budget . . . the 
Department of the Environment, alone, had a budget of 
$10,170,500 in 1981-82. Here into 1988-89 we have a budgeted 
figure for the Department of the Environment and Public Safety 
of $10,785,100. And so, Mr. Minister, if you subtract those 
items which have been added to your budget, the property 
management payment, the Public Safety, and the EMO 
(Emergency Measures Organization), we have actually 
therefore seen, since 1982, a significant cut-back in funding to 
the Department of the Environment. In fact, a funding cut from 
10.2 million in essence, then, to $5.7 million. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I guess simply: why this huge 
downgrading of concern for the Department of the 
Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I know that the hon. member was not in the 
House prior to ’86, but at the time that the water corporation 
was formed and the staff that were transferred and the budget 
that was transferred to the water corporation from Environment, 
it amounted to 58 positions and $3,722,960. So that would 
account for a lot of the discrepancy that you’re seeing is the 
period when that change occurred. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, my quick calculation tells me if 
about $3 million has gone over to the water corporation  3.7 
 I’m still left with almost $2 million unexplained. The 
difference between your budget now and in 1981-82 is 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $5.5 million. If 3.7 has 
gone over to the water corporation, I’m still left with almost $2 
million less funding today for concerns in the environment than 
we had in 1982. So I’d really like an explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  When the hon. member tries going back 
and relating to 1981, I would have great difficulty because I 
was not Minister of Environment. I can’t give you all the 
figures back that far since there was a different government in 
power. I went back as far as the time when the major change 
took place under our government in 1984, but I don’t believe 
that you could expect me to go back to that period. 
 
You know, just as an example of trying to make these 
comparisons that the member is making, if you took just the 
chemical can collection program that was brought in since we 
were government, or if you took the scrap vehicle collection, 
each one of those changed this program by millions of dollars. 
And each year there are different needs in our province, so we 
bring in programs that address those needs. 
 
Like an abandoned mine program is new this year, as I 
indicated to you. It was perhaps not needed as seriously a few 
years ago, but it is needed now, so we have ongoing changes. 
And I cannot relate the figures of ’81 to today’s figures; it’s 
most difficult. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1097 
 

Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I don’t have the same difficulty. 
I simply look up the budgeted amounts for the department over 
the years, and I see that the Department of the Environment is 
suffering in its funding. The figures I’ve used have not even 
taken into account inflation over those years, and we’re 
spending less today in the Department of the Environment than 
we spent in 1981-82. And I find that very difficult to 
understand, Mr. Minister, other than to say it reflects a certain 
lack of priority, lack of concern with your government. I don’t 
say this of you particularly as an individual, but certainly a lack 
of concern of your government for issues in the area of the 
environment. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like some further explanation of, without 
using inflation, of the 2.2 million that is clearly missing now 
from your budget that was there when your government took 
office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well, as I indicated to the hon. member, I 
have the overall budget figures the same as you do going away 
back. And I don’t believe that you can compare budget figures 
going back because of the difference in the programs that are 
under the Department of Environment today and what was 
under the Department of Environment at that time. Changes 
have been significant, and there will continue to be change. In 
1981-82 you had $10 million; in 1988-89 you have 10.785 
million. I don’t think that we’re too far off in actual dollars. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, you were here today as I was, 
when the Premier was quite anxious to compare budgeted 
figures from one year to another year, to past years. He seems 
to do that quite freely. He talks about increases in health care 
spending that again are reflections of transfers of other items 
into the health care budget. We’ve seen a number of items 
transferred to the Department of the Environment. 
 
That which is being spent on the environment, I submit, is less 
today, significantly less today, than when your government took 
office. Clearly an addition to your budget has been this payment 
to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation of 
$1,022,200. 
 
Mr. Minister, I sent to you a letter last week, which I hope you 
received, asking for some very specific information in regards 
to the property management corporation portion of your budget. 
Do you have that information prepared, and if so, could I get a 
copy of it, or do I need to ask those question here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m going to send across to you a list of the 
office space that our department uses, and when you mention 
the letter that was sent, I received it yesterday and we haven’t 
had an opportunity even for the department to begin to answer 
it, so I hope that these figures meet the requirements you have. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I would ask you to review the 
questions that I have put in the letter. I anticipated you would 
only just receive it, and I certainly will wait for the response. 
But I would appreciate the specific answers to the questions 
which are asked in the letter that may not be contained in this 
document. 

Mr. Minister, if I could just get an undertaking from you that 
you will have your staff look at my letter. And the response that 
I’ve been provided here, if there are questions here that are not 
 I haven’t got time just now to look at this thoroughly  and 
if there are questions left unanswered, if I could get that 
information, I would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe that most of the questions that 
you asked are answered in the document that I sent to you. If 
there are other areas, I have sent the letter across to the 
department for them to pull the necessary information. It 
wouldn’t be here today, but it will be mailed to you in the 
future. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Thank you for that undertaking, Mr. Minister, 
and I’ll watch for the arrival of that information. 
 
I’d like to turn just for a moment, while we’re still looking 
generally at the budgeted figures here, to the administration 
branch of your department. And I’m going to go back again, 
Mr. Minister, to the 1981-82 Estimates book. And I note from 
that document that the administration branch of your 
department had 40 person-years of employment assigned to it, 
and the budget for the branch was $983,710. By 1986-87 the 
administration branch had been cut to 20 people, half the 
number of people in the administration branch, and yet its 
budget sill remained in the $900,000 area, somewhat lower at 
$932,310. Only $50,000 less, but only half the number of 
employees. 
 
And then I understand that you combined the administration 
branch with the communications branch, adding a total of three 
people. So now I see in the new Estimates book there are 23 
person-years indicated beside the administration and 
communications branch, and a figure of 1,259,200 . . . 
 
So in essence we’ve got half the people in the branch that we 
had in 1981-82, and yet we’re spending an additional $300,000. 
So I would like an explanation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this is an awkward 
question to answer because the method of operating in the 
department has changed completely from ’81 until now; you 
come with . . . different deputy ministers do things differently. 
 
At the time that you speak of, the secretariat staff were all in the 
administration division, and all of the drafting staff were in the 
administration division. Many of the drafting staff, or maybe 
even all of the drafting staff, were transferred to Sask Water 
when that change occurred, and the secretarial staff now are 
assigned to the branch that they serve. We don’t have a steno 
pool that everybody draws from, but rather we have secretarial 
staff in each branch of the department. 
 
We’ve also added computer systems to the administration side, 
which changes the costs, and the communication people are 
working under administration. So when you get all of those, 
you have a 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1098 
 

number of changes. 
 
And don’t forget that from 1981 until now, there have been 
salary negotiations that impact on how many dollars an 
individual would earn, and inflation has continued to escalate 
the costs of government. I think if you were to go back and look 
at the total cost of government, the total budgeted cost of 
government in 1981 and compare it to today, that is a 
significant change as well, and something that needs to be taken 
into consideration when you make these comparisons. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, just precisely, precisely in the 
administration branch of your department now, administration 
and communications, we’re spending a little more money for 
almost half the number of people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Precisely. I understand that some have been transferred to the 
water corp, and the secretarial pool no longer exists, and you’ve 
brought some new people in and there’s been inflation, 
precisely. 
 
I go back then to my first question about your total budget: how 
is it that we need to be spending, in essence, twice as much for 
administration, but the total budget picture is down at least $2 
million in the same interim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well, I might just say to the hon. member 
that you’re trying to compare apples and oranges, and it’s very 
difficult to do that. There have been significant changes, as I 
indicated to you, in the kinds of people that make up the 
administration branch of the department. Secretarial wages are 
much different then computer operators’ wages. So the different 
people that we bring in necessarily mean that the total cost of 
that area is different, but they do different work as well. 
 
You can’t talk about communications as just one person’s 
salary; communications go much beyond that. They go to the 
computer type of printing that is done, and all of the technical 
type of people that you have in any department. In 1981 you 
weren’t doing those things; it was entirely different. So the 
comparison is difficult to draw because there basically is no 
comparison between the two. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, just one further comparison in 
this area. As I look back on the 1981-1982 Estimates, I found 
that there were nine people in the Department of the 
Environment working in the area of policy, planning and 
research in that branch, then an allocation, in those days, of 
$428,000. 
 
In the first budget of your government you cut the spending in 
that area of planning and research by a figure of 13 per cent, 
and then in the second budget  at least the way I looked at it 
 it seems that that branch of your department disappeared 
altogether. 
 
So can you tell me today, now in your department, how many 
people there are working on planning and research and policy 
matters, and how much financial support they’re given, and 
where in your budget we find that financial support? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  There is no specialized group at this point. 
The work that you speak of is being done by the director and his 
staff in each division, so the operation of 

the department has changed. The work is still being 
accomplished, but it’s being accomplished by the people in 
each section. Each director and his staff of the different 
programs, the different areas of Environment, now do their own 
work. 
 
Now we are setting up, as I indicated to you in my opening 
remarks, a new division that will have two people in policy and 
planning, and those two people will be working to a great extent 
on the task force implementation. So I think that we’re still 
doing the work; it’s just not set up in the same manner so it 
doesn’t show the way it did in 1981. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Let me say, Mr. Minister, that I feel, 
personally, and I think others would share this opinion, that it is 
important for a department like yours to have people who can 
be exclusively involved in policy planning, future thinking, and 
so on. 
 
I heard you say that you’re going to establish at least a 
two-person policy and planning division related particularly to 
the task force reports. Mr. Minister, where are they to be funded 
from? What kind of budget will they have for their work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  There’d be $150,000 of new money in the 
budget to handle that division. There’d be two salaried people 
in the 100,000 figure to cover the two, and 50,000 for the 
expenses of the operation of that division. So that’s the new part 
that’s just coming in. The hiring hasn’t taken place yet but will 
in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, can you direct me to the place in 
the blue book where I would find that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’d refer the hon. member to item 3, 
Environmental Assessment. You notice that the number of 
person-years changed from seven to nine, and the amount of 
money changed from 427,900 to 579,000. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m just a little bit 
disappointed. My assumption, having studied the Estimates, 
was that you were devoting two more people to environmental 
assessment. 
 
As you indicated in your opening statement, the call upon your 
department for environmental assessments is growing and 
growing and growing, and I thought that to meet that need 
that’s indeed why these two people had been added to that 
budget item. So I’m frankly disappointed to hear that in fact 
there is no more money going to environmental assessment, but 
in essence you’ve slated these two policy and planning people 
under that category. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you consider making that new initiative a 
separate budget item and leave environmental assessment with 
its two extra people as indicated in the blue book, and create a 
new category for that special initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I think it’s important to allow a department 
to set up in the best manner possible for the needs of the 
department. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1099 
 

We have the environmental assessment branch with a capable 
director. There’s no problem with these two people working 
from that branch and doing their job. 
 
Now of the 479,000 that was there in last year’s budget, some 
of it would have been used for planning and priority; you have 
to have that. And so when we come this year with an additional 
amount of money and two more people, it still will provide that 
option in that division. I believe it can do a good job for us in 
the manner that it’s set up. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, now if we can just move away 
somewhat from the budgeted figures and so on, in the blue 
book, into some of the issues that your department has dealt 
with or not dealt with over the past 12 months. 
 
And I would like to begin with what clearly is felt by the people 
of Saskatchewan to be one of the most serious environmental 
issues facing our province just now, and being dealt with by 
your department, and I refer to dioxin contamination in the 
North Saskatchewan River around the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill. 
And I would like us today to review some of the events of the 
past year because, Mr. Minister, I believe that as we review the 
events of the past year those events will indicate, let me say, 
almost a negligence on the part of yourself and your 
government. 
 
(1530) 
 
They indicate to me that you have moved on this issue only 
when forced to, when public pressure has been there to force 
you to move. They would indicate to me that you seem willing 
to allow this problem  this environmental crisis as it’s 
described by some  that you’re willing to allow this problem 
to grow without taking some substantive steps to deal with it. 
 
And I suspect, Mr. Minister, of course you’re going not to agree 
with my assessment of the year’s events. And so I propose that 
we spend some time this afternoon reviewing those events 
because of the concern over this issue being expressed by 
workers at the pulp mill; being expressed by residents of Prince 
Albert and other communities along the river that are clearly 
affected; and being expressed frankly by people across our 
province, and indeed our nation. And they will want to hear the 
exchange, I think, that we have on this very significant issue. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, just so that we have some common basis 
for our discussion, may I just first of all ask you as Minister of 
Environment of the province of Saskatchewan, do you consider 
the dioxins that have been found in settling pond and in the fish, 
do you consider these to be extremely toxic and dangerous 
chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well, the member made a number of 
statements when he was asking his question. Let me first say to 
you that we were never forced to act. 
 
The department has probably been one of the forerunners as far 
as monitoring dioxins in our province compared to 

any other province across Canada. The types of dioxins, as you 
may know, are . . . there are about 75 different types and of 
those, one is extremely toxic. 
 
When the department checked the settling ponds in 1986, they 
did not find in their tests that they had done that there were any 
of the very toxic dioxins in the settling ponds at that time. 
 
The outflow from the Weyerhaeuser mill into the Saskatchewan 
River was checked in 1987; the effluent that comes back into 
the river was checked. And at that point, when we had the 
results back in March  and I gave you those figures in the 
House here  it was found that none of the very toxic waste 
was coming through the system and into the river. There was 
some of the very toxic dioxin found in one settling pond on 
Weyerhaeuser’s property this year, but that is not released on 
into the environment. It’s left there in that settling pond  this 
is the sludge. 
 
So though there were traces of dioxin found in fish  and 
particularly they were suckers that were found at the bottom of 
the river  and they did have traces, even the traces that were 
found in those suckers were within the allowable amounts by 
the Government of Canada or the Government of the United 
States. Like, we don’t set those figures; those are set outside of 
our boundaries. So we were within the range, well within the 
range. 
 
I believe that what we are seeing basically is a flare-up of this 
issue because of at least some media reports that were not 
factual and were written in an inflammatory manner. And when 
that happens, it’s bound to get people nervous. If people had 
been told the truth all the way through, I don’t think we would 
have had that difficulty. 
 
I believe the department has acted responsibly in this issue. And 
we cannot say to you or to the public that Weyerhaeuser has 
been the cause of any dioxins in the river, because the checks 
that we have made of their effluent coming back into the river 
system did not test that there were dangerous dioxins in the 
effluent. And that test was not done by Saskatchewan, it was 
done by laboratories in Ontario. 
 
So I believe that we have as fair a test as anybody could get, 
and the figures that came back would support the position that 
the department has taken. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, we’re going to review, very 
carefully, many of the things that you have just said. This is a 
very significant issue to the people of Prince Albert, the 
workers at the pulp mill, and the people of this province, and 
we are not going to go quickly through this issue. 
 
We, Mr. Minister, have, I think, some agreement therefore that 
that one form of dioxin, the 2,3,8,2  whatever it is  2,3,7,8 
-TCDD is indeed, as it has been described widely, an extremely 
lethal chemical. Mr. Minister, you said a few seconds ago that it 
was back in ’86, I think you said, that the tests were first 
ordered. At that time I’m assuming that you and your 
department would be aware of the this TCDD, dioxin. How is 
it, Mr. Minister, that when you did that initial testing that you 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1100 
 

didn’t discover that dioxin which is clearly there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I think that’s a very strange question for 
the member to make. Remember the plant is an ongoing 
operation, and in 1986 when samples were taken from the 
settling pond and the samples were tested in the laboratory, they 
did not find that they had the dioxins in the samples; there 
weren’t any. In 1987 traces were found, so there was a change 
in what was flowing there and what the residue was. And we 
monitor on an ongoing basis because things do change and I 
would expect that we will see change again. Whether it will be 
up or down . . . I hope it goes down. 
 
Weyerhaeuser has indicated that they are very concerned that 
there any traces of dioxin and they’re working on that. And I 
think they have been a responsible company and will do exactly 
as they said. So for you to say you’re surprised that there’s a 
change, I’m not surprised when things change. I hope that 
sometimes we’re going to see the change go the opposite way. 
But in ’86 the tests showed that there was no dioxin, and we did 
not do the sampling . . . like, we took the samples, but we didn’t 
do the lab tests, the lab test was done by others. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, are you saying then to this 
House today that the presence of that most dangerous of the 
dioxins, that has now clearly been identified in the settling pond 
of Weyerhaeuser and in the fish, was not there in 1986  that 
the 138 parts per trillion appeared there in one year? Is that 
what you’re saying, Mr. Minister  that it wasn’t there in 
1986, and it was there in 1987, and that it appeared in that one 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  That’s what the test showed. Now the 
testing, that’s a very, very delicate test that we’re talking about. 
If you were to have tried this test probably 10 years ago, you 
couldn’t have tested it. It’s such minute quantities that the 
equipment just was not available, but it is available today. We 
don’t have it in our labs here. We can’t even get this test done 
in Saskatchewan, so we have to send out. 
 
I think we tread on very dangerous ground when we try to 
attribute the dioxins that were found in the fish to 
Weyerhaeuser. That dioxin source, we are not able to say where 
it came from. It could have come from a pulp mill; it could 
come from the city of Prince Albert. I am advised that that 
dioxin can even come from water running across areas where 
forest fires have burned. 
 
So there are many sources, and for the member to try to make 
accusation that any one given source caused the problem is 
extremely dangerous, and I know that, as a department, my staff 
would not make that assumption. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I have not yet got to that 
accusation. What I’m accusing, if I’m accusing anything just 
now, is that in 1986 you and your department did tests for 
dioxins. You came up with a finding that said there were certain 
dioxins in that settling pond, but not those of the most lethal 
nature. 
 
I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, what a variety of groups from 
across Canada have said, that in fact your tests were 
inappropriate; that you in fact didn’t use the correct 

equipment to test for the most lethal of the dioxins. Would you 
accept that as at least a possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, I wouldn’t accept the member’s 
statement at all. We sent the samples to the best labs that are 
available in our nation, and I believe that the sample results that 
we got back would be the best that you could get anywhere. 
 
It’s very simple to stand here and make that accusation, but 
when you send them to a scientist who is working in a 
well-equipped lab and then say he didn’t do a good job, I hope 
that you have a lot of background in chemistry to back up what 
you’re saying. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I equally hope that you have a 
lot of background in chemistry to be able to assure this House 
that the TCDD that’s in the settling pond at Weyerhaeuser 
appeared there in one year; that it had not been collecting there 
for years and years, but that somehow in the course of less than 
12 months, appeared in the settling pond at Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have admitted in this House today that 
you knew about the dioxins, of one form at least, in the 
Weyerhaeuser settling pond in 1986. How, Mr. Minister, did 
you make this information available to the public at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised by my officials that the 
samples that were taken in 1986 did not show any dioxin of the 
2,3,7,8-TCDD. They were clear when that sample came back. 
 
You asked about the method of communication. That was done 
through a press report in the fall of ’87. As you can appreciate, 
you take the samples and it takes a good part of a year to get the 
results, so that’s what happened. And when the press people 
had the report that there was no showing of he dioxin 
2,3,7,8-TCDD, they weren’t even interested in going forward to 
publish. 
 
(1545) 
 
But it was when Greenpeace or other organizations in British 
Columbia started to make the commotion that the issue flared 
up again and became more of a press type of issue. I don’t 
believe that the press did a good job, confidentially, of reporting 
this one. I don’t know whether it should be confidential. When 
you say it here I guess it isn’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, I don’t agree with their reporting at all on that issue, but I 
guess press have the right to report as they see fit, and we can’t 
write their stories for them  sometimes I’d like to help. 
 
The staff advised me that you could take two samples on the 
same day and they could show somewhat different in their 
analysis at the end of the complete test. So whether there was 
something that was missed in that one, I don’t know. But they 
took sludge samples and sent them away and had them tested, 
and that’s the best that anyone can do. You can’t go and look in 
the pond and say there’s dioxin there and know where to pick it 
up. You go and take a sample of the sludge, and that’s what 
we’ve done, and I believe that the samples were as 
representative as you could get. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1101 
 

Mr. Calvert:  So, Mr. Minister, then you admit the 
possibility that the 2,3,7,8-TCDDs may well have been in the 
sludge in 1986, but somehow you just missed them. Well I’ll let 
the minister respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, I don’t buy that at all. What I’m telling 
you is we took a representative sample, we sent it away, and the 
sample came back clear  that there was no 2,3,7,8-TCDD 
dioxin in that year. And when we took the tests in ’87, likely the 
same people took the tests of that sludge, and it came back that 
there was a very small trace. Things do change, as I indicated to 
you before. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, when it was announced by your 
department that dioxins had been found  and if I may say so, 
I think appropriately highlighted in the press  what reaction 
did your department receive from the residents of Prince Albert, 
the residents of Nipawin, others whose lives were affected by 
the North Saskatchewan River? What was the response? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that when the press reports 
initially came out, there were two letters that came that were 
registering a concern that they had taken wrong information 
from what they read in the press. They didn’t realize it was in 
the settling pond; they thought it was in the river. Once they had 
that clarified, we’ve had no more concern expressed from that 
area. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, is it not rue, is it not true that 
particularly residents of Nipawin and others asked the question 
that if the Department of the Environment knew there were at 
least . . . there was at least one form of a dioxin present in the 
sludge, they were asking the question: why, therefore, has the 
Department of the Environment not been testing the water and 
not been testing the fish to that point? 
 
I ask the same question. When you realized there were dioxins 
there, why is it that the department was not immediately out 
there testing the water and testing the fish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I could advise the hon. member that there 
was concern expressed by the city of Nipawin at the time that 
the fish were tested, and that test was done by the fisheries 
branch of the government; it wasn’t done by our department. 
 
The traces that were identified in the fish  though they were 
low, there were still traces of dioxin  and that was a concern 
to Nipawin and, I guess, to anyone, and that was the reason they 
raised the concern. 
 
We have monitored the river water and we’ve monitored the 
P.A. Pulp mill and the flow that comes back into the river from 
that pulp mill, and I believe that the reports that we have at this 
point would indicate that there is no major concern. 
 
We have gone a step further. I’ve contacted the federal 
Department of Environment. I’ve asked them to work with the 
Department of Environment in Saskatchewan on a joint study 
and to jointly do tests of the river and of the area to try and find 
what the dioxin source has been that 

the fish were in. We haven’t had a response at this point from 
the federal government. I’m anticipating that I will get a 
response soon, but I haven’t heard a reply to my request up to 
this point. 
 
We do face another serious issue in the testing of water or 
effluent or sludge for dioxin, and that is that the numbers of labs 
that are available are very few, and so you have to stand in line 
and wait to get your sample tested. If we could speed up the 
turn around on that it would be of considerable advantage, but it 
hasn’t been possible up to this point. Maybe in future we can 
establish something, but it’s a very costly process and not 
something that you can do quickly. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Minister, I have very carefully saved 
all of the press and the public reporting of this issue. When the 
presence of the dioxins were announced, there was a hue and a 
cry from a variety of people for testing of the fish and the water. 
At that time an official from your own department is quoted as 
saying, “I guess it’s something that should be done, but at this 
point we haven’t.” 
 
Mr. Minister, I fail to understand, when you as minister in your 
department were aware of the presence of dioxins, why you did 
not immediately seek to have the testing of the water and the 
fish done. Why was there this period of delay? And indeed I 
recognize the fact that it takes many months to get these tests 
done because of the availability of testing facilities. We could 
be ahead of the game now if you hadn’t been so slow off the 
draw. So why the delay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I think the article that the member reads 
from was the article that was written after the fish samples had 
been done by the fisheries department and dioxin was detected. 
If I’m right, I believe that’s the article. 
 
An Hon. Member:  November 30,1987. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Yes, that’s the article. That was after the 
fish samples had been taken and the dioxins were identified in 
those fish in very small traces. And remember, these are suckers 
who are bottom feeders who would get far more than 
surface-feeding fish. 
 
The fisheries department has indicated that they would test 
sports fish, and it will take some time to get that response back. 
For you to say there’s a hue and a cry, and then the first person 
you quote is a person from my department saying that yes, we 
should do some more sampling  that’s not a very big hue and 
cry. That’s a person responding to a concern after it has been 
identified. And I think that’s a fairly normal reaction from a 
department official. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, are you saying to this House 
today that the tests on the fish had been conducted and were in 
your possession before November 30, 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I am advised that the fish were taken in 
approximately October of 1987, and the results were not out 
until March. I’m sorry. So the article you have  you didn’t 
give me a date of when that was. Perhaps you’d like to do that. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1102 
 

Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, then let me refer to a variety of 
articles that appeared in provincial press across the province all 
around that time. On November 30, 1987, in the Regina 
Leader-Post, an official of your department is quoted as having 
said  referring to the testing of the fish and the water: 
 

I guess it’s something that should be done, but at this 
point we haven’t. 

 
December 1, 1987, from the Regina Leader-Post, a quote from 
the mayor of Nipawin who said: 
 

It’s ridiculous that the provincial government isn’t 
testing the North Saskatchewan River for dioxin after 
traces of the deadly chemical were found at the 
Weyerhaeuser pulp mill. 

 
On December 2, 1987, in the Prince Albert Daily Herald, you 
are quoted, sir: 
 

The minister confirmed tests have been ordered to check 
for dioxin contamination in fish from the North 
Saskatchewan River. 

 
You were confirming that the tests had been ordered, not 
conducted or completed as you’ve just indicated to this House. 
Mr. Minister, I submit that you only ordered these tests after the 
pleas and the hue and cry that came up from Prince Albert and 
Nipawin, and from across the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The reports that would have been out in the 
fall of ’87 would have been reports of dioxins being present, but 
not 2,3,7,8-TCDD, which is the dangerous dioxin. I don’t 
believe that anyone knew that there were dioxins in fish until 
after the samples were tested and came back. 
 
When the scare came that there could be some of this very 
dangerous dioxin in the river, that’s when we took the river 
water samples, and they were tested after that. We gave you a 
report in March that what was flowing from Weyerhaeuser back 
into the river did not have that toxic dioxin in it. 
 
(1600) 
 
So I believe that we’ve followed a good program as far as the 
department is concerned. What you’re reading from November, 
when you speak about the town of Nipawin, was a scare that 
was put in the news by people, I think, originating out of British 
Columbia and then working across the country, and really did 
not have any basis of fact. So maybe you should get a little new 
research going for yourself and come up with fact rather than 
fiction that you’re getting from the news media. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, you want to blame 
environmental organizations. You want to blame the media. Mr. 
Minister, you’ve said in this House today that by the fall of 
1986 your department was aware of the presence of dioxins. 
 
Now for one reason or another, for one reason or . . . by the fall 
of ’87, I’m sorry, for one reason or another, you 

didn’t detect the TCDD, but you knew there were dioxins 
present. You did not order the testing of the water and the fish 
on that knowledge. You waited until there were tests showing 
that the TCDD was present. I believe that’s what you just said 
to this House. Now that’s just not acceptable. 
 
With the presence of any dioxin, it seems to me a responsible 
government and a responsible Minister of the Environment 
would have ordered immediate tests. That’s what the people of 
Prince Albert and the people of Nipawin and others along the 
North Saskatchewan would have expected, and they said so in 
the press. It was only after they protested to you and protested 
publicly, expressing their shock that nothing was being done, 
that you ordered the tests on the fish and the water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I think that when I spoke to you before I 
told you that when the tests were taken of the sludge ponds in 
Weyerhaeuser in 1986, that they did not show that the 
dangerous dioxin 2,3,7,8-TCDD was present. And I told you 
that the samples that were taken in the fall of 1987 did show 
that there were minor traces. 
 
The samples of fish were taken by the fisheries division of the 
Department of Parks in October. The article you read from was 
in November. So I didn’t instruct them to take those samples; 
they had taken those samples on their own. 
 
What I did do was to ask the department to take tests of the 
effluent that was coming back into the river from the pulp mill, 
and to test the sludge pond a second time in ’87. And that was 
done. The river itself has not shown that it had these dangerous 
dioxins in it, but as you can appreciate, the dilution that would 
occur in the river compared to what you find in a fish that 
would eat time and time again in the same place would be quite 
different. 
 
So to detect the minute quantities that would be in the river 
would likely be very difficult even with today’s equipment. If 
there are dioxins in the river, then we would have very, very 
minute traces that are much below what is considered 
dangerous by Canada. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Minister, maybe we should move 
along just a little bit. Mr. Minister, you will admit, I’m sure 
now, that the most lethal form of the chemical dioxin is, in what 
I would describe as a high level, present in the sludge at the 
Weyerhaeuser mill. I would describe 138 parts per trillion as 
being a high level of dioxin. You will freely admit, and have 
publicly, that there are levels of that very lethal dioxin present 
in the suckers along the North Saskatchewan River. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I’m going to ask you then very simply: 
what are you doing to stop it? What are you doing to prevent 
further contamination, either of the sludge or of the fish in the 
North Saskatchewan? What are you doing currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the levels 
that were found in the sludge showed laboratory levels of 42 
and 138 parts per trillion of 2,3,7,8-TCDD. Whether or not that 
is higher than average I really don’t know. My staff advise me 
that that’s quite within the 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1103 
 

recorded requirements in sludge ponds at pulp mills across 
Canada. 
 
I believe the important part to remember, when we speak of the 
tests of the sludge, is that this sludge is not released back into 
the river or back into the outer environment; it’s contained on 
the pulp mill property in a waste disposal area. It’s not put back 
out into the environment as such. 
 
There have been changes in the type of chlorine that’s used on 
the bleaching process at the pulp mill. And I’m not really a 
chemist that can tell you the entire change, but there is chlorine 
dioxide now that’s being used which should cut considerably 
the amount of 2,3,7,8-TCDD that would likely be generated by 
that pulp mill. 
 
So it is a step in the right direction. I understand that there have 
been meetings between the staff of Weyerhaeuser and the union 
that works . . . the management and the union at Weyerhaeuser. 
They are making some recommendations, but they haven’t 
finalized any direct change of process other than to change that 
one chemical. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, then, very directly: will you, as 
the Minister of the Environment, insist, and with legislation if 
necessary, that processes at the pulp mill be changed to lower 
the level of the most toxic of the dioxins? Are you prepared to 
insist that this happen, and not just hope that it happens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Up to this point in time we haven’t found 
what we considered to be a very dangerous problem occurring 
at the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill, so we wouldn’t at this point be 
taking that kind of punitive action. We will continue to monitor 
very closely what’s happening at that mill, and appropriate 
actions will be taken as time goes along if there is a change in 
what we find. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I guess I know what our Prime 
Minister feels like when he goes to Washington and talks to the 
President of the United States about acid rain. The President of 
the United States always seems to find a way to say, well we 
need to . . . we’re not sure it’s a problem, we’re not sure that the 
problem is of a magnitude that we need to deal with; what we 
need to do is some more testing. And that’s kind of the feeling 
I’m getting from you, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would ask you to respond to this article which appeared in the 
Regina Leader-Post on March 5, 1988. It is a report that was 
from an interview with John Sprague, who is, as you may well 
know, a toxicologist employed by the province of Ontario 
studying the toxicity of pulp mills. John Sprague says, quoted in 
the article: 
 

The answer (to the dioxin problem) is not more 
government studies and expensive tests for dioxin 
contamination of fish. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

Why study it for 20 years when you can do something 
about it? . . . People are spending 

$1,500 a crack for every set of dioxin measurements and 
are tying up whole labs and completely ignoring 
anything else. We (scientists) think this is an 
unprofitable (decision). 

 
You’re aware Mr. Minister, that in other parts of the world, a 
different bleaching process is used. Every indication is that the 
oxygen bleaching process reduces, if not eliminates, the 
presence of the dioxin of the most lethal kind. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you at this time, through your department and 
in consultation with Weyerhaeuser, are you looking at that as an 
option for the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  If the hon. member has the article that he 
was reading from in front of him  this is Saturday, April 16 in 
the Saskatchewan Star-Phoenix, and it says: 
 

By using chlorine dioxide instead of chlorine, dioxins 
and other waste products will be reduced immediately, 
Sprague said. 

 
That’s what has happened at the Prince Albert pulp mill, is 
exactly what he has said here. So I think that our department, in 
working with the federal government and others, has been 
encouraging that change, and I’m advised that that change has 
taken place in Prince Albert. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, then I thank you very much for 
that assurance. And be sure that many in this province will be 
watching that situation very closely. 
 
The record of your department over the past year, frankly, has 
left some folks less than sure that you’ve been right on top of 
this. And so a variety of people will be watching to be sure that 
processes are being changed at the Weyerhaeuser mill, that in 
fact we’re not faced with an environmental time bomb here on 
our hands. 
 
Just one further question, Mr. Minister, in this area: this sludge 
that currently exists in settling ponds, what is the long-term plan 
for the sludge? What is the plan for the long-term disposal of 
this sludge that now contains this high level of the very toxic 
dioxin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that this sludge is retained on 
site in the land fill, not to be taken off of their site. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, that, I guess, doesn’t quite 
satisfy me. What is the long-term plan, then, for the material 
that will be standing in a land fill? Is it just to stand there for 
ever and for ever and for ever? Is there not some plan in place 
for the disposal of this material? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  That product will be maintained on that 
site, on Weyerhaeuser’s site, on their property in a land fill. 
Maybe in future time if we had hazardous waste incineration 
capabilities you could burn it, but we don’t have that kind of 
capability now in Saskatchewan. To haul it to Ontario or 
something may be possible in the future, but at what cost? 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1104 
 

So we don’t have immediate plans of moving it. It’s to be held 
on the site, the same as it has been through the years that the 
NDP were in government and the pulp mill operated. The 
method of handling sludge was established and it’s ongoing, 
and that’s the proposal that we’re making today, is that it will 
be ongoing until some future time. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well there is something new about the 
situation, Mr. Minister, as you well realize. Now we have the 
presence of dioxins of the most lethal kind in that sludge, and so 
there is some urgency, I think, for you and your government to 
be dealing with the whole question of hazardous waste that will 
include that sludge. 
 
And I want to pursue that question, as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Minister, with you in terms of the disposal of hazardous waste 
in our province before we’re through these estimates. I believe 
my colleague from Athabasca has one or two questions he’d 
like to ask right now, so I’ll just defer to him. 
 
Mr. Thompson:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to ask a few questions on the new program that you have 
on abandoned mines. I know it’s a new program. I looked under 
public safety, which I assume it would be under that subvote, 
and I . . . it’s not under that, right? Okay. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could just explain what has 
taken place in the last year, or since you have created the new 
program of checking into abandoned mine sites? And I wonder 
if you could explain to the committee whether . . . or to the 
legislature whether you have expanded that into northern 
Saskatchewan, into the abandoned uranium mines, or is it 
strictly into the coal mining areas of southern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I would advise the hon. member that this 
will be under the abandoned mines, or the mines section, not 
under public safety. And the program is brand-new; it was just 
implemented at budget time this year. So we’re in the process 
of putting staff in place and we are, to some extent, utilizing the 
staff from our Prince Albert office to get the program up and 
running now. 
 
We’re just in the very initial stages, but we will be covering the 
coal mines in the South, but we’ll also deal with mines in the 
North; so it will cover mines all over. And I believe that if you 
are aware or you hear of mines that are causing difficulty or are 
a danger to the people in the area, that we would appreciate it if 
you make the department aware of that so that we could deal 
with it. 
 
Mr. Thompson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In your response, 
I wonder if you could indicate how much staff you plan on 
putting into this program and when they will be starting to 
work? I fully agree that if there are any mine sites that I hear of, 
I would most certainly pass that on to your department. 
 
I’ll just wait for that answer, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  It’s a little hard yet to give you an exact 
figure on staff, but it’ll probably amount to about two 
person-years, but it may involve more than two people or 

parts of people, because it’ll be more of a summer-time kind of 
activity. 
 
But the actual filling of an abandoned mine would not be done 
by the department, but it would be done by contract. So the 
identification and the method of dealing with any individual 
situation will be dealt with and developed by the department, 
and then a contractor would be employed to carry out the work 
as designed by the department. 
 
Mr. Thompson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would urge 
your department, under your direction, Mr. Minister, to have 
your staff go out and take a look at the mine sites that we have 
in northern Saskatchewan. As you are aware, there are many 
mines that have closed down, and I can think of some of the 
earlier ones, the Vista mine, and Gunnar and Eldorado just 
lately. But there are many smaller mines that have operated in 
northern Saskatchewan, and I would think that they should be 
looked into. 
 
We would never have this agency in the Department of the 
Environment if it wouldn’t have been for the tragic accident 
that we had in Estevan. That’s how it was created, and it’s too 
bad that that had to happen, but now action has been taken. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would also consider expanding 
the program not necessarily using the staff from the Department 
of the Environment, but utilizing other government agencies, 
such as conservation officers and the like, around the province 
and expanding that to not only abandoned mine sites, but I think 
if we took a look at some of the abandoned farms, that you 
would probably find that there are a number of wells that have 
become dangerous. 
 
A lot of wells were filled in in the earlier days with logs and 
types of garbage that 10, 15, 20 years later have decayed and 
are starting to cave in or will cave in with weight. I have 
personally seen wells such as this, and what it does, not only is 
it a danger, for an accident like we had in Estevan, but it’s also 
a danger to many of our wildlife animals such rabbits and 
coyotes and deer who can fall into these abandoned sites. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would just consider 
expanding the program and using other departmental people to 
take a look at some of the sites where you might find an 
abandoned well that has started to decay and cave in  and 
take a serious look at that, because I think what we don’t want 
to have happen is another accident like we had. And it could 
happen in an abandoned well just as easily as an abandoned 
mine shaft. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I can appreciate the concern you have with 
water wells. They may be a problem, but in most cases they’re 
on private property, and it would be most difficult for the 
department to be involved in identifying or dealing with them. I 
think that there is a responsibility by individuals to address that. 
I know as a farmer myself I’ve had water wells; I’ve had to fill 
them and sometimes fill them two or three times. And I believe 
that we’re going to have to depend on the general public to do 
some of that. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1105 
 

The mines themselves have been mined by people who no 
longer are in the area. In many cases they’re closed and the 
company has disappeared, so you can’t go back to them and ask 
them to fill it, even though we would like that. 
 
I think in today’s method of opening a new mine, a method of 
closure at the end of the mine is also developed, so it’s a little 
different circumstance and I hope it’s going to deal with the 
issue you raise. 
 
Now I’m advised that all of the mine sites in northern 
Saskatchewan have been identified by the people who have 
been working out of the Prince Albert office in programs that 
we had in prior years. They aren’t all closed or anything like 
that, but they are aware of them and will likely be working with 
them as funds are available. 
 
The southern area of the province, which is going to be the first 
one zeroed in on because the population areas are heavy there, 
we will be looking at utilizing the assistance of the rural 
municipalities and councillors to identify some of these. We’re 
also looking at aerial maps that will provide much of the 
information and show the danger areas. 
 
My staff have worked just a few days in that area now. They’re 
just putting the program together, and the staff is still not 
completely hired  we’re using existing staff at this point  
but are making a beginning on addressing a very serious 
problem that has occurred from the disaster that occurred last 
fall near Estevan. We don’t want repetition of that, and that’s 
the reason for the program. 
 
It will likely be an ongoing program, and we don’t believe that 
anybody should expect that all of these problems will be 
addressed in one year, but they will be addressed in the next 
few years as we work with the people of the province, both in 
the North and the South. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Thompson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was not 
speaking of any wells that would be on private property when 
we talk about abandoned mine sites. I also speak in those terms 
as far as wells  it’s abandoned property or farms where no 
one lives any more, and you’ll see these old buildings that are 
caved in, and that’s where you will find this type of a situation. 
 
And I would think that if it was advertised through your 
department, to make your department aware of any such 
problems, I would appreciate if you added that to the problem. 
Because I think that it can become serious, and if we found one 
or two wells in the whole province that were dangerous, it 
would be very important. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The program was set up basically for 
mines, as you’re aware, and we do intend to do some media 
advertising to get public awareness and public assistance to 
identify the dangerous mines that are out there. So the 
beginning will be made, and as the program goes forward, if 
there is need to go beyond mines to other dangerous wells or 
whatever, we may look at that. But it isn’t intended in this first 
year. 

Mr. Thompson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would urge the 
department to also add the wells into your program. 
 
I want to just ask a few question, Mr. Minister, on the 
inspectors that you have working in the Department of the 
Environment that inspect the tailings ponds and the uranium 
mines in northern Saskatchewan. I wonder if you could just 
indicate how many inspectors that you have on staff, and also if 
you could indicate how many times  I should know the figure 
 but how many times a year do your inspectors go into . . . 
and let’s just use the one site as example; they would all be the 
same. But how many times a year do the provincial 
environmental inspectors go into Amok to inspect the tailings 
ponds and where they empty out into the environment at Cluff 
Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  We have four inspectors and every 
uranium mine is treated the same. There’s a minimum 
inspection of once per month. And if there’s a spill occurs or 
there’s any problem detected when they are there, then they 
may go back many more times until the problem is corrected. 
So a minimum of once a month, but it might run 15, 16 times or 
more in a year if there’s been a spill or any other reason that 
they go back. 
 
Mr. Thompson:  And, Mr. Minister, I’m assuming that they 
work in close conjunction with the federal Department of the 
Environment. Is that right? I’m assuming that they work closely 
with the federal Department of the Environment. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  There would be overlapping of inspections 
done by the federal Department of Environment and our 
department, but they’re not joint inspections. And a minimum 
of once a year there is a surprise inspection where they have no 
idea that you’re coming, because I think you can’t have 
everything cleaned up just for inspection day. You want to see 
things as it is and as it operates day after day. So they do go in 
by surprise at times just to have a look at what a day-to-day 
operation looks like and to be sure that it’s satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Thompson:  A final question, Mr. Minister. Are you 
satisfied with the levels and the readings that you’re getting 
from Amok? Are they below the provincial standards and the 
federal standards on a continual basis, on a month-to-month 
inspection? And could you just indicate if you’re satisfied with 
the way it’s been going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised by the chief inspector that the 
levels are well below our requirements in not just Amok but all 
of the uranium mines, and the inspector advises me that in his 
opinion they are doing an exemplary job of controlling the 
levels of emission, keeping them much below what we even 
require. 
 
Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to talk this 
year again about public safety, if I could, Mr. Minister. We had 
a session on this last year, as you’ll recall, in which I explored 
with you how it was possible that your public safety branch 
would have a staff reduction of some 38 or 39 people, I think it 
was, last year, and we went through the details of the number of 
the work-load of the various branches that you have. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1106 
 

I don’t propose to go into it in that kind of detail this year, but I 
do notice that they’ve zapped you again, Mr. Minister, in the 
sense that you’re now . . . your staff is now being reduced from 
81 to 71.2 person-years. Now will you advise us how these 
reductions fall across the public safety division and what that 
means in terms of the program that you’re delivering in this 
public safety sector of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  In response to the hon. member’s question, 
a lot of the difference that shows here is that in this year’s 
budget we have only included the gas and electrical for a 
three-month period; in last year’s it showed for six months. 
 
I told you last year we were intending to transfer that to 
SaskPower. The legislation was before the House, but the 
House closed before the legislation passed. The intention is still 
the same, is that that will transfer as soon as the legislation is 
through, and it’s back before the House now. 
 
So what we had last year was a six-month budget. We had 43 
positions but because it was a six-month it shows as 21  like a 
half a year for each one  this year we’re looking at three 
months. So again, you divide that in four instead of in two and 
that shows a lot of the reason  like you’re down to 10.8, 
approximately. 
 
Mr. Mitchell:  Could I ask you to be specific, Minister, as far 
as the various branches are concerned in this division. Can you 
take us through the ones that will remain with your department, 
such as boiler and pressure, and elevator, and the fire 
commissioner’s branch, and detail for us the cuts to these 
particular branches. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that there are no cuts to any 
branch, except that change in electrical and gas inspection. I 
could give you the numbers of people working in each, if that 
was what the member wanted. I’m not just sure what you’re 
looking for. 
 
Mr. Mitchell:  Well that’s fine, Minister, I know how many 
are in each branch. I just wondered if, in the spending plans, 
any of this reflected a cut in any of those services. I think that 
you and I agreed last year that the work-loads in these branches 
were not reducing, were remaining constant or increasing, and 
that it just wasn’t appropriate to have any cuts. 
 
I’ve been made aware, Minister, of a problem, and I would like 
your response to this particular problem area. It concerns 
natural gas leaks which have been detected but not repaired, and 
these are leaks outside of buildings. My understanding is that 
when you have a natural gas leak within a building, within a 
residence, your people get right to it and it is repaired, but that 
there are a number, a significant number of leaks which have 
been detected outside buildings. 
 
And I’m informed that you do have record of these, that they 
have been compiled and that, indeed, they have been increasing. 
They are detected, I’m told, they are detected by a hand-held 
halide detector  that’s h-a-l-i-d-e  halide detector and the 
gas leak is identified 

and the location is recorded. 
 
But while you’ve been, or while the leaks that are detected 
inside buildings are being tended to at once, these outside leaks 
 either above the ground or below the ground  are not 
being attended to. Now could I know, Minister, if my 
information is correct, and if it is correct, what the position of 
the department is with respect to these leaks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  We would not have record of leaks outside 
of buildings. That would not fall under our purview; it would be 
the job of SaskPower’s inspectors. I would be most surprised, if 
it is true, that you would allow gas leaks to be happening. For 
one thing it’s costly, and for the other side it’s very dangerous. 
I’m very pleased to hear that the leaks inside the buildings are 
responded to right away by my staff, because that’s the way it 
should be. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Mitchell:  Another area that I would like to ask you 
about, Minister, concerns stationary steam engineers. And in the 
past, in the department as it then was, we renewed those 
certificates every year, and the advantage of that was that the 
department or the branch was able to keep in close touch with 
the engineers involved and keep track of them. There were 
certain advantages we saw to that. 
 
Now about a year ago, as I recall, this policy was changed to 
permit renewals every five years. I wonder, Minister, if, on 
behalf of your officials, you could respond as to how that 
experiment is working in terms of the department’s policing of 
steam engineers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Chairman, I just report to the hon. 
member that the new regulations only came into effect in 
mid-April. There will be an ongoing inspection of the facilities 
that most of these engineers are in, so a monitoring of how 
effective they are would be done regardless of the five-year 
licence. 
 
And I’m advised that we also pass on a 20 per cent savings to 
them by having the licence owner renewable every fifth year, 
and most of them are responding well to that idea, and it cuts 
down considerably on the work of preparing certificates and 
new licences and so on, on an annual basis. 
 
I believe the move was well received up to this point, but it’s so 
new I couldn’t give you much history. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I’d like again to move our 
attention to a different area. This time, let me just refer to two 
headlines that appeared in today’s Leader-Post. You’d be aware 
of these headlines, the first being the “New turf campaign 
canned,” referring to the fund-raising project being conducted 
by the Saskatchewan Roughriders which is now being put on 
hold because of the delay in the legislation regarding canned 
beverages in this province. 
 
The second headline I’d want to refer to is one that is a quote 
from yourself saying that the law allowing cans is 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1107 
 

coming soon  is coming soon. This is an important area of 
your jurisdiction for a variety of reasons; one, because there’s a 
great deal of public interest and concern in what precisely is 
going to happen in terms of the aluminum cans, and because 
this aluminum can issue takes us into the wider subject of 
recycling in our province, and so I’d like us to spend some time 
on that. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I may ask a very specific question. You say that 
the legislation is coming soon. How soon? When will we have 
the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I don’t know how well aware the hon. 
member is of the process of putting legislation in place but it’s 
not done just instant. There are many hoops that it has to jump 
through. There’s the drafting process and the legislative review 
committee and cabinet and caucus and then the House and the 
debate time that it takes here, so the time frame that I anticipate 
is approximately 10 days, two weeks, something like that. Ten 
days, I would think, is reasonable to be expecting to have it 
pretty much ready for the House. 
 
The debate time, I really can’t control that. The opposition, to 
some extent, controls how long any Bill is debated, but I would 
expect that this one could move through the hoops of the debate 
in reasonable time and we may have to give approval to put the 
cans in place and backdate the legislation to meet it, or 
something like that. But there are a lot of those details I can’t 
give you yet because we’re just not far enough. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, we, in the last session of this 
legislature, passed the amendments to The Litter Control Act; 
that was at least November of last year, if memory serves me 
correct, or October or November. It’s a long time since then. 
Surely you have been working on this legislation. I realize that 
there is some time required, but we’re looking at month after 
month after month. I simply don’t understand why the 
legislation wasn’t all drafted and ready to go as soon as this 
session began. 
 
Can you explain to me why the delay? Why wasn’t it being 
prepared? Why wasn’t all the drafting being done? Why wasn’t 
it ready to be delivered to our desks before May 1 when your 
minister responsible for the Liquor Board was going around the 
province saying and assuring people that it would be all ready 
to go in the month of May? And on the basis of his remarks and 
others from your government, people in our province were 
planning on that basis. Why wasn’t the legislation ready to go 
when this House was called? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well I wish it were as simple as the hon. 
member says. But since the legislation went through the House 
in November, there’s been much consultation with the industry, 
with the retailers, with the consumers’ association, with the 
brewing association, and the bottlers’ association. Through that 
consultation was established a fairly major study that was done 
by the Saskatchewan bottling association. 
 
That study was not completed. They said it would be ready in 
mid-January; we got it at the end of February. Following that, it 
takes time for us to review what the study said. It took time for 
the bottling association to 

review, and then the recommendations of our department went 
forward to cabinet in that process. 
 
So it’s not a fast process, but it’s been a steady process and one 
that I’ve been satisfied with. I think we’ve been working as 
quickly as anybody could expect to accomplish. It’s not a 
simple issue; it’s a fairly major issue. And I believe when we 
bring forward legislation that likely you, as opposition 
members, and the general public will be quite pleased with the 
outcome. I can’t give you the details of that until the legislation 
is finalized and comes forward to the House, but when it does, I 
believe you’ll be satisfied. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well we’re certainly not going to argue that 
you’ve done this in a hurry, Mr. Minister. And I tell you, I’ve 
had a number of phone calls just within this past week from 
business people and others, concerned about the delay in this 
legislation. So let me just pass that on to you that there is a 
concern out there; people want to see this go ahead as soon as 
possible. I heard you say a few moments ago that perhaps you 
could make the legislation retroactive or something and let 
people go ahead. There is a concern out there. I want you to 
know that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I know you’re not about to disclose any of the specifics of 
the legislation, at least I expect you won’t. But then will you 
answer a few questions of a general nature around this 
legislation and the issue of the aluminum cans. Do you, Mr. 
Minister, as the Minister of the Environment, do you favour a 
deposit on all aluminum cans, on some aluminum cans, or on no 
aluminum cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe that the member is coming into 
very specific questions on policy that I can’t give him answers 
to at this time. When the legislation comes forward, I think it 
will address some of these things, but I couldn’t deal with it 
now. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I’m not asking about your 
legislation. I’m asking about what you think, as the Minister of 
Environment in this province, and surely you have an opinion 
on this. Do you as an individual, as a minister, favour a deposit 
on all cans, or some cans, or no cans? I’m just asking your 
simple . . . your opinion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Chairman, my same answer stays. I 
don’t believe that I can answer that type of question at this 
point. I would ask you to wait until the legislation comes. In the 
very near future I think you will have the legislation and likely 
it will answer those questions. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, will the legislation answer the 
question of the strategy, if there is going to be a deposit on 
some cans or all cans, will the legislation address the matter of 
the collection of cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe that the legislation will address 
your concerns on those issues. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, you believe the legislation will 
 or the legislation will address the collection of the cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The legislation will. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1108 
 

Mr. Calvert:  Whatever, Mr. Minister, the specifics of the 
legislation are  and again I encourage you to let the people of 
Saskatchewan know what these specifics are going to be  
whatever the specifics of the legislation are in terms of cans, I 
think it is widely recognized that jobs in this province are going 
to be affected by the shift, particularly to canned beer. Clearly 
jobs in this province could be affected very, very significantly. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, have you and your government dealt with 
the question of job loss as it can be related to the aluminium 
cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I think that when we start talking of job 
loss, it’s an issue that has been of concern to all of the people 
that work in the bottling industry. We have met with the union, 
with the companies that work in the brewing industry. And 
we’ve met with the companies in the soft drink bottling 
industry. I’m hopeful that when the final program is in place 
that there will not be a loss of jobs; there may even be a job 
enhancement. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  When the final program is in place, Mr. 
Minister, is that something that you expect to have in place 
within a matter of weeks and months? Or are we talking about a 
program that you hope to have in place in a matter of years and 
maybe a decade? When will the final program be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I would expect that the final program will 
be in place through the course of this summer. It will start 
probably by early June, and by the fall of this year will likely be 
pretty much in place. Nothing starts instant, but it should pick 
up speed very quickly and be in place this summer. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, are you then assuring this House 
and the people of Saskatchewan that the program that you have 
designed, and will have in place by the end of the summer, will 
in fact preserve the jobs that we’re concerned about that may be 
lost . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order, please. Order. It’s getting to be kind 
of difficult to hear what the old estimates are about. Estimate 
seems to be superfluous to the conversation. So let’s get back 
on the theme. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, before the interruption from 
members opposite, I was asking you when the program is in 
place, then you are assuring this House that there will be no job 
loss because of the switch to aluminum cans. Are we getting 
that assurance today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I can’t give that kind of an assurance. What 
I am saying to you is that I believe that by the time the whole 
program is in place, there may be job enhancement, there may 
be more jobs. But that wouldn’t mean necessarily that they 
would be the same jobs. You know, there may be people on a 
bottling line that won’t be working, and there may be other 
people in the collection side that weren’t working before who 
are now working. 
 
So there may be different jobs, but I believe there will be more 
jobs. That’s the intent. I don’t think that in the 

brewing industry you can attribute the change in the number of 
people on a bottling line strictly to the aluminum can issue. 
There are many outside influences that affect that. 
 
I think the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
negotiations have had considerable impact on that industry, and 
so there may be changes in jobs whether or not there were 
aluminum cans coming in. At least that’s what I’m advised by 
the industry itself. 
 
So during the course of this summer I would expect that likely 
there will be more jobs rather than less jobs. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, there is another group of people 
in this province who are looking at some of their livelihood 
being affected by whatever the legislation is that’s going to 
finally appear, and that’s the small-business person that’s in the 
bottled pick-up business. And that also involves a number of 
young people and students in the summer-time. 
 
Through your new program and in the legislation, will they be 
offered some protection? Do you feel that they will be able to 
continue in the kind of work they’ve been doing, and it may be 
small industry in our province, but it’s not an insignificant and 
particularly not for the people involved. 
 
Can you give us some assurance that they will be able to be 
involved in that business in our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe that I can assure the hon. member 
that any charitable organizations or individuals who wish to 
collect containers will still have the opportunity to do that the 
same as they’ve always had. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order please. It being 5 o’clock this 
committee stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Item 1


