




















































June 9, 1988 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 9, 1988 
 

1959 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a 
group of grade 5 students from Wadena Elementary School, 36 
of them in number, seated in the west gallery. 
 
Their teacher Mrs. MacDonald, chaperons Mrs. Peace, Mrs. 
Olson, Mr. Arndt, and Mr. Ekstrom are with them, and last but 
not least, their bus driver Mr. Peckham. I ask all hon. Members 
to help me welcome my guests today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should like 
to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a group of 28 grade 6 students from Arcola School 
in my constituency. They’re seated in the east gallery. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher Mr. Eric Ingham, and by Mrs. 
Schilling and Mr. Deeth. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them after 2:30, the question 
period, and to get into my own lively question and answer 
session with them, and I would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you three members from the Chinese 
republic, the Republic of China, People’s Republic of China, 
sitting in the west gallery, and I would like them to stand, 
please, as I introduce them. 
 
Mr. Huang Xinbai, the senior commissioner for State Education 
Commission of the People’s Republic of China and president of 
Chinese Education Association for International Exchanges; 
Mr. Yang Quinghua, councillor for education in the embassy of 
People’s Republic of China in Ottawa; Mr. Cui Jianguo, who is 
the interpreter for Mr. Huang; and Professor Peichi Hsieh, 
professor of History at the University of Regina. 
 
I know that you had an opportunity to meet with our Education 
officials at noon today. I’m looking forward to having dinner 
with you this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will all members please join me in welcoming our 
guests from the People’s Republic of China. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly today, some 75 grades 4 and 5 students from Victoria 
School in Kamsack, which is in my constituency of Pelly. They 
are here with their teachers Joyce MacLean,  

Brenda Kondratoff, Gwen Reilkoff, and Lorie Neher. 
 
I hope they have an entertaining session this afternoon with us 
in the legislature. I look forward to meeting with them later, 
after question period, for pictures and drinks and hopefully 
answer any other questions they might have at that time. I hope 
that everybody will help me welcome them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure today for me to introduce to you, and through you to 
all members of this Assembly, 14 grades 7 and 8 students from 
the Ceylon School which is in Ceylon, which is approximately 
70 miles south of Regina. 
 
They are accompanied here today by their teacher Mr. Henry 
Tekatch, chaperons Edith Ayotte, Gayle Hillrud, and Marilyn 
La Rocque. They are seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
And I had the opportunity to meet with these students and their 
chaperons prior to lunch. We had a very good discussion on 
what is going on in the world today and in our province. I hope 
they enjoy the proceedings here in the legislature during 
question period and find it informational and perhaps 
educational. 
 
I would like all members to join with me in welcoming the 
students from Ceylon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the 
Assembly, a number of directors and executive members from 
the Saskatchewan Surface Rights Association. They were to be 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and I think there may have been 
no seats left, so they are now in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think they have met with members of all three caucuses. This 
group of people, for those who are not familiar with their work, 
represent farmers in their dealings with oil companies, and they 
perform yeoman service in that regard. 
 
I know all members will want to join with me in welcoming to 
the Assembly the directors and executive members from the 
Saskatchewan Surface Rights Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Farm Credit Re Home Quarter 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Agriculture and it deals with the report on STV this 
afternoon which concerns farm credit. And the report this 
afternoon is that Dave Fraser of the Farm Credit Corporation 
has announced that FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) will be 
limiting to 25 per cent of the value of farm land of the home 
quarter to farmers in their borrowing policy. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1960 
 

I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you’re aware of that? And if so, have 
you made any overtures to the federal government to allow for 
farmers to continue to borrow against the home quarter the way 
they have in the past — 100 per cent of the value of the land? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am aware of Farm 
Credit’s attitude with respect to the home quarter. And in fact I 
talked with the president and with the federal Minister of 
Agriculture about the potential reaction to the legislation that 
we introduced here in defence of the home quarter and the 
farmer, and said that we had the support of financial 
institutions, including not only the banks but the credit unions 
and generally the large percentage and proportion of the farm 
population. I encouraged them to look at it very carefully. 
 
I will also be talking to them again with respect to their lending 
policy as a result of the statement that came out today that said 
that they are going to cut back on the capacity to lend on the 
home quarter. Now the farmer has some capacity as well to say, 
look, despite the legislation, obviously I have the right to put 
my whatever collateral up for security that he wants. But the 
Farm Credit Corporation is obviously extremely sensitive to the 
security they have now in terms of the home quarter, and have 
made an announcement that says that they are going to be 
lending less on it than they have in the past. 
 
But I will be talking with them, as well as the federal Minister 
of Agriculture, because the support that we are receiving as a 
result of the legislation introduced by the minister is widespread 
and broad, and I expect we will receive support from the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the Premier and the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Premier, as a past farmer you’ll be 
well aware that many farm operations in the province, literally 
thousands of them, use the home quarter as security for 
operating capital during the year. In fact many intensive 
operations — hog operations, poultry, cattle, ranchers, for 
example — lease the majority of their land and only own the 
home quarter, and for years and years they’ve been using this as 
collateral for operating loans. 
 
What your legislation is doing in that particular case for that 
group of farmers is putting literally thousands of farmers on the 
line and possibly pushing them over the brink when it comes to 
operating capital for this year. In fact farmers are telling us, in 
the drought tour when we were down in the south-west and the 
west side of the province, that they in fact are very concerned 
about the impact of Bill 37 when it comes to the lending power 
on the home quarter. 
 
And I’m just asking now whether or not you are going to be 
talking to the federal government, your counterpart, to see 
whether we can get this cleared up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the  

hon. member’s question, I would propose to the hon. member to 
read the Act, because what the Act says, Mr. Speaker, is as 
follows: that if an individual farmer wishes (a) to build on his 
home quarter after this Act is passed, or to buy the home 
quarter, or to deal otherwise in financing that home quarter, the 
financial institution and the farmer can apply to the Farm Land 
Security Board for a waiver of that. That waiver will in fact take 
place; that will exempt those individuals from the home quarter 
protection. That clearly is stated in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The purpose of the home quarter, quite frankly, is this. There is 
a large number of farmers in Saskatchewan facing financial 
difficulty, and is it too much for the government and for the 
politicians and for the people to provide rules that allow that 
individual the decency to have a home to live in, Mr. Speaker, 
and not be afraid of being run off of his home, let alone his 
farm? 
 
That seems to me to be a decent thing, recognized throughout 
North America, and it should be recognized in the province of 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question to the minister. 
Obviously you don’t have to lecture the opposition about 
reading Bill 37. The people I’m asking you to lecture are the 
federal government, the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation), who 
are changing their policy in response to Bill 37. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The question simply put, Mr. Minister, is 
the fact that the Farm Credit Corporation, with a vast amount of 
money loaned out to farmers, is sending a signal, not only to the 
farming community but to other lending institutions in the 
province, and what they’re saying clearly is that the home 
quarter is no longer to be used as security the same way as it 
was before. 
 
And what will happen is there’ll be a drying up of operating 
money that will impact farmers, but as importantly, will affect 
Main Street, Saskatchewan, where small-business people are 
struggling to stay alive. 
 
All I’m asking for you to do is to call your counterpart in 
Ottawa, Prime Minister Mulroney, ask him to get the policy 
straight with FCC to send the signal to the farmers and the 
lending institutions and the business people in Saskatchewan, 
that we do have confidence in the farmers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two observation, Mr. Speaker. First one 
being is this: that until this legislation the Farm Credit was 
exempt from all regulations that had to be handled by the banks 
or by credit unions, etc. This legislation says to Farm Credit, 
you’re going to b dealt with the same way as any other lending 
institution is dealt with, and I think that’s the way it should be. 
 
Now with regard to Farm Credit, they have had a waiver 
automatically, Mr. Speaker, a waiver automatically that  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1961 
 

they could step in and take the home quarter, that they didn’t 
have to go through even the existing laws that’s there today. 
 
Our conversations with Farm Credit is as follows: until this 
legislation is passed, where they would have a mechanism by 
which they could apply to get this waiver, they are going to cut 
back. And I would simply encourage the members of all sides 
of the House to pass this legislation so we can get back to 
normal, and you will, in fact, see Farm Credit lending money to 
Saskatchewan farmers as they have in the past. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary to the minister. On the 
same newscast on CTV the vice president of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — STV. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — STV. The vice-president of the wheat 
pool was talking about the problems that will be created, not by 
Bill 37 directly but by the implication of what your federal 
counterparts in Ottawa are doing with the FCC, literally drying 
up operating capital to farmers and sending a very, very 
negative signal to the Saskatchewan lending institutions, the 
farmers, and the business people, that this is not a good place to 
invest money. 
 
I’m saying to you and asking you, on behalf of the farmers: will 
you today talk to your federal counterparts and get them to 
change their policy on lending on the home quarter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I indicated when this 
legislation was introduced that what we were trying to do with 
this legislation is draw a proper balance, a balance on the one 
hand to provide protection to the farmers who are being, or are 
fearful of being, challenged to have their farms taken away 
from them. And that’s real. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide a mechanism whereby the lending institutions feel 
comfortable enough to provide that . . . continue to provide that 
operating and credit to the farmers. 
 
I find it somewhat strange that when faced with that balance 
and those alternatives, the members opposite of the NDP come 
down on the side of the lending institution and not on the side 
of the farmer. I find that somewhat strange, Mr. Speaker. I 
suppose I should not. 
 
What I say, Mr. Speaker, is once this legislation is passed — 
and I would hope the members opposite would expeditiously 
help us pass this legislation — you will see lending return to its 
original form, Mr. Speaker. The balance is there, credit will be 
made available, and at the same time — something the 
members opposite never, ever speak of — is that we can 
protect, as well, those individuals who fear, Mr. Speaker, not 
only the loss of their farm but fear, Mr. Speaker, that they will 
be kicked out of their house. Them and their children and I 
think we should have some passion for that type of situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and I  

want to go back to the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, 
because this is very much a farm issue. And I want to be very 
brief in my question. I just want to ask you, which I’ve asked 
four times now: will you contact your counterpart in Ottawa to 
see whether or not we can get straightened out the problem that 
FCC is creating for lending institutions, farmers, and business 
people in this province? Will you do that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I already responded to the 
member, and I said that I’d been in touch with them before, and 
I will be in touch with them again. 
 

Gas Tax Rebate 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to direct a question to the Minister of Finance, and I have here, 
before me, a completed gas tax refund under your infamous fuel 
gas tax rebate, whatever you call it, and I’m interested in the 
process for returning the money to the people of Saskatchewan, 
which you have held for a year of 11 months, interest free. 
 
There are some 275,000 people that have applied for a rebate. 
And if you consider the cost of the staff time, the stationary, the 
printing, the envelopes, the stamps, it would cost over a dollar 
per letter to communicate with these 275,000 people. Can you 
tell us here today why you feel it was necessary to spend over 
$275,000 to send out a letter to every applicant telling them that 
their rebate has been processed and that they will be receiving it 
in a couple weeks time? Why couldn’t you have, in fact, 
enclosed a cheque without the previous letter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I’m finding the hypocrisy 
from the opposition, which has dominated this session, a little 
surprising. On the one hand, they don’t like the rebate. Last 
year the whole question on the gas rebate is: you’re trying just 
to avoid paying it back. So we advertised to tell people how 
they would get their rebates. 
 
They’re critical that it’s going to take too much bureaucracy, so 
we hired summer students, young people, Mr. Speaker, so we 
don’t build up a permanent bureaucracy. The reason that people 
were notified, Mr. Speaker, that their rebate is being processed 
is the very simple fact that by using summer students, Mr. 
Speaker, this will be paid out over the course of the summer, 
and I think it’s a fair way to notify the public that submitted 
applications, Mr. Speaker, that in fact their application, one, 
was received, that it’s being properly processed, and that their 
cheque would be sent some time over the summer as we’ve 
acknowledged right from day one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement, Mr. Speaker. I can only say, Mr. 
Minister, in my view, that your arrogance is only superseded by 
your incompetence. 
 
I want to ask you further, Mr. Minister, when you do send out 
this rebate cheque — that’s not good enough — but can you tell 
us why that you have to enclose yet another  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1962 
 

piece of propaganda with the smiling picture of the Minister of 
Finance telling us of all the virtues of the fuel tax? I want to ask 
you — or is it really what you’re doing again is using the 
taxpayers’ money to put your mug and face in every household 
in Saskatchewan at the cost of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It should come as no surprise to the hon. 
member and to the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that recent surveys 
indicate that they would just as soon have my picture as his. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think that we should put in 
perspective the fact that the New Democratic Party has opposed 
the gas tax rebate, Mr. Speaker. The New Democratic Party . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you. That the New Democratic Party 
has opposed the gas tax rebate, that the New Democratic party 
has opposed the government using students to process the forms 
over the course of this summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just advise every New Democratic member in the 
province of Saskatchewan — this is voluntary, Mr. Speaker. No 
New Democrat is required to fill out their forms. And if the 
hon. member doesn’t want the letters from the Minister of 
Finance, then he doesn’t have to fill out his form, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re not making him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
everyone in Saskatchewan keeps the . . . looks at the 
administration of this program as a disgrace, and it’s magnified 
by the waste and the self-serving propaganda of the Tory 
machine. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Minister, you have advertised 
this program; you have spent money in mailings to every 
householder who is an applicant; you have sent out unnecessary 
letters telling them that their cheque is going to be coming, it’s 
processed; you have included a useless piece of propaganda 
with every cheque. Indeed, Mr. Minister, it will have cost well 
over $2 million sending out, processing this to the taxpayers 
who . . . it’s their money. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, what right do you have of wasting the 
taxpayers’ money on your self-serving propaganda campaign, 
while at the same time refusing legitimate rebate to over 3,000 
applicants in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, let me say that no 
legitimate rebate is in fact being refused. 
 
Secondly, I, Mr. Speaker, want the people of this province to 
recall that last summer, after the announcement of the fuel 
rebate to the ordinary people of this province, the New 
Democratic Party said, you are not going to  

advertise this because you’re just going to encourage people not 
to apply for the rebate, Mr. Speaker. Now when we encourage 
people to apply, let them know that their application forms are 
in fact received and being processed, the NDP have now done a 
flip-flop, saying, now you’re advertising too much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Make up your mind. The only thing that you have been 
consistent about this, Mr. Speaker, is that the New Democratic 
party do not like the fuel rebate, and the New Democratic Party, 
Mr. Speaker, will take away the fuel rebate from the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the 
Minister of Finance about the gas tax rebate. Mr. Minister, I and 
my colleagues have had a number of complaints from people 
who have had their rebate forms returned because you have 
been unable to read the postmarks and then have jumped to the 
conclusion that they were mailed after the deadline. This article 
in the Leader-Post of June 9 refers to that, and in this article it 
says that there are 2,500 to 3,000 people who have their forms 
returned. 
 
Is it fair, Mr. Minister? Does a reasonable and fair government 
deny benefit of a doubt to thousands of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? That’s the answer I want, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I appreciate the rather succinct 
question from the back-up minister of Finance . . . deputy . . . or 
critic of Finance, Mr. Speaker. Having said that to the hon. 
member, I think you should take a look at the rest of the article. 
There was a period of time given to the forms to be received by 
the Department of Finance. 
 
Secondly, we have written back to those people and asking 
them to give some form of assurance that in fact it was mailed 
in time. I do believe the official indicates in there, Mr. Speaker, 
that that effort will satisfy, I believe, most people that 
legitimately got their applications in in time; and secondly, that 
there was either an obliterated or an inadequate postal mark, so 
that they will get the rebates. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, earlier you told the press and the people of 
Saskatchewan that your government expected additional 
revenues from the gasoline tax because you calculated that 30 
per cent of the people would not apply for the rebates. Could 
you tell this House how many people who sent in their gas 
rebate forms have had them rejected and returned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to supply 
that information to the Assembly and the hon. member, keeping 
in mind that not all of the forms have been processed. I can only 
give you the information of the forms processed up to date. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I do ask hon. members and the public to 
recognize that it was the NDP that encouraged  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1963 
 

us to advertise this program, to make sure that everybody who 
was eligible got their forms in. Now they’re being critical that 
we didn’t advertise enough, and 70 per cent or whatever, Mr. 
Speaker, so I urge the hon. member to be consistent. 
 
And we are trying to give and ensure that all those who got their 
applications in in time — and there was ample notice of the 
deadline, Mr. Speaker — that they will, in fact, get the rebates. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — A new question to the Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Speaker. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan had to 
place their trust in your government and Canada Post. Either 
one by itself is a shaky proposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you’ve had about a year to 
look at your gas tax. In fact, the people have been paying for it 
for a year and are just now seeing the full extent of the 
bureaucratic nightmare you have brought to this province. 
 
Now, compared to the government budget snafu which you 
have engineered yourself, Mr. Minister, this is a minor blip in 
events in Saskatchewan, similar to the used car tax fiasco where 
you nicked hundreds of Saskatchewan taxpayers for untold 
sums. 
 
However, even though this is small relative to the budgetary 
deficit snafu which I mentioned earlier, Mr. Minister, will you 
assure this House today that this program will either be 
extensively revamped or cancelled completely? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m sure Craig Dotson is turning over in his 
office over the way that that question was fumbled by the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want the press and I want the public to notice 
that we have just today had the formal request from the New 
Democratic Party to cancel the fuel tax rebate program, Mr. 
Speaker. That is exactly what the member has just asked, that 
the fuel tax rebate program be cancelled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that no New Democratic member over 
there has filed a rebate form, Mr. Speaker, taking advantage of 
the system that they criticize, taking advantage of the delay that 
they’re very critical of, taking advantage of the use of summer 
students, Mr. Speaker, to process the forms and avoid a 
permanent bureaucracy. 
 
I just hope, Mr. Speaker, that all New Democratic members 
over there can stand up in this House and say, I want to do away 
with this program, and I’m so true to my belief that I didn’t 
send in a rebate. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think they have the 
courage to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hold-back of Fee by SGI 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), and it concerns his victimization of Saskatchewan 
families. Can the minister confirm that SGI has had for the past 
few months a policy whereby it holds back $35 when a person 
turns in their licence plates as a so-called administration fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm that today. I 
will take notice of it and look into it for the member. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
can confirm that I phoned the licensing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Some time ago we did make a 
ruling in the House that if there’s a supplementary directed to a 
question that had been taken notice of it should be simply given 
without a preamble. And I’m just drawing that to your attention. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, new question. Mr. 
Minister, I can confirm for you that this morning I phoned your 
licensing office at SGI and was told that effective December 1 
this $35 licensing fee was in place. This victimizing is 
becoming second nature with your government: you hold back 
on the gas tax, you hold back on the drug rebates, and now you 
hold back $35 in licensing fees. Why are you penalizing and 
victimizing Saskatchewan families, and when are you going to 
get your hands out of the pockets of Saskatchewan families and 
put them onto the proper business of government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I have long since learned 
not to take anything on face value that comes from that side of 
the House from certain members. So, as I said, I’ll take notice 
and look into this. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Inaccurate Statements by EEC on Canadian Farm 
Subsidization 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
make a statement with respect to international farm subsidies 
and in defence of the situation faced by Canadian agricultural 
producers. 
 
As Minister of Agriculture, I want to address a very serious 
matter and to express my government’s concern regarding the 
recent comments made by officials of the European Economic 
Community relating to Canadian farm subsidies. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the subsidies received by 
Europeans — and I will be supplying examples to the media 
and to the general public — are manyfold higher than they are 
here in Canada, and as a result we have received very unfair 
treatment. 
 
Officials of the European Economic Community stated that 
Canada has no business blaming the Europeans for the high 
farm subsidies that have triggered the current trade war in 
agriculture. An Organization for the  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1964 
 

Economic Co-operation and Development study was put 
forward by the Europeans to show that Canadian farmers derive 
nearly as high a proportion of their income from subsidies as 
European farmers do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these comments are wrong, and the figures are 
erroneous. At a time when over-subsidization by the European 
Economic Community is causing severe financial hardship for 
our farmers, we cannot allow, Mr. Speaker, such unfair and 
inaccurate comments to go unheeded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious matter that costs our 
economy a great deal of money, and it can result in $2 wheat 
instead of $7 wheat that farmers here in this country can 
receive. The extreme result could mean public apathy towards 
the plight of our farmers here in Saskatchewan, and indeed 
across the country, if they believe the erroneous information 
coming out of Europe. 
 
During this very difficult time, our farmers need to know that 
the people of this province and of this government and indeed 
this Assembly and the nation will continue to support our 
agriculture industry and not fall prey to the political game being 
played by the European Economic Community. 
 
The real issue is that the over-subsidization by the Europeans 
has caused excessive production, surplus production by 
European farmers, and has resulted in an oversupply of grain on 
the entire world market. 
 
By the very nature of the European subsidization program, the 
more the farmers produce in Europe, the more they are 
subsidized by the government. And it’s a treadmill, Mr. Speaker 
— the more they produce, the more they’re subsidized, and just 
one thing leads to another. 
 
As a result, what used to be major customers of ours, the 
European community has become a major producer and 
exporter of grain competing with us world-wide. This situation 
has driven down the price of grain to record low levels and has 
caused extreme financial pressure on Canadian farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make the point that farmers of 
Saskatchewan, and indeed Canada, can ill afford to be caught in 
a numbers game which some members of the European 
Economic Community seem intent on playing. To compare 
subsidy levels between countries, they knowingly used figures, 
Mr. Speaker, knowingly used figures normally applied only in 
calculating subsidy levels within a given country. Therefore, the 
compared apples with oranges and were not fair in the 
comparisons when they talked about Canadians. 
 
Let me give you the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
farmers receive approximately $4.70 a bushel, including 
subsidies, for their wheat. A producer in the European 
Economic Community receives approximately $7.13 a bushel. 
Any measure that states the level of subsidies within these two 
prices is equal, obviously is incorrect. 
 
And I will refer, Mr. Speaker, to an example that I’m going  

to be providing to the House, and I have given to the Leader of 
the Opposition and the Leader of the Liberal Party, that points 
out that the subsidy going to Canadian producers, at the 
maximum, is in the neighbourhood of $2.10, compared to a 
price of $3.77 a bushel, or 55 per cent of the price. The 
Europeans receive 103 per cent of the price of a commodity as a 
subsidy alone, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve documented it in some 
detail for the public and indeed for this legislature. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Prime Minister has 
received endorsement by this administration and from farmers 
across the country. And I would just add my congratulations 
with two very notable farm leaders, one, the president of the 
Canadian Federation of Agriculture, and another one, Wayne 
Easter, president of the National Farmers Union, for supporting 
the Prime Minister in defending our farmers against unfair 
international subsidies. 
 
I’m tabling this information, Mr. Speaker, to put it on record. 
Our farmers receive nowhere near the subsidies that Europeans 
do. We are not going to stop supporting our farmers, and we’re 
going to continue to encourage our Prime Minister, Mr. 
Speaker, to fight for unfair subsidies and to reduce them 
world-wide and to defend farmers here against the kind of 
unfairness we’ve seen internationally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think all of us in the 
Assembly and the farmers of Saskatchewan will be amazed that 
the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, would rise today and 
deal, not with the debt crisis of farmers; not with the drought 
that is taking farmers off the land in record numbers across the 
south and western part of the province; wouldn’t deal with the 
Bill 37 and the FCC problems which are in the news today, but 
would come here with a, what he calls, a ministerial statement 
— questionable whether or not it should have been allowed — 
and wasted the time of the House trying to defend the Prime 
Minister who goes to Europe two weeks ago and makes a fool 
of himself, and uses this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious what we should 
be talking about if we’re going to talk about agriculture today in 
the Saskatchewan Assembly. We have been demanding — the 
official opposition — of the Premier to come forward with a 
proposal and recommendation and policy on the situation facing 
the drought area of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The statement dealt with the 
international subsidies and how they’re affecting the 
Saskatchewan farmers, and I know the hon. member will want 
to make his remarks relevant to that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it seems obvious, and it will 
seem obvious to the farmers of Saskatchewan, how this relates 
to the dilemma of wheat prices in Saskatchewan. And possibly 
if I could complete my remarks, it would become apparent to 
the members of the government and the Speaker how this fits 
together. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1965 
 

But I want to say to the Premier . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well I would like to ask you to do that; I 
would like to ask you to do that and to make certain your 
remarks are relevant. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure when I complete 
my remarks that it will become very obvious that the Premier is 
Saskatchewan’s Don Quixote, going out tilting windmills when 
the province of Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan 
are going broke in record numbers. That’s what’s happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I say, I say he’s using the Assembly 
in this ministerial statement to try to get away from the real 
issues facing farmers, created, at least in part by the price of 
grain, but the real issue being the debt situation, in large part 
caused by that federal government he attempts to defend; Farm 
Credit Corporation today announcing that they are going to 
reduce the lending power of the home quarter to 25 per cent, in 
reaction to the policy of this government. 
 
That’s the issue today, and yes, it does relate to the price of 
grain, because that is the reason the farmers are in the debt 
situation they are. And I want to say that in response to the debt 
situation and the problem they’re facing the government should 
be coming forward with active policy and proposal that would 
defend the farming community and the business people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
More than that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s clear that overriding all 
of these hard economic problems in rural Saskatchewan are the 
cut-backs to social programs that this government is hell-bent 
on implementing in this province. We see the devastation of the 
drug plan that directly affects farmers who have seen the 
subsidy war cause them problems in Saskatchewan; the removal 
of the dental program in rural Saskatchewan which impacts as 
well on the overall situation of farmers. 
 
And I say to the Premier, if you are serious about farmers, come 
to this Assembly with a ministerial statement dealing with the 
relevancy of the problem, and not with a political agenda and a 
federal election in attempting to try to protect an unpopular 
Prime Minister in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 85 — An Act respecting Certified Nursing 
Assistants 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 
of a Bill respecting Certified Nursing Assistants. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act respecting Registered Nurses 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I move first  

reading of a bill respecting Registered Nurses. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ 

Superannuation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 
 

Bill No. 88 — An Act to make Certain Changes in the 
Statute Law with respect to the Investment of Moneys Held 

pursuant to Certain Acts 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move firs treading of a 
Bill to make Certain Changes in the Statute Law with respect to 
the Investment of Moneys Held pursuant to Certain Acts. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 89 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Saskatchewan Municipal Board Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 90 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Dependent Adults Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Consequential Amendments of Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Dependent Adults Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 91 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 92 — An Act respecting Provincial Emblems and  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1966 
 

Honours 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Provincial Emblems and Honours. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Ambulance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Ambulance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I’d 
like to raise a point of order in respect to the purported 
ministerial statement by the Premier. 
 
It has been set out, Mr. Speaker, as a tradition of the House and 
is supported by . . . and I’ll quote a reference here in 
Beauchesne’s that any ministerial statement should be current, 
it should be topical, it should be relevant. And as I indicated, 
Mr. Speaker, in Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 
Fifth Edition, on page 87 under “Statement by Minister,” it 
indicates: 
 

The Speaker has emphasized that both the Government 
and Opposition contribution should be brief and factual. 
The purpose of the ministerial statement is to convey 
information, not to encourage debate. 
 

I would ask Mr. Speaker to consider the purported ministerial 
statement made today and make a ruling in respect to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve heard the point of order raised by the 
hon. member from Quill Lakes, and I will review the record and 
bring a response. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
wish to rise under Rule 39 and seek leave to move a motion 
along the following lines. The motion will be moved by myself 
and seconded by the member from Quill Lakes and follow the 
following format: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the federal government’s 
Farm Credit Corporation has decided to restrict credit to 
Saskatchewan farmers, and further, that this Assembly 
urge the Government of Canada to order the Farm Credit 
Corporation to rescind its recent decision to restrict credit 
to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 

Leave is not granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to move 
second reading of The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, habitat is the key to stable wildlife populations. 
The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act was enacted to 
protect critically important wildlife habitat on Crown land. This 
important initiative was taken to counter the rapid loss of 
wildlife habitat on private land, and to ensure that a baseline of 
wildlife habitat was protected. 
 
The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act was drafted in such 
a way as to provide for this protection and yet not adversely 
affect present agricultural uses of the land. The government 
recognizes that this is critical. Crown wildlife habitat must be 
afforded long-term security. This Act is essential to the 
maintenance of game stocks, rare and endangered species, and 
other forms of wildlife, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to date 1.2 of the 3.4 million acres of Crown land 
originally identified as warranting designation under this 
legislation have been included in the Act. The lands we now 
propose to add to the schedule of the Act are of strategic 
importance to provincial big game populations, notably mule 
deer and antelope. 
 
We propose to add 714,000 acres of critical wildlife habitat, 
mostly from the south-eastern grasslands, to the 1.2 million 
acres currently in the Act. All lessees affected by the proposed 
designation have been fully consulted with. If concerns were 
expressed by a lessee, their land was withdrawn. We also wish 
to remove from the Act 47,000 acres of land that no longer 
warrants designation. The net result of the proposed 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, would bring the total lands protected 
to approximately 1.9 million acres in the schedule to The 
Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation for their past, present, and 
anticipated future support of this legislative initiative. I also 
want to thank the 669 lessees whose leased land is coming 
under the protection of this Act. Those many Saskatchewan 
people are making a direct contribution to the protection of 
wildlife habitat in our province. 
 
This government has worked closely with the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation, other government agencies and affected 
lessees, on the development of this important initiative. The 
designation of these additional lands will ensure the protection 
of native wildlife populations and will represent a continuation 
of one of the most significant wildlife conservation initiatives 
undertaken in this province. 
 
I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, second reading of An Act  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1967 
 

to amend The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’d like to once more ask the hon. members to 
please refrain from debating across the floor of the House while 
these Bills are being introduced. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We on this side of 
the House will be supporting this Bill but we will have a few 
questions that we want to ask in committees. I see that the 
minister has got the wildlife federation on his side, but it wasn’t 
too long ago that in order to get them on side, you had to return 
the funds that you had taken away. I see that you have given 
their money back and now they’re on side. 
 
We will have a number of . . . a few questions that we want to 
ask regarding the 47,000 acres — is that going into the 
Grasslands National Park? — and just a few figures that we 
want to get and how many acres that are now protected. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will leave it till it comes into 
committee. Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m exceptionally pleased 
today to have this opportunity to begin debate on the second 
reading of Bill No. 56 — The Saskatchewan Mining 
Development (Corporation) Reorganization and divestiture Act. 
 
This Bill will be one step on the way to the creation of one of 
the world’s largest uranium companies, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to tell the House that the headquarters of this new 
company will be here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This legislation we are debating here today will provide the 
provincial government with the authority necessary to proceed 
with implementation of this proposed transaction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are three primary purposes of this Bill. First, we want to 
provide for the merger of Eldorado Nuclear Limited and the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation into a single 
company which is far stronger than either corporation could 
have ever imagined before. 
 
Second, we want to ensure that the head office of this 
world-scale resource company is here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And third, we want to allow for the orderly divestiture of the 
company’s . . . I mean of the government’s ownership in this 
new company. 
 
Merging of the operations of these two world class mining and 
processing companies, Mr. Speaker, will be a benefit for the 
people of Saskatchewan and of Canada. Through the 
transaction, both companies will be able to draw on the other’s 
strengths in areas such as low cost reserves, marketing, and 
technologically advanced processing units. 
 

The creation of this new corporation means that we are building 
on the strengths and the successes of two already formidable 
companies in the international scene. The reputation of 
Saskatchewan and, indeed, Canada as an internationally 
recognized uranium producer will be enhanced. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, the transaction does not end with the 
merger of these two Crown corporations. Plans are already in 
place to proceed with the privatization of the company as soon 
as possible. This will occur through employee purchase plans 
and public or private share offerings. 
 
Again, this is another example of this government’s 
commitment to allow the people of Saskatchewan direct 
participation in the ownership of a major Canadian company, 
one which combines the natural resources of Saskatchewan 
with made-in-Canada expertise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to assure all hon. members that this transaction has 
not been entered into without considerable forethought and 
careful analysis. Working independently and through separate 
financial advisers, the shareholders of SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation) and Eldorado have analysed 
possible scenarios for government divestiture of these two 
Crown corporations going back as far as 1983. 
 
(1500) 
 
In the spring of 1986, discussions regarding the possible merger 
and subsequent divestiture of SMDC and Eldorado began. In 
February of 1988 a letter of intent was signed. This provided 
the broad framework around which final negotiations would be 
structured. This letter indicated that the primary purpose of the 
merger would be to crate a world scale, private sector, Canadian 
controlled company which would be a major source of uranium 
for the western world. 
 
With the legislation before us today, Mr. Speaker, we will be 
able to help in achieving that goal. 
 
The letter of intent also provided a summary of the proposed 
privatization schedule for this new company. It is the intent of 
both governments to have 30 per cent of the company 
privatized within two years, and to have the company fully 
privatized within seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I have stated earlier, the result of this letter of intent was to 
provide the base on which the final deal will be structured. This 
legislation before us today will allow this to take place. Also at 
this time, there is federal legislation, Bill C-121, the Eldorado 
Nuclear Limited, Reorganization and Divestiture Act before the 
House of Commons, which will allow similar action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Once the merger is complete, or more precisely, Mr. Speaker, 
the acquisition of assets by a new company, the new company 
will have a unique combination of assets that will give it a solid, 
secure place in the uranium industry. At the present time, 
Eldorado Nuclear Limited is  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1968 
 

the owner of mining properties near Rabbit Lake, 
Saskatchewan, technologically advanced refining and 
conversion plants, research and development facilities, and a 
share of Key Lake which has the lowest ore production costs of 
any operating mine in the western world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These assets will be merged with SMDC’s uranium ore bodies 
at Key Lake, Cluff Lake, and Cigar Lake. Mr. Speaker, this 
combination will provide the new company with one of the 
strongest raw material positions in the industry, and will also 
allow security of supply for the conversion facilities. In other 
words, Saskatchewan will be the home of a uranium company 
capable of competing with anyone anywhere in the world. 
 
The potential for success is further intensified when you add 
SMDC’s recent success in gold mining. Currently, the Star 
Lake mine is operating very successfully, and more good things 
are expected in the gold mining area. 
 
The new company will have an asset base valued at 
approximately $1.5 billion, and has anticipated sales of $500 
million per year. Over 1,000 employees will be working for the 
corporation. 
 
Given the tremendous size and potential impact of this new 
organization, it is apparent that determination of the ownership 
split was possible only after long and detailed negotiations and 
analysis. The final result is that initially the Government of 
Saskatchewan will hold 61.5 per cent of the equity and the 
federal government will hold the remaining 38.5 per cent. This 
split in ownership was based on independent financial advisers’ 
analyses with which we agree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are confident that the combination of the assets of SMDC 
and Eldorado will lead to advantages that were not available to 
either of the original companies when operating alone. More 
specifically, we expect synergies to develop in the areas of ore 
reserves, marketing, and security of supply for the refining 
division. 
 
This new company will control the operation of Key Lake 
which, as I have stated earlier, has the lowest cost reserves of 
any uranium mine operating today, Mr. Speaker. This is 
strengthened by the fact that the new company also controls 
Cigar Lake, one of the richest uranium ore bodies in the world. 
 
In other words, the new company will likely have a strong 
competitive position in the future because of its flexibility in 
developing and using low-cost ore. 
 
Marketing of the product through the proven channels of both 
companies will contribute to overall profitability of the 
company. Given that Canada supplies approximately one-third 
of the western world’s uranium, it is clear that the new 
company will have an important part to play in the 
market-place. 
 
The new company will also provide security of supply for the 
conversion facilities currently operated by Eldorado. Production 
of fuel for power plants, including that required for the Candu 
reactor, will be based on a low-cost accessible supply of raw 
material.  

Saskatchewan mines will be assured access to these advanced 
conversion facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In summary, with the merger of these two companies we will be 
seeing the benefits which result from the creation of a vertically 
integrated mining company. Producing, refining, converting, 
and supplying of nuclear fuel related products will all be 
managed by a company headquartered here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that safety for the environment and for workers is a 
major concern for all people familiar with uranium. Let me 
assure you that safety is a primary consideration, and that steps 
are being taken to guarantee that the new company operates 
under the same strict standards that the rest of the industry must 
meet. No exceptions to the regulatory environment will be 
required. The new company will fall within the regulatory 
framework of the Atomic energy board, the nuclear 
non-proliferation policy, and the Canada Labour Code. All 
other applicable federal and provincial regulations will also 
apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am certain that this Bill will be a major benefit to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and I would like once more to 
restate its three objectives to allow for the sale, number one, of 
the assets of SMDC; number two, to form the new merged 
corporation to guarantee that the head office of this new 
corporation will be in Saskatchewan; and to allow for the future 
privatization of the new company. Each component contributes 
to the possibilities for future growth and diversification of the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
With this Bill we are establishing a new company which will 
have its executive, administrative, marketing and operating 
functions centred in Saskatchewan. Undoubtedly, Mr. Speaker, 
this is going to add considerably to the level of mining expertise 
located in the province. We are confident that this company will 
contribute significantly to the industrial and commercial base. It 
allows participation and a highly competitive technologically 
advanced industry. 
 
This Bill also paves the way for future divestiture of the new 
company. The new company will be an entity which is available 
as an investment vehicle for pension, insurance, and trust funds. 
Furthermore, we are confident that there will be a high level of 
interest in private investment in the new company from both 
private and corporate investors. Also there will be establishment 
of an employee share purchase plan as soon as is possible, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In this merger, and in all subsequent transactions, there has and 
will continue to be careful consideration given to the interest of 
the employees. Their union has been protected, and the new 
company will provide all of its employees with benefits and 
terms and conditions comparable to those that they currently 
enjoy. And of course they will have the opportunity to 
participate directly in the ownership of this exciting and 
dynamic new company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this enabling legislation that we have put forward 
is a clear demonstration of the commitment that this 
government has to encouraging the development of a  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1969 
 

strongly diversified economy which encourages growth. I am 
sure that all members of the House will recognize the benefits 
of this Bill and will join with me, Mr. Speaker, to expedite the 
passage of this Bill through this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, following some comments, I will 
move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was listening to the minister’s comments, and I 
have never heard more utter . . . empty piece of nonsense for a 
long time in this legislature. 
 
Number one, every one of those statements that he made in 
regards to the character of SMDC, and he says what it ought to 
be, already exists. Number one, we are already here in 
Saskatchewan. SMDC is already in Saskatchewan, so why is he 
introducing a Bill that puts something in Saskatchewan? He 
makes a big deal about that. 
 
He makes a big deal about the fact that it will be a world-class 
outfit. Well SMDC is already a world-class outfit. That in fact, 
when you look at SMDC’s record, it’s got $900 million worth 
of assets; that SMDC made $60 million; that its long-term debt 
will be done away with in a couple of years; that it had a 20 per 
cent return on investment; that it put $30 million worth of 
dividends. I think the facts prove, Mr. Speaker, that it is indeed 
a world-class outfit. 
 
When I listen to the minister, Mr. Speaker, he appears to be 
saying that it would be a world-class outfit. But we now look at 
this Bill. Mr. Speaker, when I look at this Bill, I see this as 
probably one of the biggest pieces of PC patronage, give-away, 
and hypocrisy that we have seen in a long time. And that’s 
precisely what this Bill is about. 
 
It is going to make in history . . . when we look back at it in 
history, it will make the patronage of Hill, of Schoenhals, of 
Weyerhaeuser, of Pocklington, look very small in comparison 
to the give-away of this Saskatchewan peoples’ resource and 
Saskatchewan peoples’ assets. 
 
The minister never mentioned once in his speech, in his small 
presentation — and I’ll talk more about these things — there’s 
absolutely nothing, no mention about jobs. No mention about 
jobs for Saskatchewan people, no mention for jobs for people in 
northern Saskatchewan, no mention for jobs in regards to 
Indian-Metis people. 
 
When we look at the aspect of contracts to Saskatchewan 
businesses, absolutely no mention. Absolutely no mention 
except empty promises in regards to the environment. And 
workers’ health and safety — no mention except an empty 
promise. 
 
We are used, Mr. Speaker, to promises by this PC government, 
but all we get in return is that we get more patronage and 
greater and greater hypocrisy. 
 
When we look at the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker, we see it as a world-class outfit  

at the same time. It had made strides, and the reason why it had 
introduced the concept of a joint venture approach to work hand 
in hand with private industry, the mixed economy approach, 
was that in many cases in the past we had not dealt with these 
important issues of jobs at a reasonable level. We had never 
dealt with the questions of environment, the questions of 
workers’ health and safety, to the same degree that we learned 
through the experience with SMDC. 
 
(1515) 
 
And now we are going to be turning back the clock, and all we 
get is a promise for shares, and they call it a special share. And 
I must say that it’s analogous, Mr. Speaker, to the government 
taking over your house and taking over your yard, and turning it 
over to one of their friends or to the big corporations. It’s 
analogous to that. 
 
And they turn around and say, well you’re going to benefit from 
this; what we’re going to do is sell you shares of this house that 
we took away from you; we will sell you common shares — 
first of all we’ll sell you a share on that garbage can that’s in the 
backyard, that’s in the alley-way; we will not sell you full 
shares because only the large-scale corporations are going to be 
able to handle the 25 per cent of this and 25 per cent of that; 
what we will do is give you maybe a little bit of share on the 
brass doorknob. And that’s because basically that’s what 
ordinary people can afford in regards to the immensity of this 
billion dollar asset, $2 billion asset that we are talking about. 
 
So I would say that when we look at the question of farms, it’s 
the same way as taking over your farm, and they turn around 
and sell you shares on a fence post and say you are a public 
participant of this — you are a public participant of this. But 
you have to give us more money because we’ll make it look 
like a gold fence post in much the same way that we’ll buy you 
some more paint to make this into a golden garbage can. 
 
Because what it is, is one of the worst pieces of swindle that we 
will see in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — We have given away many of our jobs. We 
have given away many of our health equipment, our highways 
equipment. We have given away our forests to American 
multinational. Now we are giving away our mines and our last 
great resource, one of the last major great resources in the 
province of Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate for a moment and 
come back to it later on. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to give second reading 
to an Act to amend The Automobile (Accident) Insurance Act. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1970 
 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this legislation is threefold. First, 
an amendment is required to The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act to permit the creation of regulations retroactively. 
 
Second, an amendment is required to permit costs to be 
awarded against SGI in actions for insurance coverage. 
 
And third, a proposed amendment adds a definition of the word 
“province” to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
The most important amendment will permit the auto fund to 
improve service to customers and ensure that equitable rates are 
charged to drives and vehicle owners. 
 
As an example, the person will occasionally request registration 
for a vehicle model that is not defined in our classification 
system. While this only involves a small number of motorists, 
we want to ensure the highest level of service for all drives and 
vehicle owners. Most commonly we are talking about some 
types of motor homes, some commercial semi-trailers, and 
things of that nature. 
 
When these people now apply for licence plates, the auto fund 
has two alternatives: if the vehicle doesn’t fit the classification 
system, a delay may occur while a new regulation is prepared to 
cover that particular type or model of vehicle. Members will, 
I’m sure, see the inconvenience that could cause, an 
inconvenience that certainly is not necessary. Or registration 
can be made without proper authority and subsequently 
authorized, and any adjustments made later. This causes further 
inconvenience to the public as well as creating an inefficiency 
for the auto fund. If, however, we have the power to make new 
classifications retroactive, we will eliminate these inefficiencies 
and improve service to the motoring public. 
 
Section 5 of the AAIA (Automobile Accident Insurance Act) 
deals with the classification of vehicles and drivers, and 
therefore the amendment pertains to that section. 
 
The second provision I mentioned has to do with section 63 of 
the AAIA, a provision that has been in the AAIA since 1946. It 
is a provision that the Law Reform Commission has urged 
should be repealed. We agree, Mr. Speaker, and that is why 
we’re doing so with this amendment. 
 
In simple terms, the provision is an archaic one which exempts 
SGI from paying court costs to people who successfully sue it 
on matters of AAI coverage. It comes into play rarely, about 25 
times per year. The provision conflicts with the usual principle 
that requires the losing litigant to pay the other side’s costs. 
Section 63 was probably originally written into the Act to 
reduce costs when the Act was created in 1946, but now it is out 
of date. 
 
My last comment on this provision is to remind members that 
this section does not apply to the common types of insurance 
suits, where one insured person sues another and SGI happens 
to be the insurer of the defendant. It pertains to matters of 
coverage only. 
 

The third change I’m referring to, Mr. Speaker, defines the term 
“province” in the AAIA Act. As the legislation now stands, the 
definition does not include the territories, and the problems with 
this should be obvious to all members. Briefly, AAIA insurance 
ceases to be valid when people move and re-register their cars 
in another province. But because the definition of “province” is 
unclear, we have a situation where a person moves to another 
province, and properly his Saskatchewan insurance becomes 
invalid. But if he moves to a territory, the insurance does not 
become invalid. This legislation merely plugs this long-standing 
loophole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you and all members can see, these 
amendments before us are rare, really a housekeeping nature, 
and I expect that full support will be forthcoming from all 
members. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve just 
had a brief opportunity to review the proposed changes to The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act, but I think three points can 
be made. I’m sure that the Northwest Territories and the Yukon 
Territories will be pleased to be finally recognized as provinces 
in our country, and that at least one jurisdiction recognizes that 
they do have provincial status. It would have been nice had the 
province of Saskatchewan, along with provinces across this 
country, recognized that the Yukon and the Northwest 
Territories should be made provinces when they arrived at the 
Meech Lake Agreement. 
 
The second point that I’d like to make is that it’s surprising that 
the minister is changing the legislation to make regulations 
retroactive one year. And I suspect that there have been some 
fees or registration fees imposed or premiums imposed that the 
government did not make regulations for, and they are now 
asking us to retroactively change the legislation. 
 
And finally on this legislation, I’d like to congratulate the 
government for recognizing that when claimants go to court 
against SGI, and they are successful, that they should . . . the 
courts should be able to assess legal damages through court 
costs to a Crown corporation, and I think that this is a major 
breakthrough for the public. And so I support this aspect of the 
legislation. 
 
I have some other things that I’d like to say about the 
amendments to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, but I 
want to take more time to review the legislation, and therefore 
I’d ask to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Workers’ 
Compensation Act, 1979 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, legislation requires that a 
committee of review be established once every four years to 
review workers’ compensation. This committee is equally 
represented of employers and organized employees. This review 
committee was chaired by Judge Alastair Muir of Moose Jaw, 
and the committee brought down a unanimous report. 
 



 
June 9, 1988 

1971 
 

The government takes the recommendations of the committee 
of review with the utmost respect. I may point out that this 
government has had an excellent record in implementing 
previous recommendations. This record is greater than that of 
other jurisdictions in Canada. The committee made 17 
recommendations, 54 dealing with workers’ compensation 
matters. Recommendations requiring legislation are addressed 
in the above-captioned amendment. 
 
The amendments meet most of the recommendations of the 
committee and provide increased benefits in the following 
areas: substantially increased dependent spousal benefits; 
increased funeral benefits; greater focus on foster parents by 
allowing a greater foster parent allowance; 50 per cent of 
Canada disability pension benefits retained by the workers or 
the dependent spouse. This change in legislation will put more 
cash into the hands of all workers and dependants who are 
under the plan. 
 
To provide a better life-style, more workers will receive 
independence allowance. This previously was only available to 
those who were unemployable. 
 
The board will share workers’ legal fees on third party actions. 
 
The amendments also extend the reporting period for 
employers, clarify the medical review process, and remove the 
requirement for annual review of wage loss benefits. 
 
The balance of the amendments are housekeeping in nature. 
 
The amendments will continue to place Saskatchewan workers’ 
compensation on the leading edge in North America. 
Saskatchewan continues to have one of the lowest average 
assessment rates for industry, and the highest level of benefits 
in North America. Our Workers’ Compensation Board remains 
one of the only long-term, fully funded boards on the continent. 
I am pleased to say that there has been a continual reduction in 
fatal and total injuries in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government remains committed to workers’ safety in 
Saskatchewan and providing comprehensive benefits. I may 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, 
which is currently undergoing a $50 million expansion, will be 
service workers in the late fall. This new facility will be able to 
triple the capacity to treat injured workers in Saskatchewan. 
 
By imposing these reasonable and affordable recommendations, 
it again places Saskatchewan on the leading edge of treatment 
for employers and Saskatchewan workers. While other 
jurisdictions have been encountering difficulties with their 
compensation boards, Saskatchewan has maintained its 
credibility and has received praise from workers and unions 
alike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 69, An Act to 
amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’ll come as no surprise when I say to  

members opposite that I’m going to ask . . . that I’m going to 
move a motion to adjourn this at the end. 
 
There is, Mr. Speaker, a great deal that needs to be done in the 
area of workers’ compensation. Few areas of government cause 
urban members as many problems as this particular area. It isn’t 
so much the law as the administration. Indeed, I don’t think the 
law has changed drastically since this government took office. 
It’s the administration; well over half the complaints I get, as a 
member, are about the workers’ compensation. 
 
(1530) 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, some things that badly need to be done. 
As a for instance, we need to bring to a halt the whole process 
of deeming people fit for jobs and then reducing their 
compensation by the amount that they’re deemed to be fit to 
earn. 
 
Earlier in the day, during question period — I don’t think Mr. 
Ernie Jelinski and Gordon Scrimbit will mind me saying that I 
saw them in the gallery earlier during the question period. Mr. 
Scrimbit, in particular, put a series of rather amusing ads in The 
Regina Shopper, purely for the purpose of making the point. He 
described a man, slightly under 60, described all his physical 
disabilities, then went on to advertise himself for a job. Having 
read the ad, there is no way he’d be hired for anything — he’s 
disabled. He did it to make the point that he had been deemed to 
be capable of earning $8 an hour. He did it to make the point 
that he was not capable of earning $8 an hour, but that’s how 
much was reduced from his worker’s compensation. 
 
I can well imagine that the fund is healthy. It’s healthy because 
it isn’t paying out anywhere near what is owed to the workers 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues have some 
very serious concerns about this legislation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Inadequate administration. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And the . . . in particular, that’s right. The 
member from North East points out our concern is in particular 
about the administration of this. I suspect that we will want to 
raise some questions in the Committee of the Whole. I know 
my colleague who is our Labour critic, from Moose Jaw North, 
will want to make some comments about the Bill. 
 
I did not hear the member who, I know, had such an intimate 
knowledge of workers’ compensation — and it’s a subject of 
such fascination to him; I know that had it been in the Bill, the 
member from Souris-Cannington would have told us. He didn’t 
mention it, so I assume that these problems which are of such 
concern to us, I suspect they’re not dealt with in the legislation. 
That doesn’t mean the legislation is all bad, or that we’ll vote 
against it, but I think we’re as much concerned about what it 
doesn’t do as what it does do. 
 
I’m going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very good. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1972 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Since I’m now getting 
applause from all sides of the House, in particular one of my 
very special fans, the member from Souris-Cannington, I’m 
going to stop there and ask for leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise today to 
move second reading of An Act to amend The Corporation 
Capital Tax Act. 
 
This Bill introduces a corporation capital tax surcharge that 
addresses some of the inequities of the corporate tax system. It 
will ensure that large resource corporations with significant 
activities in Saskatchewan pay their fair share of taxes. 
 
The corporate tax system must become a more significant 
source of financing government priorities. In 1987-88 the 
corporation capital tax generated about $55 million in revenue. 
In 1989 we estimate that . . . ’88-89 we estimate that revenue 
from this source will increase to over $90 million as a result of 
changes proposed in the budget. 
 
Let me briefly explain how the corporation capital tax is 
determined. The tax is basically a tax on the wealth of a 
corporation. A corporation computes its corporation capital tax 
based on its taxable paid-up capital. The amount of paid-up 
capital of the corporation is essentially equal to the sum of 
long-term liabilities and owner’s equity. From this, a 
corporation is permitted a deduction of $10 million. The tax 
only applies, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to large corporations 
operating in the province. As a result, fewer than 1,000 
companies pay the tax, and most of them have their head offices 
located outside of the province. 
 
The current corporate capital tax rate levied on resource 
corporations is equal to 0.5 per cent of taxable paid-up capital 
allocated to Saskatchewan. Effective July 1, 1988, resource 
corporations will pay additional corporate capital tax based on 2 
per cent of their value of Saskatchewan resource sales. 
 
In computing the surcharge, resource corporations will be 
allowed to deduct their existing corporation capital tax liability. 
Large interprovincial resource corporations that minimize their 
tax burden by allocating a greater share of taxable paid-up 
capital to other jurisdictions will now pay a minimum corporate 
capital tax based on their Saskatchewan resource tax activity . . . 
resource activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the corporation capital surcharge will generate an 
additional $34.8 million in ’88-89 and an additional $50.4 
million in ’89-90. The increase in corporation capital tax will be 
used to help finance our increased health and education 
program costs. 
 
In addition to the corporate capital tax surcharge effective July 
1, the corporation capital tax will be expanded to apply to 
federal commercial Crown corporations. This will permit 
greater neutrality to exist between public and  

private commercial entities competing against each other in 
industries such as transportation and resources. Application of 
capital tax to federal commercial Crown corporations will also 
result in estimated additional revenue of $2.3 million in this 
fiscal year and $3 million in ’89-90. 
 
An amendment will be made, Mr. Speaker, to the regulations 
pursuant to clause 3(2)(b) of The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
to incorporate this change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this is another one of those 
Bills which I intend to adjourn so that there can be substantial 
time to consider the remarks of the minister, as brief as they 
were, but also substantial time to debate the issues involved not 
only in this particular Bill but all Bills in this legislature this 
year related to taxation. 
 
It is well known that this government’s record on taxation is far 
greater than dismal. What is even more criminal about it is the 
shift of the taxation from the corporate sector and the 
corporation sector to the ordinary taxpayer, in the form of the 
flat tax; from the government sector to the property tax, making 
Saskatchewan’s taxation regime probably the most unfair in all 
of Canada. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, has happened in the short span of some six 
years sine 1982. It has had a devastating effect on the economy 
of Saskatchewan because this government has taken out 
hundreds of millions of dollars out of the spending power of the 
family, the consumer, and put it into the hands of the oil 
corporations who have been making massive profits all during 
that time. 
 
That has, Mr. Speaker, in turn had a very cruel effect on the 
small-business man throughout all of Saskatchewan who is no 
longer receiving that dollar which the consumer used to have to 
spend, because the government has changed the tax system in 
such a way that the government is now taking that consumer 
dollar in the form of various forms of taxation. 
 
And I think there’s no doubt in anyone’s mind in Saskatchewan 
that that has had a very dampening effect on the economy, a 
very major contributor to the kind of depressed economy that 
we have here in Saskatchewan today. And that’s not taking 
away from the difficult times that agriculture is in; that’s 
recognizing that. But that certainly was just especially a time 
when the government should not have been increasing taxes on 
ordinary people and on families to the extent that they have. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that members of this House, on 
this Bill and other tax Bills, will have a great deal to say, and 
for now I adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to move 
second reading of The Litter Control (amendment) Act. The 
amendments to The Litter Control Act will  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1973 
 

enable implementation of a new beverage container policy in 
the province and a collection and recycling system for these 
containers. 
 
This new policy will respond to the public demand for greater 
flexibility by allowing non-refillable containers on the market. 
At the same time it will reduce litter and waste by ensuring that 
these containers are recycled to the greatest extent possible. It 
will also create employment for handicapped people in the 
province through the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres who have been contracted to establish 
and operate the collection and recycling system. 
 
Aluminum cans have been identified as the first non-refillable 
containers to be approved because they have high scrap value 
and, as such, form the basis for a recycling system. The system 
will be expanded to allow other non-refillable containers such 
as plastic or PET bottles in the near future. 
 
The principal objectives of the proposed amendments are to set 
the initial 5 cent per can refundable deposit and the 2 cent per 
can environmental handling charge, and provide authority to 
vary them by regulation. 
 
They provide authority to require collection and remittance of 
this refundable deposit and environmental handling charge from 
distributors; license collectors to collect and remit these 
refundable deposits and environmental handling charges; 
provide authority to enter into agreements to collect and remit 
refundable deposits and environmental handling charges; pay 
refunds on behalf of the government; establish and maintain a 
collection and recycling system; provide for the financial 
requirements of these agreements; identify that funds collected 
are to be deposited to an environmental protection fund which 
will be used to provide deposit refunds and operate the 
collection and recycling system; make the amendments and 
respective regulations effective from May 12, 1988 to coincide 
with the legal sale of carbonated soft drinks and beer in 
aluminum cans in Saskatchewan. 
 
Carbonated soft drink and beer containers are regulated under 
The Litter Control Act and regulations. Each container must be 
approved before it is used in the province. Until now, only 
refillable glass bottles have been approved. 
 
In closing, let me emphasize that the new beverage container 
policy will respond to a strong public demand for non-refillable 
containers — principally the aluminum can — reduce litter by 
controlling the use of non-refillable containers, and reduce 
waste by encouraging recycling of non-refillable containers, and 
create jobs for handicapped people in Saskatchewan. 
 
The amendments proposed to The Litter Control Act are 
necessary to implement this policy and develop appropriate 
regulations. I invite the support of all members for these 
amendments. 
 
I now move second reading of The Litter Control amendment 
Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I’d 
like the opportunity to introduce some students that have just 
arrived in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, some 
two dozen students that have come in from the Calder School 
today. I think they’re grade 4, 5 and 6 students. They’re with 
their teacher Valerie Evancio and their chaperon Janice 
Artemenko and their bus driver Calvin Morash. 
 
I’d like to welcome the students to the Assembly today. What 
we’re in the process of doing is going through second reading 
of some Bills. It’s a little bit different from question period that 
most students have the opportunity to come and see, but I hope 
you’ll find it entertaining, and I will meet with you shortly after 
for questions and drinks and pictures and answer any questions 
you might have. 
 
And I would ask the members to welcome these guests in the 
usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I join with the member in 
welcoming the students who are visiting with us this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have this opportunity to address a 
few remarks to Bill 82 which will amend The Litter Control 
Act, and as the minister has indicated, essentially what we’re 
doing here is putting into place this government’s plan for the 
reintroduction of, first of all, the aluminum cans into 
Saskatchewan, and then perhaps some plastic containers later 
on. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will want to adjourn the debate just after a few 
very short remarks because the issue does bear, in my view, a 
wide public discussion, and I personally, and other members of 
our caucus, will want to be consulting with the public and 
giving study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will recall that it was last November, I 
believe, that we debated a Bill in this House to, at that time, 
amend The Litter Control Act, essentially at that time opening 
the way for the reintroduction of non-refillable containers, 
primarily the aluminum cans. And you will recall at that time, 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House raised two very 
significant concerns: one, the concern about protection of 
Saskatchewan jobs, particularly those individuals employed in 
the bottling industries and the brewing industry; and a concern 
about protection for our environment with the reintroduction of  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1974 
 

the cans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will recall at that time we raised those 
concerns, we had hoped that those concerns were heard by the 
minister and the government, and we then lent our support to 
the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I think was day 55 of this session, and 
so we are some many months now from those amendments that 
were made last year, and if I may say, at last we have the 
legislation which we have been waiting for. The people of 
Saskatchewan are aware that in fact the cans now have been on 
the market for some time, since at least the middle of May, and 
we’ve seen the system that this government has designed. Now 
we have the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many of us in this province who have 
looked at this system which the government has designed. And 
we’re looking at what is already happening in the brewing and 
bottling industry. And, Mr. Speaker, in some ways this 
government has inflicted a failing system on both counts on the 
people of Saskatchewan. We are already seeing significant job 
losses in the brewing and bottling industry, Mr. Speaker, and 
we are seeing a system of recycling that’s only now just getting 
on its feet. And those of us who spend time on the roads are 
already seeing the cans and so on in the ditches. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, some of our concerns are heightened, not 
lessened, by what we see happening in the province. Mr. 
Speaker, we will want time to consider this legislation. We’ll 
want time to consult with people whose lives are very directly 
affected. We’ll want time to consult with the general public of 
Saskatchewan, and time to give consideration to the minister’s 
remarks this afternoon. So I would move to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the other members and my 
colleagues here in the Assembly, a group of students from the 
Ridgedale School in the community of Ridgedale. There’s 43 
students, I understand, in the group today. They’re accompanied 
by their principal and one of the teachers, Mr. Allan Brown; 
their chaperons Mrs. Judy Reimer, Mrs. Carol Sturby, Mrs. 
Marlene Miazga; and their bus driver Allan Breadner. 
 
I would hope that they’ll find their time in here informational 
and educational. I’m sorry that they were unable to be with us 
for question period, certainly the more interesting time of the 
day many times. But they’ll learn here, and I’m sure they’ll 
have questions. I look forward to meeting with them a little 
later and discussing what they’ve seen here. And that I would 
ask everybody  

here with me to join with me in welcoming them here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 37 — An Act to 
provide for Security for Saskatchewan Family Farms be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s fair to say there are few Bills that’ll come before the session 
which are as important as this one. If I had to pick the most 
important Bill before the Legislative Assembly, I think it would 
undoubtedly be this one here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well next to certain members of the Assembly who are going to 
make it possible for the Saskatchewan public to drink beer in 
cans, apart from that, I think this is the second most important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to . . . I’m not going to deny that the 
Bill does some good. It will be the thrust of my remarks, 
however, that the Bill doesn’t begin to meet the problem. I will 
add, for the benefit of members opposite, that I know that other 
members on both sides of the House will want to be involved in 
what is really a crucial debate about the future of agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. I’ll therefore be adjourning debate at the end to 
allow members of both sides of the House to get into this 
debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are some positive things in the 
legislation that I shall refer to in due course. However, in the 
end result I think it’s fair to say that it does not provide for the 
security of the family farm. It falls well short of that. 
 
The difficulty, Mr. Speaker . . . The immediate problem is that 
the government opposite will not face the problem but 
continues to try to avoid the problem. We saw that in a major 
way today. The Premier got up and gave a frankly silly 
statement. My colleague, the member from Regina Elphinstone, 
described him as Saskatchewan’s version of Don Quixote, and 
he did appear to be tilting windmills. The Premier got up and 
gave a silly statement on an incident that took place two weeks 
ago when the Prime Minister was apparently not properly 
informed. It occurred 8,000 miles away; involved a different 
level of government. The Prime Minister did not distinguish 
himself with his statements, and it appears that he needs the 
Premier of Saskatchewan to come to his aid. All I can say is if 
he needs the Premier of Saskatchewan to come to his aid, he is 
very short of friends and supporters, and badly in need of 
assistance when he’s got to reach down that far into the barrel 
for some help. 
 
The member from Milestone-Bengough wants me to get back to 
the Bill. I know he is waiting with bated breath for my 
comments so that he can frame his own, and I shall do that right 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the primary problem . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
did not see the changing of the guard. Mr.  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1975 
 

Deputy Speaker, the problem in agriculture is that the industry 
is overcapitalized. By that I mean the industry is carrying far 
more debt than it can service given current depression prices. 
One could state the problem in various ways. 
 
Certainly the problems were brought about by abnormally low 
grain prices. That happens, however, from time to time. While 
no one welcomes it, and everyone wishes it would go away — 
we all wish the Europeans and the North Americans would find 
a way to stop subsidizing the farmer and agriculture and let the 
industry carry itself — there’s no way to do that. Nor is there 
any way to avoid, in a free market economy, depressed prices 
from time to time. That’s one of the prices you pay. 
 
What, however, has caused the crisis, it seems to me, is the very 
high level of debt that the agriculture industry is carrying. That 
debt was accumulated in the ’70s and early ’80s when 
agriculture seemed to be very buoyant. Land was bought at 
prices well beyond what could be justified in an economic sense 
by the product it could produce. Machinery was bought at very 
high prices. A very high level of debt was accumulated, and that 
debt can no longer be serviced. 
 
And I want to say, in passing, that the government was a major 
part of the problem. If you agree with me that it’s a fair 
statement of the problem to say that the industry has . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . more debt than it can carry, when 
you did as this government did, add a billion dollars to the debt 
that the industry’s carrying, you’re adding very significantly to 
the problem. 
 
That was not part of the problem; that was part of the . . . That 
was not part of any solution; that was part of a problem. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You know what 22 per cent a day adds 
up to? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Thunder Creek 
mentions the fact that interest rates got to be very high. They 
did, indeed. 
 
There was very little, I think, that any government could have 
done about that. The federal government, I think, could only 
have dealt with the high interest rates by instituting foreign 
exchange controls. Nobody, least of all the Conservative Party 
of Canada or the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, asked for 
foreign exchange controls. Without the foreign exchange 
controls, interest rates are a factor of the market. 
 
What was not a factor of the market, and what was an entirely 
voluntary program, was the farm production loans which, as I 
said, added a million dollars to the debt and, therefore, added 
very significantly to the problem of an industry carrying more 
debt than it can afford. 
 
It’s going to be a while before this one goes, I can say to the 
member from Milestone-Bengough. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is now a major creditor. I 
gather, although I haven’t seen official  

statistics, I gather that a third of the farm debt is now owed to 
the government. This government is therefore the major 
creditor. It is conceivable the credit union system of 
Saskatchewan holds as much debt, but nobody else would hold 
as much debt as the Government of Saskatchewan. They are 
therefore a significantly . . . perhaps the member from Thunder 
Creek’s right, and perhaps the Farm Credit Corporation is in 
that league as well, but those would be the only players that 
would. So this government’s a major player. 
 
As we said earlier in this session, I won’t repeat it, this 
government has been harsher with the farmers in many ways 
than the private lending institutions have. They want not just the 
interest, but they want their principal back in addition. They 
have raised the interest rates, demanded principal and interest, 
and as I said, behaved in a fashion which is harsher than most 
private lending institutions would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s not much the government can do, in spite 
of the Premier’s forceful and well-received statement on the 
Prime Minister’s bumble of two weeks ago. Notwithstanding 
this efforts, there’s not much the Premier can do about 
agricultural subsidies. There isn’t an enormous amount we can 
do about grain prices, but there is something this government 
can do about the farm debt. It might take a more common sense 
approach with respect to that one-third of the debt which it now 
holds. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government, as we’ve said on 
previous occasions, should not be demanding back principal, 
should not be increasing interest, and should behave in a 
fashion which is no more greedy than a private lending 
institution. Private lending institutions these days, in dealing 
with farmers who have debt problems, are happy enough to get 
the interest. They certainly don’t increase the interest rate, they 
don’t demand principal, and they know that if they carry the 
farmer for a while, they’ll get it. Not this government; you’ve 
got to have your principal, and you had to increase the interest 
rate by 50 per cent, from six and something to nine and 
something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is a major part of the problem and 
not part of the solution. That was indicated in a fairly minor 
way today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Premier chose to 
deal, in a way which I think can only be described as asinine, 
with the Prime Minister’s bumble in Europe. He chose not to 
deal with the decision of the Farm Credit Corporation to 
discontinue lending money on the home quarter. 
 
It is really, Mr. Speaker, unfortunate that other lending 
institutions, some of whom who do not have the federal 
government, who do not have the pockets of the federal 
government to back them up, some other lending institutions — 
the Royal Bank, the credit union — major portions of the farm 
debt . . . they have behaved, so far, in a fashion which is 
reasonably cautious, have made no alarmist statements; they 
have not run around the province weeping, gnashing their teeth, 
rending their clothing, suggesting that the end of the world was 
coming. The only institution to do that was the one institution 
over which the Conservative Party has direct control — the 
Farm Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1976 
 

(1600) 
 
And it ill behooves the Premier of Saskatchewan to refuse leave 
to a motion by the member from Regina Elphinstone, which 
suggested that he ought to take the matter up with the federal 
government and ought to suggest to the federal government that 
they ask the Farm Credit Corporation to be a little more 
moderate and reasonable — it ill behooves the Premier of 
Saskatchewan to refuse leave to debate that motion — it didn’t 
have to be passed; they wouldn’t even give leave to debate it — 
at the same time as he stands up and makes this silly rebuttal to 
the European ministers who took exception to something Brian 
Mulroney said. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to get on and deal for a moment 
with the question of the Bill itself. I want to say in a general 
way that the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the member 
from Regina Wascana has strolled in, in his distinguished 
fashion, and said, point of order. He doesn’t seem to have a 
point of order but he’s . . . I’ll yield the floor if the member has 
a point of order. He hasn’t. As so often happens with the 
member from Wascana, he cannot resist listening to himself 
talk, even if it makes no sense. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the member from Regina 
Wascana that the rest of us can resist the temptation to hear you 
talk. If you have something to say, say it; it not, be quiet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Wascana no doubt will 
want to get into the Bill, and no doubt he has many pearls of 
wisdom which must be placed before this Assembly. I know the 
member from Thunder Creek cannot possibly make up his mind 
about the Bill until he hears the analysis of the member from 
Regina Wascana; I know that. And in due course I’ll be 
adjourning debate and will be allowing the member from 
Regina Wascana his turn to get in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I make this as a personal comment — I’m not 
speaking on behalf of the caucus, but I say as a personal 
comment that I don’t think any legislation which fails to deal 
with the level of debt will ever deal with the problem. There has 
to be, Mr. Speaker, as has been suggested by the co-operatives, 
the credit union, and the wheat pool which do not, to put it 
mildly, agree upon what the solution ought to be — but both 
have agreed that part of any solution has to be debt set aside or 
debt write-down. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, no legislation and no program which 
doesn’t include that will ever deal with the problem. The basic 
fact is that the level of debt is much higher than can be carried, 
much higher than can be serviced, and if we don’t deal with the 
absolute level of debt, we aren’t going to deal with the problem. 
 
The agricultural industry will be here, Mr. Speaker, but we will 
lose an alarming percentage of young farmers. It may be the 
image of Conservative members opposite that we should have 
10 or 20 or 30,000 farmers farming 10,000 acres each — that 
may be your image of how the agricultural industry should 
operate. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t ours. 
 

Our image of agriculture is that we should be taking every 
possible step to ensure that every farmer who’s now farming 
stays on the land. That should be our goal. Our goal should not 
be to rationalize the industry, as I think members opposite are 
doing. 
 
I said, with respect to an earlier piece of legislation, an 
amendment — may have been the estimates of the Farm Land 
Security Board — the Farm Land Security Board is an opiate. It 
eases some of the pain of leaving the farm. But, like an opiate, 
it does not cure the disease; it just eases the pain. And that’s all 
I think the Farm Land Security Bill was doing, was acting as an 
opiate. It eased the pain of leaving, but they all left at just about 
the same speed as they would have left anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill doesn’t change that fact. This Bill is 
going to be an opiate. It is going to ease the pain of leaving the 
farm, but it isn’t going to prevent it, except in the rarest of 
cases. We say on this side of the House that that’s not enough. 
They don’t need . . . Farmers of Saskatchewan don’t need 
opiates. They need a cure. They need a solution. They do not 
need something to kill the pain. They need to deal with the 
problem itself, and that’s all the members opposite are doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said there are some positive things in the 
legislation, and I’m going to acknowledge that at this point in 
time. I think the provision with respect to guarantees of debts, I 
suspect on the balance is positive. It is very, very minor. It is a 
very minor improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said about the relationship of some 
of my colleagues who act for banks. I will confess, Mr. 
Chairman, that I once acted for the Royal Bank. I think at this 
point in time they’re probably as bothered by that as I am. We 
may have both misjudged the relationship. But at one point in 
time I used to act for a couple of branches, actually. 
 
I know that the provision which is now set out in section 31 was 
precisely what they did. All guarantees had to be in writing; 
they were all sent to a lawyer, which was myself at the time; all 
sent to a lawyer, and I had to explain to them what they were 
doing, how much it was, and what the deal was. Then they 
signed it. If that didn’t happen, as far as the Royal was 
concerned, the guarantee didn’t exist. So the Royal at least has 
done this for some time. I suspect that most of the chartered 
banks have. I don’t think it’s been the practice of all the credit 
unions. 
 
So that while this is an improvement over the existing law, 
which is 300 years old — the existing law on guarantees goes 
back to the Statute of Frauds in the 1600s — while it’s an 
improvement, it’s a very, very minor improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is much about this Bill which I think is 
going to operate in a fashion which will make the farmers’ lot 
harder. I want to mention some shortcomings in this legislation; 
some of them, I understand why they happened, and some of 
them, quite frankly, I just do not know why the government’s 
doing what they’re doing. 
 
I think it’s unfortunate that the . . . I may say with respect to the 
mediators, it appears to me — and I will be asking the  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1977 
 

minister this in Committee of the Whole — but it appears to 
me, Mr. Minister, that mediators will no longer be offices or 
employees of the board. It appears to me they will now be 
private . . . come from the private sector. I say that because the 
appointment of the mediators is separate from the appointment 
of employees — it’s done by the minister directly. 
 
On a quick glance through the Bill, I saw nothing in the Bill 
which made the mediators subject to the provisions of The 
Superannuation Act or the public service of Saskatchewan. I 
therefore suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the mediators are going to 
come from the private sector. I think that’s unfortunate. 
 
Quite apart from the cost of it and the fact that I would assume 
the cost is going to be charged back to the farmer and the bank, 
although I don’t know that for sure, I think it’s unfortunate that 
the mediators do not remain employees of the board. I say that 
because I think that gave the mediator additional clout. While I 
might decry the limited role the board played in acting as an 
opiate and not as a cure for the problem, the board did establish 
a good deal of credibility with the courts. And in my 
experience, the report that went forth from the board was 
generally acted on by the court, although not always. 
 
Now that gave the mediator a very real authority when he 
started to bang heads. And I can tell you, from having done 
arbitrations and mediations, it’s basically a process of banging 
heads until you can get both sides to be a bit more reasonable. 
The fact that the mediator was going to write a report which the 
court was in all likelihood was going to act on, gave the 
mediator real authority and real power. And when he banged 
heads, they knew their heads had been banged because he had a 
role to play later on. 
 
The mediators have now lost that entirely. The mediators are 
now simply functionaries. Try to get two people together and 
try to suggest to them what’s reasonable. In my experience, by 
the time the bank and the farmer have argued and fought about 
it to the point where the banks decided to foreclose, neither one 
is in the mood to be reasonable. 
 
So I think the mediators and the whole mediation system is 
going to suffer when you separate the mediators from the board. 
 
The certificates . . . the Act also sets out a scheme for filing a 
certificate of non-participation. This is basically a certificate of 
the mediator that the farmer or the bank has not participated in 
good faith. What’s interesting about this — and this particular 
section is indeed I think a good part of this legislation, and it 
was drafted by the banks — what is interesting about this 
section is that when a certificate of not participating in good 
faith is filed against a farmer, the order for the leave to 
foreclose proceeds. 
 
When a certificate of not participating in good faith is filed 
against the bank, one would think that the application would be 
dismissed. That’s the opposite of allowing it to proceed. 
 
That’s not what happened. What happened is they  

mediate again. Mr. Speaker, there clearly appears to be a double 
standard with respect to these certificates of not participating in 
good faith. The farmer in effect loses his land; the bank just is 
asked to do it again. This is one section that I would think the 
banks would find a significant improvement, and I suspect the 
farmers would not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the homestead provisions. This is probably a 
modest improvement, but it’s very, very modest. The provision 
provides, as I think the minister may have outlined, that 
foreclosure cannot proceed so long as the farmer is living on the 
land, and so long as the court finds that he’s making a sincere 
effort — I don’t think it has to be reasonable — a sincere effort 
to meet his payments. 
 
That’s not a very high standard and I suspect in most cases the 
courts will refuse leave to foreclose against the homestead. But 
that’s only for three years. After the passage of three years, the 
bank, credit union, FCC, or trust company, can proceed anyway 
against the homestead. It doesn’t give the farmer the homestead 
for the rest of his life; it gives the farmer the homestead for 
three years, and then he’s going to lose it anyway unless he’s 
got the problem resolved. 
 
There is one section that I think is most unfortunate. I’m not 
sure if . . . I was going to be so generous as to say this might 
have been unintentional. Perhaps I shouldn’t be that generous 
and let the minister make his own defence. 
 
Section 71(d) of the old legislation prohibited an action on 
collateral security. It’s very important, Mr. Speaker, because 
collateral security can include personal property; can include 
livestock and machinery. The old Act prohibited an action on 
collateral security. I have not seen that in this legislation. 
 
I saw a section which at first I thought covered it because it said 
that an action on the mortgage . . . in any action on the 
mortgage, the seller or mortgagee’s only right to recover the 
purchase price was to take title to the land. That I thought at 
first blush might have covered it, but I don’t think it will, in 
retrospect. I think an action recovered and an action 
commenced to take the cattle or the machinery before dealing 
with the mortgage, I think would be successful. 
 
So I think the government has opened the door for banks, trust 
companies, and credit unions to proceed against the cattle, 
against farm machinery. And that’s lost in the old Bill, and I 
frankly do not understand why that’s been done. 
 
I’m not going to be so critical as to suggest that this was done at 
the request of the banks. I’m going to be very generous and say 
that I think the members opposite may have made a mistake in 
drafting this legislation. If that is the case, I hope the 
amendments are introduced in Committee of the Whole. If it 
isn’t the case, I can tell you that I and my colleagues are going 
to be most critical of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has been a lengthy Bill. I, in fact, was 
working my way through it when the Bill was called, and I have 
not finished my review of the Bill. I want to do  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1978 
 

that in light of the comments from the minister opposite. I 
therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1615) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I would ask the minister to 
please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’d like to introduce George Loewen who’s an associate deputy 
minister; John Heath, on my left, who’s an associate deputy 
minister; Lawrence Krahn, who’s behind Mr. Loewen, who’s in 
charge of finance and administration within the department; and 
Darrell Thomson, who’s an associate deputy minister, behind 
me as well. And there’ll be various and sundry other officials as 
the need requires, as we go into various aspects of this very 
large department, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it’s 
appropriate to note that there have been tabled in this legislature 
today — like 30 seconds ago, I received one of them — several 
health care reports, which I haven’t had a chance to look at. I’m 
sure that’s a deliberate strategy on the part of the government, 
to withhold information from us so we don’t have a chance to 
look at it and properly inform the public. I noticed one of these 
reports was reviewed by the Provincial Auditor last year — 
June 26, 1987. And I’m wondering why the minister didn’t 
make that report public last year in July or August. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there’s no question that this government 
constantly banters about numbers which are supposed to prove 
Saskatchewan is facing rapidly escalating costs for health care 
and medical services. The throne speech maintains that health 
care expenditures are consuming more and more of our tax 
dollars and that our health care system is extremely costly to 
maintain. The Tory rhetoric, Mr. Chairman, is that the demands 
of Saskatchewan people are driving this province into 
bankruptcy — not the demands of the Tory friends, not the 
demands their incompetence and mismanagement causes, but 
the demands of the people are driving this province into 
bankruptcy. 
 
So what do they do? They establish a task force on health care. 
Yet another task force, yet another report, Mr. Chairman, after 
the hundreds that we’ve had over the years across this country. 
Mr. Chairman, if it wasn’t for this government’s attacks on 
health care, for their attacks on medicare, and their 
incompetence in managing the health care system in 
Saskatchewan, we wouldn’t need a task force today. 
 
They’re hoping, however, that this task force will take the 
political heat off the government for the next 18 months. The 
government hopes to use the task force as a cover up  

and an excuse for not solving pressing problems that require 
immediate solution today, not 18 months from now, which is 
when the task force is supposed to report. 
 
The government also hopes that this task force will give it some 
credibility in health care by the very virtue of its existence. 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, rather, this government 
has no credibility in health care, absolutely none. 
 
Nowhere has the PC betrayal of Saskatchewan people been 
more evident than in their attacks on health care. It was a tragic 
irony that they picked 1987, the 25th anniversary of medicare in 
Saskatchewan, to betray the basic principles, the basic 
principles of medicare and to attack our health care system. 
Those basic principles being comprehensiveness, accessibility, 
public administration, and universality. 
 
Comprehensiveness, Mr. Chairman, means all health services, 
preventive, diagnostic, curative, rehabilitative that modern 
medical and other services can provide. Comprehensiveness 
means that all these health services will be available to the 
people of Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
But what did they do? They reduced services. They reduced 
services, Mr. Chairman. They reduced access to the prescription 
drug plan by requiring 80 per cent up-front costs and a 20 per 
cent, plus $125 deductible to be borne by the taxpayers. They 
reduced the service being provided by the prescription drug 
plan. They reduced the service being provided by the dental 
plan in Saskatchewan, and they reduced services by allowing 
unacceptable and intolerable hospital waiting lists to rise and 
rise in Saskatchewan. They attacked the basic principle of 
medicare, that of comprehensiveness. 
 
They attacked another principle of medicare, Mr. Chairman, the 
principle of accessibility. And the Hall commission report states 
that deterrent fees or premiums reduce accessibility to medical 
care and people are, in fact, deprived because of their economic 
status and condition. 
 
But what have the Tories done with respect to accessibility? 
They’ve reduced it, Mr. Chairman. They reduced accessibility 
to the prescription drug plan because people could not afford to 
pay the up-front costs. Many cannot afford to pay the 20 per 
cent that will still be remaining if indeed the minister’s plastic 
promise materializes in this province. 
 
There is a PC Party resolution that deterrent fees should be 
implemented in Saskatchewan; the PC Party wants to further 
reduce accessibility of medicare in Saskatchewan. The hospitals 
don’t have enough money to keep their beds open during the 
summer. They reduce accessibility to hospitals in needed and 
urgent surgery. Another attack on medicare, Mr. Chairman, 
another attack on another principle on one of the corner-stones 
of medicare in Canada. 
 
With respect to public administration, Mr. Justice Hall, in the 
Hall commission report of 1980, says: 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1979 
 

That during my public hearings a number of briefs urged 
that there be a return of the system to a “free market.” 

 
The implications of such a return are great, and he goes on to 
point out that the Canadian system, Mr. Chairman, is less 
expensive than the American privatized system, the free market 
system. 
 

Canadians spend (and now I’m quoting from the 1980 Hall 
commission report) 97.5 cents out of every health dollar 
on health services, and only 2.5 cents for the advantages of 
prepayment. 
 

He goes on to say only 93 cents . . . or 82 cents of each health 
dollar is actually available for health services, indicating a much 
higher overhead cost for the advantages inherent in prepayment. 
 
He talks about the saving. In other words, he’s saying that the 
overhead costs with respect to health care in the United States is 
higher than it is in Canada. And that, Mr. Chairman, is because 
the system in the United States is a free market system. And 
under that system, I might point out, as I will be making that 
point repeatedly throughout this presentation, 37 million 
Americans do not use or have access to health care in the 
United States. Yet, on a per capita basis, the spending in the 
United States is substantially higher than it is in Canada and in 
Saskatchewan where we have a publicly funded system. 
 
But what does this government do with respect to the principle 
of public administration? It orders a report on rural hospitals, 
and whether or not . . . the role of rural hospitals in 
Saskatchewan. And what do we see in this report, Mr. 
Chairman? We see reference to the free market system in the 
United States. We see statements about the free market 
dictating our requirements in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, that’s not the Saskatchewan way, and that’s not the 
way medicare was evolved. 
 
What do we see this government doing? We see this 
government supporting private multinational corporations by 
supporting Brian Mulroney and their PC cronies in Ottawa with 
respect to drug patent legislation. They support the drug patent 
legislation which has already caused a substantial increase in 
drug prices in Canada. That’s the private system, Mr. Chairman, 
and that’s what they want to move towards, and that’s what 
they’re working to move towards. 
 
They privatized the dental plan, they privatized the dental plan 
inasmuch as they put it in the hands of the private sector. And 
it’s clear that the evidence is that the publicly funded plan is, on 
a per capita basis, cheaper or not any more expensive — about 
the same or cheaper — the publicly funded plan, Mr. Chairman. 
But in Saskatchewan we see with respect to the dental plan a 
drastic drop in the utilization, a drastic drop in utilization — 
another principle of medicare being threatened, and that is 
accessibility and universality. 
 
With respect to the principle of public administration, we see 
the de-institutionalization of people in Saskatchewan, a 
principle which basically we agree  

with. But if the government is not going to provide services, 
out-patient services that are commensurate to the help that they 
would receive in the institutions and in the hospital, then 
de-institutionalization, Mr. Chairman, leads to private services 
being developed and people having to pay out of their own 
pockets for further services in Saskatchewan. It’s a move to 
further move to the privatization of medical care in 
Saskatchewan. They’ve reduced funding to health care 
professionals so that health care professionals are being forced 
to set up private practice. 
 
I also understand that there’s a couple more private labs that 
have sprung up in the province by the encouragement of this 
government and which is having some effect on our publicly 
funded labs. So you see a constant trend out there, Mr. 
Chairman, towards the privatization of health services by the 
PC government in Saskatchewan. Bit by bit, piece by piece, 
they’re frittering away at our medical care system and attacking 
one principle of medicare after another. 
 
(1630) 
 
The fourth and last principle I want to talk about is universality, 
Mr. Chairman. Universality means that adequate health services 
shall be available to all Canadians wherever they reside and 
whatever their financial resources may be, within the limitations 
imposed by geographic factors. 
 
What does the government do with respect to the principle of 
universality? It destroys the dental plan so that it’s more 
difficult for working parents and people living in rural 
Saskatchewan to obtain dental services. They don’t have an 
adequate dental plan in rural Saskatchewan as much as the 
minister will travel out to Radville and have a phoney 
ribbon-cutting ceremony some six months after a clinic has 
been set up there. They have not provided rural Saskatchewan 
with adequate, universal, accessible dental services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — What else does the government do with respect 
to universality? It decimates the prescription drug plan so that 
the availability of it to all people in Saskatchewan is simply not 
there. 
 
It orders a report that in effect — as much as the minister may 
try to deny this — in effect by implication, suggests the closure 
of rural hospitals. And for anyone to deny that, Mr. Chairman, 
is not to fully understand exactly what is being said in that 
report, and I know the minister understands. 
 
How else have they affected universality with respect to 
deterrent fees, Mr. Chairman? Their private agenda is to 
implement deterrent; it’s not a private agenda, Mr. Chairman. 
Excuse me, the PC Party, by public resolution, in effect at their 
convention, passed a resolution to the effect that deterrent fees 
would be imposed, Mr. Chairman. That will reduce the 
universality of health care in the province of Saskatchewan, if 
in effect deterrent fees are imposed and I . . . which is one of the 
basic principles of medicare in Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1980 
 

And I just wish to refer you once again to the Hall commission 
report where under the heading of universality, they talk about 
deterrent fees: 
 

But during the public hearings, I was surprised at the 
wealth of complaints regarding the number of persons 
reported by community groups and by medical and 
hospital spokesmen as not being insured in the three 
provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario, 
which still levy premium taxes. This issue has been 
subjected to extraordinary public discussion in Ontario, 
particularly through the deliberations and report of the 
legislative committee in 1978, and I need not belabour the 
issue here. However, what both the legislative committee 
revealed and what various briefs submitted during my 
public hearings highlighted is the very small percentage of 
those entitled to subsidy, that is the working poor and the 
temporarily unemployed who actually apply for and 
receive the entitled assistance. Lack of knowledge of its 
availability, cumbersome administrative procedures, even 
difficulty in obtaining application forms apparently create 
genuine barriers to insured status. 

 
In effect, Mr. Chairman, what is being said there, that once 
deterrent fees are implemented, those who may have an 
exemption from paying it often don’t utilize that exemption 
because of one barrier or another, whether it be the bureaucracy 
or lack of knowledge that the exemption is available. And in 
effect what happens is you have the universality of medicare 
being attacked and destroyed, and that’s what the PC Party 
wants to do in Saskatchewan. And they’re on record to that 
effect, Mr. Minister. 
 
So, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chairman rather, the corner-stones of 
medicare, its very foundation, each and every one of them — 
comprehensiveness, accessibility, public administration, and 
universality — have been betrayed by that Minister of Health 
and by his government and struck down by the PC government. 
 
So what does it do? What does it do, Mr. Chairman? It sets up a 
task force. It sets up a task force, Mr. Chairman, for the purpose 
of using it as a smoke screen. 
 
And they appoint to this task force, loyal civil servant that he 
may be, the former deputy minister to the Minister of Health, 
who was the deputy minister at the time that the government 
decimated medicare in Saskatchewan and betrayed every single 
principle of medicare as it is founded and interpreted in Canada. 
We suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the appearance of that is that 
this hardly gives the task force the appearance of being 
independent. 
 
But what is even more disturbing about this task force, Mr. 
Chairman, even more disturbing is the fact that the terms of 
reference of this task force make no reference at all, not a single 
reference to the principles, the fundamental principles of 
medicare being the foundation upon which the task force must 
operate. 
 

The terms of reference and the mandate do not say that, Mr. 
Chairman. Why don’t they say that, Mr. Chairman? I think they 
don’t because we have to assume they don’t, and we assume 
because they are absent that a review of all those principles is 
wide open by the task force. And the principles of medicare are 
open to be disregarded by the task force, because the minister 
and the government have refused to say that the task force is 
bound by those four corner-stones of medicare. 
 
For more than 40 years, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan has had a 
strong and proud tradition of leadership in health care. It as the 
people of Saskatchewan, under the CCF leadership of Tommy 
Douglas, that introduced hospitalization insurance in 
Saskatchewan, a first in North America. It was the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, the men and women of 
Saskatchewan, under the leadership of Woodrow Lloyd, that 
introduced medicare — a bold step, Mr. Chairman, and another 
first. And it was the people of Saskatchewan, the men and 
women of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, and the Allan 
Blakeney New Democrats, who introduced new and innovative 
health care services for Saskatchewan like the prescription drug 
plan and the school-based children’s dental plan. 
 
These were positive steps for improved health care for 
Saskatchewan and they were firsts in North America — firsts, 
Mr. Chairman. But the PC government and the Minister of 
Health have turned their back on the proud Saskatchewan 
tradition of health care leadership. They’ve broken their 
promises and they’ve betrayed medicare in Saskatchewan. And 
now they’ve mandated a task force to review even the very 
principles and foundation of medicare, the corner-stones of 
medicare. 
 
The task force mandate says that it can look at insured services, 
for example. For those who know the PC government, what do 
you think that means? Do you think that means increasing 
insured services? Of course not, Mr. Chairman. Do you think 
that means further cut-backs and slashing of insured services? 
Of course, Mr. Chairman, that’s what the Tories are signalling. 
Do you think that means justifying the cruel and heartless 
cut-backs to the prescription drug plan and the dental plan? Of 
course, Mr. Chairman, that’s what the Tories are signalling. 
 
Their mandate talks about funding of health care. What do you 
think that means, Mr. Chairman? That we should have more 
public funding of health care, or does that mean we should be 
funding health care through deterrent fees and through other . . . 
pay your own way or pay as you go. 
 
And the mandate of the task force refers to utilization of health 
care. What does that mean, from a Tory point of view, Mr. 
Chairman? That means over-utilization and therefore deterrent 
fees. 
 
The terms of reference talk about the nature and distribution of 
health care facilities. And what do you think that means, Mr. 
Chairman? Well, Schwartz report jumps into my mind; closure 
of rural hospitals is the other thing that comes to mind, and so 
on. And it goes on and on. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1981 
 

But nowhere does it say that the task force must be cognizant of 
the corner-stones of medicare and the basic principles and the 
basic foundation upon which medicare in this country and in 
this province was based. Why? As I said before, because the PC 
government wants those principles to be reviewed — that’s 
why. 
 
And we know that these task force people are good men and 
women and we trust they will acknowledge these basic 
principles of health care. But that’s not the Tory agenda, I tell 
you, Mr. Chairman. The members of the task force may 
acknowledge those principles, but it’s not the Tory agenda. 
 
So if the Tories don’t like this report, what are they going to 
do? I think they’ll shelve it and hope it gives them some 
credibility, but not necessarily act on it. Do you really believe, 
Mr. Chairman, that they’ll implement progressive and fair 
recommendations to improve socialized medicine? Of course 
not. They may use it as an election ploy, and in that regard I 
think the timing that the task force is to report is very 
interesting. I see the minister has set the time for the task force 
as December 31, 1989, just before we go into an election year 
— set by the Minister of Health for the task force. And I’m 
wondering why the task force wasn’t given the opportunity to 
set their own timing. 
 
So if we get a good report out of the task force, what is the PC 
government going to do with it in this pre-election year? 
Probably make promises to the public. But we know what they 
do with their promises. They break them as soon as they get 
elected and then continue on implementing their privatized, 
right-wing extremist’s ideology gone wild in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And let’s look at some of these promises that the PC 
government have engaged in over the years. Let’s look at them. 
The promise to have cut the provincial income tax by 10 per 
cent — a promise broken. The promise to eliminate the gas tax 
for good — another promise broken. The promise to eliminate 
the provincial sales tax — another promise broken. The promise 
that the PC government would never attack Saskatchewan 
medicare. The member from Melville in his election material 
saying, funding for health and education will be increased. The 
member from Maple Creek saying, improvements on health 
care delivery system, as a promise in her election material. 
Another PC member saying, improve medicare, and look at 
this: extend drug plan coverage; plan to include all prescription 
drugs. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s a PC promise for you. It’s so much 
hot air, Mr. Chairman, so much hot air. So we know what they 
do with their promises. After they get elected they break them. 
 
And meanwhile, while the task force is going through the 
province, the Tories continue with their rhetoric on spiralling 
health costs. And there’s no doubt, Mr. Chairman, that national 
health care expenditures have been rising over the last decades, 
but the Tory lines must be exposed for what they are — scare 
tactics, fabricated to justify Tory governments dismantling 
medicare in this province and indeed throughout the entire 
country. 
 

There has been no real attempt on the part of this government to 
reduce costs for the people of this province; rather the attempt 
has been to reduce the commitment to medical care and to 
publicly funded universal health care programs. For example, 
let’s look at the (Drug) Patent Act, a federal Act which allows 
multinational corporations to charge ever higher prices for their 
drugs and to give them an edge on the market. This has done 
nothing, the (Drug) Patent Act, the federal (Drug) Patent Act 
has done nothing to assist in the containment of health care 
costs in this province. It certainly has not ensured that 
prescription drugs remain within the affordability levels for all 
people in this province. It has, in fact, facilitated the ability of 
multinational drug companies to continue to charge ever 
increasing drug prices, and it’s my understanding that this has 
already started at record levels. 
 
In the long run, the drug patent legislation in Canada, Mr. 
Chairman, is going to mean higher medical costs for people, 
because instead of having access to medication that they need, 
people will be hospitalized. So in the end, Mr. Chairman, these 
short-sighted policies are going to result in higher medical costs 
for future generations, all for the purpose of going along with 
their Tory friends, multinational drug corporations across the 
country. 
 
So in the interim, we, the taxpayers in Saskatchewan, pay. Their 
friends are smiling, and the principles of accessibility and 
universality are being betrayed by their approval of the drug 
patent legislation. 
 
(1645) 
 
The evidence that blows a hole in the Tory myth that medicare 
is too expensive is the fact that the American privatized system 
is substantially more expensive. And I think it’s important that 
the public, because there’s all this rhetoric out there about 
health care costs, and it’s referred to in the throne speech — 
health care costs being very difficult to maintain — some of the 
facts should be put on the record, Mr. Chairman. 
 
In 1983, per capita spending on health care in Canada was 
under $1,100 per year per person — I understand that’s at 
$1,200 now, but I’m dealing with 1983 statistics because I want 
to make a comparison to the United States — while in the 
United States, at the same time, per capita spending was almost 
$1,400, or 27.3 per cent higher. Unlike Canada, the United 
States remains a primarily private care system, with 37 million 
Americans lacking any health insurance. And yet their costs are 
27.3 per cent higher. 
 
Is that the direction you want Saskatchewan medicine to go, 
Mr. Minister? Is that the direction? In 1960, before medical care 
was introduced in Saskatchewan, Canada led virtually the entire 
world, devoting 5.6 per cent of GDP (gross domestic product) 
to health care. By 1983 Canada was devoting 8.5 per cent of its 
gross domestic product to health care resources, while the 
United States, that bastion of free markets, was spending 10.9 
per cent of its gross domestic product on health care — 10.9 per 
cent, Mr. Chairman, as opposed to 8.5 per cent in Canada. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1982 
 

Quite simply, there is nothing to indicate that we are spending 
too much on health care. If the United States can devote almost 
11 per cent of its gross domestic product to these expenditures, 
then Canada’s spending appears rather moderate, Mr. 
Chairman, rather moderate. And I believe that point was also 
made by Dr. Scharfstein, past president of the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) when he reacted to this 
minister and this government’s comment in the throne speech 
on the cost of health care. 
 
One major reason for our relatively better performance is that 
medicare confers substantial powers to provincial governments 
in controlling expenditures through their near total control over 
hospital budgets and in their role in determining fee schedules. 
 
But what do we see this government doing, Mr. Chairman? 
Agreeing with free trade in Canada, which opens the door wide 
open, explicitly for the administration of Saskatchewan 
hospitals and for the administration of Saskatchewan nursing 
homes by American private sector companies, in spite of the 
reason, in spite of the fact that costs are controlled in Canada 
and Saskatchewan because we have control of our hospitals and 
institutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And they are trying to contain the costs of 
health care, Mr. Chairman? Hog-wash! That’s a simple myth. 
They’re approving a free trade agreement that is going to lead 
us down the path that the Americans have gone over the last 
decades. 
 
Administrative costs in Saskatchewan and Canada account for 
about 2 per cent of total health care spending, whereas in the 
U.S. the comparable figure is 8.5 per cent — more than three 
times, Mr. Chairman, the Canadian figure. The administrative 
efficiency in Canada because of the principle of publicly funded 
medicare saves Canadians over 2 billion annually. It saves 
Canadians over 2 billion annually, Mr. Chairman. 
 
In the United States, private expenditures on health care are 
double that of Canada, Mr. Chairman — double that of Canada. 
And while the elderly are entitled to medicare benefits in the 
States, about two-thirds of the elderly purchase private 
insurance coverage to supplement their medicare benefits and 
protect themselves against the deductibles, the co-insurance, 
and limits they are subject to under the American system of 
health care. And despite this double coverage, Mr. Chairman, 
the elderly paid, on the average, 25 per cent of their health 
expenses out of pocket. And I say that’s unacceptable, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
And what we see happening in our prescription drug plan is a 
movement in that direction, because by far the most people who 
use — and according to your own report on the prescription 
drug plan which you dumped on my desk five minutes before I 
had a chance to get up and speak — according to that report, it 
establishes that seniors use the prescription drug plan at a rate 
far greater than any other sector in Saskatchewan. And so what 
are you doing? You are requiring seniors to supplement medical 
care  

insurance benefits at an ever-increasing rate. Those who can 
least afford to pay, Mr. Minister, those who can least afford to 
pay — a move to privatization, a move to the American system, 
that’s what’s happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I think it’s also interesting, Mr. Chairman, that in 
Saskatchewan, 1982 was the last year that this province 
exceeded the national average in terms of public contribution to 
total health care costs — in that year, with governments — 
federally and provincially, contributed approximately 78 per 
cent of the health care costs. And by 1985 government health 
expenditures represented 72.3 per cent of total public and 
private health care spending in Saskatchewan — a drop of some 
5.7 per cent. And this figure is significantly below, Mr. 
Chairman, the national average of 75.5 per cent. 
 
And let us not forget, Mr. Chairman, that this was before this 
provincial government acquiesced in the cut-backs of federal 
resources under established programs financing arrangements 
and before the elimination of the school-based dental plan and 
the destruction of the universal drug prescription program. 
 
So I believe, Mr. Chairman, it’s fair to say that costs are not 
spiralling, but that this government’s contribution to health care 
spending is becoming less and less every year, less than what 
other provinces are spending in Canada. 
 
In terms of provincial comparisons with respect to the gross 
provincial product, the average nationally for health care 
spending in Canada as a percentage of gross provincial product 
was 10.6 per cent in 1984, and Saskatchewan’s health care 
expenditures accounting for only 9.4 per cent of gross 
provincial product. 
 
In short, Mr. Chairman, this government has no real 
commitment to medicare in spite of what they may say. 
Medicare is not a priority of this government, and the people of 
the province know that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve said that this government is committed to 
top quality health care delivery. Well let me tell you, Mr. 
Minister, that this is not the same. Committing yourself to top 
quality health care is not the same as giving your commitment 
to comprehensive, universal, accessible, publicly administered 
health care. 
 
Top quality health care is indeed available in the United States, 
but it’s not accessible to the 37 million Americans who do not 
have health insurance and to the millions of others. It is limited 
to the extent of the maximum benefits allowable under their 
private health insurance programs. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, this is not the Saskatchewan way. Men and 
women in Saskatchewan want, yes — portable, comprehensive, 
universal, accessible, publicly administered and funded health 
care. It’s cheaper, it’s better, and it’s more humane. And that is 
the future, Mr. Minister. That’s the future. To return to 
something less is to turn the clock back. 
 
And the people aren’t fooled by your motives, Mr. Minister, 
they’re not fooled. They know you say one thing but your 
actions say another. And your actions are things  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

1983 
 

like supporting multinational drug companies, slashing 
prescription drug plan so that people are making a decision 
between buying medication and groceries, equating people who 
can’t afford . . . people on prescription drugs to criminals, 
attacking seniors through ever-increasing costs under the 
prescription drug plan. They know that you’re not committed to 
medicare, Mr. Minister. 
 
Slashing the dental plan, affecting the accessibility and the 
universality of a first-rate dental plan in Saskatchewan ; your 
support for free trade which is going to lead to the privatization 
of hospital and nursing home administration in Saskatchewan; 
your support for deterrent fees, Mr. Minister, which will limit 
the accessibility and the universality of our health care 
programs; your support for the free market in medicare while 
you know that 37 million Americans are uninsured in the 
United States — those are betrayals of principles of medicare. 
 
You have refused to correct these problems, Mr. Minister. 
You’ve betrayed the people of Saskatchewan, and I suggest that 
you’re irresponsible, uncaring, and incompetent in your 
administration of health care in Saskatchewan, and you’ve 
abandoned any claim to be the guardian of the people’s health. 
In fact, due to your government’s actions, the health of 
Saskatchewan people is at serious risk, Mr. Minister. 
 
You don’t have a shred of credibility left, Mr. Minister, with 
respect to health care. And the setting up of the task force isn’t 
going to increase your credibility, Mr. Minister, because you 
don’t have a shred of credibility left. Just ask the people as they 
come out of drug stores; just ask the people as they sit in 
dentists’ office waiting for treatment; just as the people in rural 
Saskatchewan, no dental services; just ask the cancer patients 
who have been waiting to get into the cancer clinic while you 
play petty politics; just ask the nurses and the doctors and all 
those struggling to give high quality health care under your 
heartless and cruel cut-backs and underfunding of the system; 
just ask Mrs. Couch, Mr. Minister, just as Mrs. Couch and Mrs. 
Klotz, and the Shepherd family, and Nancy Skerrett — and the 
list goes on and on, Mr. Minister — just ask them. 
 
Well the men and women of Saskatoon Eastview and Regina 
Elphinstone have had an opportunity to render judgement on 
your health care record. And the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister, are waiting for the next election to render judgement 
on this government’s health care record. And if this government 
wants to know what that judgement will be, then call an 
election sooner rather than later, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I had referred to some 
individuals at the closing part of those remarks, and I want to 
refer to them again. I want to bring to your attention the fact 
that a constituent of mine, a gentleman by the name of Mr. Max 
Smith who has been in contact with you through me, who is one 
of Dr. Busse’s patients, who has blood clots in his leg and needs 
major vascular surgery — he was booked for surgery on 
December 9, 1987; his  

condition is getting worse. 
 
I spoke to him today. He told me that his condition is getting 
progressively worse as the days go by. He has written to the 
minister. He spoke to the minister, and all he got from you, Mr. 
Minister, was some sort of non sequitur response about, this 
usually doesn’t happen, and it’s just something rare that 
happens. Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, it’s been 
from December now until June 9; December 9 to June 9 — 
January, February, March, April, May, June — six months and 
this gentleman is still not booked for surgery for blood clots in 
his legs. 
 
Mr. Minister, he could lose his legs if he doesn’t get into a 
hospital right away, Mr. Minister. Now I want to know what 
you’re going to do for that man, and I want to see some 
commitment from this government to clear up these hospital 
waiting lists. And meanwhile his wife is suffering, his wife is 
suffering under the prescription drug plan because of some 
ridiculous formality over at the Department of Health. 
 
Mrs. Jacqueline Smith had bypass surgery on March 10 and 
she’s been attempting to get coverage for a persantine drug. She 
got one-year extension in which she could get this drug, and the 
year expired, I believe, on March 20. She made an application; 
she was six days late in getting her slip in, Mr. Minister, six 
days late for the coverage. And your department has told her, 
I’m sorry, it’s too late. And that’s the sort of heartless and cruel 
policies you have at the Department of Health, Mr. Minister. 
Those are the heartless and cruel policies. 
 
And I want to know in these health care estimates what you’re 
going to do for Mrs. Jacqueline Smith, and whether you’re 
going to cover her for that persantine, six days late in getting 
her bill in, Mr. Minister. Now that’s ridiculous to deny this 
woman coverage under the prescription drug plan. Your 
bureaucracy has blossomed in a spectacular fashion, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It being 5 o’clock I leave the chair till 7 
o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


