


















































May 29, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 29, 1989 
 

1445 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion under 
debate, Mr. Speaker, is a motion put forth by the government 
member opposite, the member from Kindersley. And the motion 
that we are about to debate this evening, Mr. Speaker, deals with 
the changing of the rules of the legislature. The government 
wants to use its power — the power of its majority — to change 
the rules in this legislature in a very non-traditional manner. They 
want to put the . . . change the rules so that the bell-ringing rule 
can no longer be used in the traditional fashion it has been for 
years and years and years and how it has worked for years and 
years and years, and to limit the bell-ringing time by regulation 
to one hour. 
 
More specifically, Mr. Speaker, the motion goes something like 
this, and I quote from the blues of this morning. And the motion 
proposed by the Hon. Mr. Andrew: 
 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended by adding the following after rule 33(1): 
 
(2) When the Speaker or the chairman of Committee of the 
Whole, or Committee of Finance, has put the question on a 
motion and a recorded division (recorded division meaning 
the vote, Mr. Speaker) is requested under rule 33(1) (that’s 
one of the rules of the legislature), the bells to call in the 
members shall be sounded for not more than one hour, 
provided that while the members are being called in, either 
the government or official opposition member serving as 
House Leader, Acting House Leader, chief whip or deputy 
whip may approach the Speaker or chairman to request that 
the division be deferred . . . 
 

So the rule makes provision for an actual postponement of the 
vote until a later time, Mr. Speaker, in moving this particular 
motion. And the member acknowledges that there are times when 
you simply can’t have everybody in to be able to conduct the 
vote, members being out in distant parts of our province — 
although that is not the motive for this particular motion. And it 
goes on to read that the: 
 

. . . chief whip or deputy whip may approach the Speaker or 
chairman to request that the division be deferred, in which 
case, the Speaker or chairman shall announce that the said 
division has been deferred until a specified time, but in any 
case not later than before orders of the day on the second 

sitting day thereafter. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the motion that is under debate is a 
government motion, sponsored by the Minister of Justice, the 
member from Kindersley. The member from Kindersley, the 
minister, by bringing that motion forward, has indicated his 
priority in this legislature. The government, throughout the 
sitting, indicates its priorities by whatever it brings forth to this 
House for debate. If the government decides that privatization is 
its priority, it’ll bring forth debates on privatization. If it decides 
that changing the rules is its priority, then those are the things it’ll 
bring forth. In this particular case, the government has chosen to 
bring forth a rule change. 
 
The opposition does not choose the priority of debate, Mr. 
Speaker. The opposition, with the exception of private members’ 
day, which is Tuesdays only, when motions of the opposition . . . 
One day out of five, the opposition gets the right to choose the 
motions under debate. So by bringing forth this motion, what the 
government has done is told us that their priorities do not lie with 
any type of Bills that might help in the financing of farms which 
are under foreclosure. It has chosen not to deal with any Bills 
dealing with day care or increasing the number of day-care 
spaces or adjusting or improving the day-care arrangements in 
the province. 
 
It has not chosen to deal with pensions or tax reform of any sort. 
It has not chosen to deal with unsafe products that may be 
transported on our highways or our railways or not disposed of 
in manners that perhaps would be safer for the population. What 
has happened instead, Mr. Speaker, is the government has 
brought forth for debate this motion on rule changes, showing us 
exactly where its priorities are. 
 
It’s kind of interesting that when you look back over the 45 days, 
Mr. Speaker, of what the government’s priorities have been. 
They have been in dealing with this particular Bill, and they also 
kept bringing forward the Bill on the potash privatization, and an 
omnibus privatization Bill. And of course we know the Bill that 
started the bell-ringing procedure, the Bill that the government 
was completely out of touch on, and that was the SaskPower Bill. 
Those have been the government’s priorities. 
 
To date, we could have been debating . . . Instead of debating this 
Bill we could have been debating our estimates; we could have 
been making sure that all the agencies and boards and 
municipalities in the province would be getting their money and 
getting their money on time. We could be debating the Bills that 
I indicated earlier, that is Bills dealing specifically with farm 
finance legislation or pension reform or the lotteries tax or 
environmental protection legislation. We could be debating those 
if that had been a government priority. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when we found that the government was not, 
was not really following or setting an agenda which was 
representative of the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan, as 
we well found out, and any member can find out when he goes 
. . . if you go and ask your citizenship. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1446 
 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Elphinstone, 
would like to make an introduction. I would just allow him to do 
so, with your permission, sir. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’d like to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
and through you to the members of the Assembly, on behalf of 
my colleague from Regina North East, a group of five individuals 
from the Saskatchewan Abilities Council here in Regina. These 
people are participants of the life enrichment council, and they’re 
with us here tonight, along with their supervisors, Lynn and 
Joyce, to observe the workings of the House. And I’m sure all 
members will want to join with me in welcoming them here and 
wishing them an enjoyable stay here in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome 
our guests and Lynn and Joyce, the life enrichment officers that 
are with them. My wife, Shirley, happens to sit on the advisory 
board of the Regina branch of the Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council and works quite regularly with the people down there, 
and I know that she would like me to say hello on her behalf as 
well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the 
motion before us and the agenda of the government, when it was 
quite clear that the government was really refusing to listen to the 
will of the people, our caucus issued a news release this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and which . . . and also wrote a letter to 
the government House Leader. And I would like to refer to that 
at this time, regarding what we felt that the government should 
be doing instead of following its blind political agenda, including 
this particular motion here on how long the bells should be 
ringing. 
 
The press release stated . . . And I will quote two or three little 
parts from it here, Mr. Speaker. First of all, that the press release 
is titled “New Democrats challenge the government to get on 
with business.” And it said: 
 

It’s time that the Devine PC Government quit wasting 
taxpayers’ time with its own narrow, political agenda, and 
got on with the important issues facing the people of the 
province. 
 

That was the lead sentence of the press release, Mr. Speaker, 
issued this morning and issued later this afternoon as we were 
bringing the close on the privilege 

motions to . . . bringing the debate on the privilege motions to a 
close. Further on in the news release it says . . . We indicated on 
behalf of the caucus that: 
 

We are prepared to enter into debate on budgetary estimates 
so the budget can be passed in the swiftest possible time, 
allowing those groups and agencies which depend on 
government financing to have the assurance that their 
money is in place. 
 

This references to the budget estimates, of which only one has 
been covered, Mr. Speaker, and I would venture to say that 
through the blue book there must be at least 20 areas that need to 
be covered and some in considerable depth and deserving of 
scrutiny. And after 45 days I would have expected at least half of 
them would have been done by this time. 
 
Knowing that the government has sort of lost control of the 
agenda because of some of the bad decisions made by their 
front-benchers and by the Premier, we thought perhaps they 
ought to have some advice as to where we were going and what 
more important legislation we were referring to, and we 
suggested they include: 
 

. . . farm financing legislation, pension reform (and I’m 
quoting again), the lotteries tax, and three pieces of 
environmental protection legislation: the tax on unsafe 
products, increased fines for environmental offenses, and 
the protection of the ozone layer. 
 
As well, we are prepared to deal with important matters on 
the Order Paper which have not been brought forward by the 
government. These include legislation on the gasoline tax, 
the Grasslands Park, child care, adoption, and the Clean Air 
Act . . . 
 

That, Mr. Speaker, was the essence of the press release that was 
issued this afternoon so that the public would understand what it 
is that we’re trying to do, and how we think we could assist this 
government in moving the agenda of the legislature, as opposed 
to bringing forward measures which really are not in the interests 
of the people of Saskatchewan. I’m referring specifically to this 
Bill, this motion before us which would limit bell-ringing only at 
the sort of whim and spiteful emotion that’s been presented by 
the government. 
 
In addition to the press release, Mr. Speaker, just in case the 
members found it difficult to get their information — of course 
they shouldn’t get their information from us strictly by press 
release — we advised the hon. government House Leader, Mr. 
Speaker, in writing, by letter today, in a letter dated May 29, and 
the letter indicated things very similar to what was indicated in 
the news release. I’ll read a couple of sentences from the letter, 
Mr. Speaker, into the record. The lead sentence was, I am writing 
you this letter . . . 
 
It was from the opposition House Leader. The lead sentence is: 
 

I am writing to you with respect to the orderly disposition 
of Government business in the   



 
May 29, 1989 

1447 
 

Legislature. 
 

And then our opposition House Leader, the member from 
Elphinstone . . . The member from Elphinstone indicates that we 
ought to go on and consider Bills other than this motion which 
we have before us here today, including, he says, the Bills 
regarding clean air, adoption, family services, child care, and the 
grasslands park, and indicating that the official opposition would 
be prepared to co-operate fully with the government in order that 
such legislation or budgetary estimates may be addressed at an 
orderly and expeditious manner in the Assembly. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the letter didn’t do much good, and I 
guess the press release didn’t do much good because here we 
found ourselves back on an agenda of something that’s 
completely unneeded, nothing to do with the business of the 
people. We’re on the agenda of bell-ringing. And this is . . . I 
suppose you might wonder why — and I’ll deal with that in a 
moment — why I believe that it is that we’re on this particular 
motion. 
 
I should indicate that this is a very . . . If they really want to do 
something about the rules of the legislature, and I think that there 
are times when you should have a look at the rules of the 
legislature and how it functions, and weigh it carefully . . . It’s an 
old, established institution. Things do change slowly from day to 
day, and from year to year, and from decade to decade, and it 
certainly does need, at times . . . the consideration does need to 
be put to place. 
 
(1915) 
 
But the proper way to do it would certainly, Mr. Speaker, be to 
take the suggestions of the government, along with the 
suggestions from the opposition in their regular way, in the 
traditional way, to a committee at which, Mr. Speaker . . . of 
which Mr. Speaker would be the chairperson, of which the Clerk 
of the Assembly and perhaps staff of the Assembly would act as 
researchers. The ideas would come, would be debated in 
committee. The research would be done properly. It wouldn’t be 
done . . . The legislation wouldn’t be brought forward as a matter 
of spite or a matter of revenge. It wouldn’t be done in terms of 
trying to teach somebody a lesson. And I think overall the 
operation of this legislature could be a better place if things were 
done that way and were continued to be done that way. 
 
Well as I mentioned, however, it is the government’s option, at 
the government’s option that this could be done. The government 
instead however chooses its agenda in a different way. And they 
are choosing an agenda which to my mind is very politically 
motivated. 
 
It’s kind of a sad thing, Mr. Speaker, to see that the traditions and 
customs of this legislature will be changed unilaterally without 
the co-operation, in this case, of all of the people who are elected 
by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I come then to the point, if that’s the way . . . 
I’ve indicated to you how I feel it should be done. And then I 
have to answer to myself, why is it then that the government is 
doing this? Why is it that they are choosing to go at it in this way? 
I could, I suppose, consider that the 

reason that they brought this legislation in is incompetence and, 
goodness sakes, there’s plenty of evidence that the government 
is incompetent. And it’s been evidenced over the last month right 
here in this legislature. 
 
First of all, they made the grave mistake of thinking that the 
people of Saskatchewan wanted them to sell SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker. And that was a complete error. If they’d gone back to 
their constituencies and asked about it, they’d have found out for 
certain that that was not something that the people wanted to do. 
That’s the first evidence of incompetence that I’m going to put 
forward. 
 
And I think that perhaps what they’re doing here is . . . And it’s 
another example of incompetence; they could have used a 
different method. Another piece of evidence about 
incompetence, Mr. Speaker, is they made a mistake in the 
bookkeeping — numerous mistakes which were brought to the 
attention of the public by the legislative servant, the auditor of 
the province of Saskatchewan. The unprecedented number of 
bookkeeping irregularities and an unaccountability of the money 
showed once again that the government is very incompetent in 
its dealings. 
 
Then they proceeded to make another mistake, a mistake of 
trying to advertise the power sell-off — again incompetence, just 
like I say they’re being incompetent in bringing this particular 
legislation forward here right now instead of sending it to 
committees the way it should be done. 
 
Now this is all a government that’s doing this in a short period of 
about a month or four or five weeks. So instead of . . . And I’m 
going through this chronologically. 
 
Then instead of accepting the report of the auditor and saying, 
well thanks for bringing things to our attention and we’re going 
to try to fix something about it, they went and attacked the auditor 
— attacked the auditor, attacked the messenger, trying to shoot 
the messenger in this case. Another bit of incompetence because 
that got them into another pile of trouble, followed by an 
amendment which they put forward and had to gather all of their 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I must bring to the attention of the 
member, rule 316 which indicates: 
 

. . . that a Member, while speaking, must not: 
 

(i) reflect upon the past acts and proceedings of the 
House; (which he was doing). 

 
And rule 315(2), which elaborates: 
 

(2) It is irregular to reflect upon, argue against, or in any 
manner call in question in debate the past acts or 
proceedings of the House, on the obvious ground that, 
besides tending to revive discussion upon questions which 
have already been once decided, such reflections are 
uncourteous to the House and irregular in principle 
inasmuch as the Member is himself included in and bound 
by a vote agreed to by a majority; 
 

I think the member gets the essence of the ruling from   



 
May 29, 1989 

1448 
 

that, and I ask him not to bring up the past proceedings of today’s 
motions which have been passed. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
the public record, without me stating any more about this into the 
record . . . But it’s quite clear that what we have is a government 
that is steering a rudderless ship. It’s been error after error after 
error after error, and it’s been documented over and over again 
in the press and in Hansard over the last month to the extent that 
— and here’s something that wasn’t debated, Mr. Speaker — to 
the extent that even last Friday they couldn’t even get themselves 
together enough to get a motion in on time, at 11 o’clock. They 
were late with their own motion. 
 
It just shows a government which has just completely lost control 
of proceedings. And it makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the 
government is in such a position here where it cannot manage the 
proceedings of the House here properly, and they have to bring 
in rule changes in order to adjust what they’re trying to do. They 
can’t manage the proceedings of the House. How in the world 
can they manage the proceedings in the business of the province 
of Saskatchewan? How can they do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — It’s no small wonder that we’ve run up an 
unprecedented debt, and we’ve got taxes like we’ve never had 
before, and at the same time we’ve got services going down. It’s 
no wonder. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we ask that these rules not be changed, 
particularly not be changed in this manner. 
 
You know, a month or two from now, or half a year from now, 
things could be much different — or even two or three years, 
things could be much different. They may not feel quite the same 
sting, the same sting, quite the same way. And they might start 
thinking about the reason for having such a rule in place; they 
might start thinking about it. You see, if they go ahead and 
change this rule now just because they’ve been stung a little bit, 
or feel somewhat stung . . . They shouldn’t really feel stung. They 
should feel, well thanks, opposition, for bringing us to our senses; 
we won’t go through with this because the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t want us to sell SaskPower. 
 
That’s what should be happening. And I think over a period of 
two weeks or a month or two months, if they just sort of reflect 
and look back, they will probably think that that’s the way they 
should handle things and go on with those things that people want 
done. 
 
You see, if you do things in a hurried, unreasonable fashion like 
this, like changing the bells the way they want to do it, it makes 
us wonder what rule they want to change next. Does that mean 
that all of a sudden you want to just decide that debate on certain 
motions should be limited to a certain time, regardless of what 
the elected members . . . or regardless of their importance, that 
they’ll want to ram stuff through? Will they want to ram through 
debate, cutting off debate? Will they want to ram through 
something that will cut off access of the proceedings on 
television or cut off access through the media? Will they want to 
reduce the number of readings in the House? 

What rule will they want to change? 
 
These rules have been established over centuries, actually, Mr. 
Speaker, and they have been proven to work. You tell me where 
— in what part of the globe — democracy works better than it 
works in the British Empire or here in Canada. You tell me that. 
And that didn’t come about just because some government 
decided on the spur of the moment, after they kind of were 
embarrassed, that they should change the rules. It came about 
instead over a lot of reasoned discussion and years and years of 
experience. That’s how come our system works. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to what an editorial of May 11 
— and this is from the Star-Phoenix — said about the Tories 
bringing in this particular Bill, bringing in this particular motion, 
bringing in the motion to limit the readings. And this editorial 
says . . . The headline is, the motive of the Tories is questionable. 
Well the headline just says, “Motive questionable.” The lead 
sentence: 
 

Saskatchewan Tories may end up shooting themselves in the 
foot, by trying to limit legislative bell-ringing to one hour. 
 

Why? Well you know, and I know, that while this government is 
in power today, and they might be in power next week, they’re 
not going to be in power for more than a year, perhaps a year and 
a half or two years, and then that’s it — that’s it. You’re not going 
to see another Tory government here for another 50 years. 
 
And you know what’s going to happen? The Tories are going to 
be sitting on this side, this side of the House. And there may come 
a time when they’ll regret this particular action. They’ll kind of 
say, you know what, we limited ourselves — when not only we 
limited ourselves but we limited the right of the people of 
Saskatchewan to be heard, Mr. Speaker. We limited . . . That may 
happen. That could well happen. 
 
This particular editorial from the Star-Phoenix of May 11 
suggests in here that the government should have a cooling-down 
period before it goes ahead with any legislation, and it indicates 
and I quote: 
 

There does not appear to be any pressing need for a rule 
change. Saskatchewan is no worse off because the bells 
jangled for a record 17 days over the SaskEnergy issue. In 
fact (he goes on to say) the public is probably informed 
(probably better informed). 
 

Mr. Speaker, that brings to light the real reason for why the bells 
were rung, to make sure the public had an opportunity to be 
informed about this very important issue, and it also brings to the 
fore the second important reason for having legislation, or having 
a rule in place, which provides for this mechanism of 
bell-ringing, which provides for this mechanism. 
 
You see, in a democracy we have a series of checks and balances. 
One of them is this bell-ringing mechanism. Let me just put that 
into a larger context. Every four or five years, by custom, our 
electorate goes to the polls and in its wisdom   



 
May 29, 1989 

1449 
 

elects a majority of government members and at the same time 
elects a minority of members which sit on the opposite side, the 
opposition side. 
 
One of the things that has made democracy work is that you give 
the government members the majority so that they can carry on 
the business of the House and the business of the province. And 
you give the opposition immunity in the legislature so that they 
can bring forward and say those things which need to be said, and 
also to make sure that there is always an alternate, always an 
alternate voice added in this province and in this country. 
 
Without that alternate voice, Mr. Speaker, we would not have a 
democracy as we know it. We would have a system of 
government as is known in countries that have dictatorships, or 
in the communist bloc countries where there is just one party; 
there is no opposition. So our job, our job here in the opposition 
is to make sure that that point of view is heard. That’s one of the 
checks and balances. 
 
You see, I often have told . . . When I’ve visited schools and been 
explaining this process, I tell the students we that are sitting in 
the opposition don’t always have our way — we rarely have our 
way — but we can always have our say. And then the people four 
years from now, or five years from now, between elections can 
decide on whether they liked what the government members have 
done or they approve, and if they approve they will re-elect them. 
And if they disapprove, then they give the people who are sitting 
in the opposition, they give them the mandate to go into 
government. That’s the way our system works. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now in order for the word to get out, the opposition members 
have some techniques and the government members have some 
techniques. The government members have at their disposal 
advertising money. They can easily put to place all kinds of 
advertising, they can charter the government plane, they can take 
any kind of trip, they can authorize any kind of people . . . They 
can authorize any kind of staff to go and explain what the 
government programs are, and in that way can get the word 
across and check with the general public to be sure that the public 
knows what the direction is that they want to go. 
 
The opposition, on the other hand, does not have the financial 
means at their disposal to do the same things. The opposition 
simply does not have, and probably shouldn’t have, the amount 
of money for advertising that the government has. You can’t be 
buying ads and wasting money at the rate the government is, at 
any rate, and there shouldn’t be. 
 
But what do you do or what do you have instead? Well you have 
a couple of systems in place: one of them is debate in the 
legislature, which is recorded in Hansard and televised; and 
second is access to the press, and the press has a very important 
message, an important role here. 
 
A third method of getting the attention of the public is to 

take that very, very risky step of ringing the bells. And I say 
“risky” advisedly, because that bell-ringing system we have in 
place has built into it its own discipline. Any opposition that 
would dare to ring bells repeatedly, ad infinitum, often and 
without good reason, runs the risk of losing public favour — runs 
that risk. 
 
In the particular case here that we were in, Mr. Speaker, the 
ringing of the SaskPower . . . the ringing of the bells to save 
SaskPower from privatization, to save it from privatization, what 
happened is there was a chord that was struck that the public 
agreed with. Sixty-seven per cent of the public agrees in 
Saskatchewan — or agreed at one time, according to one poll. I 
believe it was a Saskatoon Star-Phoenix poll or at least it was 
commissioned by them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Angus Reid. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — An Angus Reid poll, my colleague from 
Elphinstone tells me. 
 
So it verified the feeling that we in the opposition were getting 
by talking to our constituents. It verified it. And so what we have 
is we have public support for that move, because that move, the 
concept of ringing the bells, that check and that balance on this 
legislature, was used in the proper manner by this particular 
NDP, this particular NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker, used 
responsibly. 
 
It says here in this Star-Phoenix editorial which I quoted from 
earlier that: 
 

. . . (this) stand-off also got political action — the 
government will delay legislative debate while a panel it 
appointed travels the province. 
 
The Opposition was able to accurately measure acceptance 
of the bell-ringing tactic, returning to the legislature when 
the people felt the point had been made. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if you . . . Or I would ask any member, if they have 
a chance to go and speak to any of their news directors in their 
area, or any editors, and ask them if this method, this method of 
bell-ringing, did actually achieve the objective of making sure 
that the public was more informed, or less informed, they will to 
a person, I’m certain, tell you that because of the bell-ringing 
there were more people that are advised of what this government 
is trying to do. And that’s the whole procedure — that’s the 
whole reason behind it. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why this system of government here 
works. Every once in a while, when the government loses touch 
— I mean the government members lose touch — it is the duty 
of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, sitting on this side, to bring 
them back to reality. If that bell-ringing process was not here, I 
don’t know if that could have been accomplished. It may have 
been. There may have been other ways of doing it. It may have 
been, but if it works why try to wreck it? If it works, why try to 
wreck it? Why fix it if it’s working? Go on and do the 
government’s business, as you should be doing it now, bringing 
on the legislation that the people of Saskatchewan brought 
forward. Bring forward the   



 
May 29, 1989 

1450 
 

Education estimates; bring forward the Social Services estimates; 
bring forward the Health estimates; bring forward the 
Environment estimates. We’ll go through those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another reference that I want to make here 
to the way our democratic system works, so that I can just sort of 
tie it in to the bell-ringing and show the place for bell-ringing. 
And I want to do this because I don’t . . . I want to bring to the 
government members’ attention about a direction that we’re 
going, and a direction that we should be going. And I’m going to 
quote from a book here that’s called The Struggle for Democracy, 
which is written by Patrick Watson and Benjamin Barber. And 
this was from the television series which was on television over 
the winter, this last winter, a series of 10 programs, where they 
documented the evolution of democracy and showed what 
direction we were going. And it is my contention, Mr. Speaker, 
that bringing this legislation to limit bell-ringing is going in the 
wrong direction. 
 
Here’s what Benjamin Barber says from this book, and it’s on 
page 271. And he talks about democracy in a world scale level, 
and I want to talk about how it fits in to us here. He says: 
 

If democracy is to survive the shrinking of the world and the 
assaults of a hostile modernity, it will have to rediscover its 
multiple voices and give to citizens once again the power to 
speak, to decide, and to act; 
 

So he says, once again to give the citizens the power to speak, to 
decide, and to act. 
 
So if you want to, if you really believe in democracy, Mr. 
Speaker, if the members on the government side really believe in 
democracy, they should listen to what the people said about the 
SaskPower privatization, listen to what the population is saying 
during the time that the bells were ringing, and then act on it in 
that fashion, act on it in the fashion that the majority of the people 
would like them to act on, and that is drop the legislation. 
 
He goes on, Benjamin Barber goes on to say: 
 

. . . for in the end (he says) human freedom will be found 
not in caverns of private solitude but in the noisy assemblies 
where women and men meet daily as citizens and discover 
in each other’s talk the consolation of a common humanity. 
 

Well this is Benjamin Barber’s . . . has been quoted in this book, 
Mr. Speaker, because he has been chosen by Watson as a partner, 
as one of the authors of the book and the author of the television 
series, The Struggle for Democracy. 
 
There is another reference in his book that I want to bring 
particularly to the government members’ attention, particularly 
to the cabinet members’ attention. And it deals with which way 
are we taking democracy in this province. This article is 
particularly relevant because I believe that by limiting the 
bell-ringing we’re actually doing a disservice to democracy as 
opposed to opening 

up our democracy. 
 
And this quotation is from page 256 from this book, The Struggle 
for Democracy. It says: 
 

During our lifetime this old planet has seen the end of the 
world’s colonial empires and, in the last few years 
especially, a global outburst of democracy. 
 

He says, in the last few years especially, a global outburst of 
democracy. And we are seeing that, Mr. Speaker, around the 
globe. We’re seeing a slight move towards democratization — at 
least I hope it is — from the Soviet bloc. And we see movement 
in South America. Occasionally there are glimmers of movement 
towards democracy. 
 
But then he goes on to say here: 
 

At the same time, there have been dramatic reverses for 
what looked like successful new democracies — 
 

What looked like successful new democracies. So he says that 
while most of the world has been moving that way, there are 
times when it has not done so, where people have acted against 
what had been increasing democratization. 
 
Now anybody that’s visited another country where democracy 
does not exist and had a chance to talk with those people and see 
those people, you get to realize just how valuable democracy is. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, once having a delegation from west 
Africa come. They were visiting our city and we were touring 
them through one of our educational institutions. And in the 
course of our discussions they were asking about how we set this 
up. 
 
So there we were in sort of a remote part of Canada, because 
certainly although I sometimes feel that my home town is the 
centre of everything, but when you put it into perspective of the 
entire population of Canada, there we are in Prince Albert, 
northern Saskatchewan, sort of the isolated area from the 
populated centres of the province. He says, how is it that you’re 
able to keep your programs going here when a lot of the wealth 
of the country is created in other parts? And certainly the other 
parts are more wealthy. 
 
And they indicated to them that through our democratic system, 
we’d finally achieved, we had achieved a system of equalization 
of payments, and how he thought how wonderful it was that we 
were able to do it. And he indicated to me that it was only through 
a democratic system and the evolution of the democracy that we 
were able to do that. 
 
It brought home a point to me, Mr. Speaker, about how fragile a 
democracy is and how we have to continue to work to better our 
democracy and have to be very, very careful about what we’re 
doing to our democratic system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1451 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I close then, Mr. Speaker, by appealing to the 
government members to reconsider what their priorities ought to 
be in this legislature. Go back to your constituencies. Seek 
advice. Get off the political agenda of privatization. 
Saskatchewan people have had enough of it, for the time being at 
least — had enough of it. Let’s get on with the estimates; let’s 
get on with the Education and the Social Services and the 
Environment estimates; let’s get on with the legislation. Let’s do 
the business of the House the way it’s supposed to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I spoke last week in a debate on 
one of the privilege motions, and I said at that time that I regretted 
having to spend time debating such a question. And I find myself 
with the same feeling tonight, regretting having to spend my time 
and the time of this Assembly debating this kind of a question. 
 
I am going to try again, Mr. Speaker, as previous speakers have 
done, to explain to you, and through you to the members on the 
government side, why what they are doing, why what they are 
doing is clearly wrong — trying to explain that we can and should 
approach the question of rule changes in the normal, traditional 
way, and why that’s a good idea; and in particular, trying to 
explain why we shouldn’t be doing this rule change at this time, 
in this climate, and in this particular way. 
 
My friend, my colleague from Prince Albert, quoted the 
Star-Phoenix editorial that talked about the motion that’s before 
this House in terms . . . as he explained, that the government 
ought not to be doing it, and raising the question, what difference 
did it make that the bells of this legislature rang for some two 
weeks, or 17 days, and that the normal business of the House was 
held up? I mean, we all know what the business of the House was 
before those bells rang, and we know what the business of the 
House, that the government has called, has been since the bells 
rang. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, frankly, the government has not shown any 
desire to be governing the province. The government has not 
been showing any desire to be governing the province. The 
government, rather, has, after disposing of the throne speech 
motion which it has to by the rules, and after having introduced 
the budget and having had the budget debate, which is provided 
for by the rules, has returned again and again and again to the 
potash agenda which it has. And the only time that it’s got off the 
potash agenda, Mr. Speaker, is when it brought this motion. Now 
what have these things to do with the proper governing of the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
(1945) 
 
As has been said before, Mr. Speaker, and I say it again because 
in my opinion it can’t be said often enough, there are serious, 
severe problems facing the people of this province. Almost 
everywhere you look there are problems that are crying out for 
attention by us in this legislature and by some kind of action. The 
government throne speech and budget speech identified some of 
them, and we on this side of the House have repeatedly 

indicated our willingness to join with the government in tackling 
these problems and producing legislation and other provisions 
that address these problems. But the government, as I say, has 
shown no desire, no desire at all, to approach those questions. So 
I think the Star-Phoenix was perfectly right when it raised the 
question of what difference did it make that the legislature didn’t 
sit during those days. 
 
Now this is not how we amend our rules, Mr. Speaker. I feel so 
frustrated in having to make this argument again because it has 
been made so often. And the people on the government side of 
the House — and every one of them know that what we are 
saying is perfectly true when we say that the rules of this House 
have only been amended following consideration by a committee 
in all of the years in which this Assembly has existed — they 
know that that is correct. They know that is correct. They know 
that what they’re doing is a radical departure from how the rules 
have been dealt with in this House since this Assembly began to 
sit some 84 years ago. 
 
They know this, and yet they persist with the resolution. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the sad part of that is that we are not considering 
rule changes in a calm dispassionate way. We’re considering this 
particular rule change in the context of all of the emotion that 
surrounded the SaskEnergy issue, the emotion that was expressed 
in every way possible by the people of this province, and which 
have affected all of the people who are trying to work in this 
House, and has indeed affected the way in which we relate to 
each other and the way in which we are able to debate in this 
House. The temperature is simply too high, Mr. Speaker. The 
temperature is too high; feelings are too high; emotions are too 
high. 
 
What we need, what we desperately need in this House, is a 
cooling-off period, a period of time in which we can regain our 
composure, regain our sense of balance and our sense of 
perspective, and stop feeling these animosities that you can sense 
in every corner of this House, and which I think is the governing 
emotion behind the motion that we are debating in this House 
tonight. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, if feelings were not running as high 
as they are, the government wouldn’t be trying to ram this rule 
change through in such a radically different way. And what I’m 
saying to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all members of 
the House, is that we just have to cool this thing, we have to park 
it for a while. We have to park it until the day comes when we 
can treat it with the kind of wisdom and the kind of logic and care 
that our rules deserve. 
 
See, Mr. Speaker, these are not the rules of the government; these 
are not the rules of the Minister of Justice; these are not the rules 
of the cabinet; these are not your rules, Mr. Speaker. These are 
the rules of the Assembly. These are my rules; these are the rules 
of my colleagues on this side of the House every bit as much as 
they are the rules of the government members. 
 
And the government members exceed the bounds of — how do I 
want to put this? — exceed the bounds of propriety, exceed the 
bounds of appropriateness, when   



 
May 29, 1989 

1452 
 

they use their legislative . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, order. I’m going to 
remind the members once more: unparliamentary language is not 
acceptable. And as a matter of fact, the hon. member from 
Saskatoon Fairview is talking about heat, and he is correct, to the 
House, and that contributes to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I was making the point, Mr. Speaker, that these 
are not the rules of the government. These are not their rules to 
amend. These are my rules too. These are the rules of the 
opposition; these are the rules of the entire Assembly, and they 
ought to be changed by the Assembly, not by the government 
using its majority in terms of the number of seats won in order to 
force through rules that they find convenient to their particular 
agenda right now. That’s wrong, the member from Kinistino 
knows it’s wrong, and they simply ought not to be doing it. 
 
They ought to be joining with us in referring this proposal for the 
change in rules, together with others which many of us agree 
ought to be made in this Assembly, to a committee in the 
time-honoured, traditional way, and have that committee 
consider those proposals in the fullness of time, without the kind 
of ill feeling and high-temperature politics that we’re 
experiencing in this Chamber in the last few days. 
 
So as I say, Mr. Speaker, it is simply not appropriate for the 
government to be using its majority in this House to force 
through a change in the rules. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a majority 
only in the sense of the number of seats won. And I agree that’s 
the most important measure, but if you recall, the popular vote in 
1986 did not result in this government achieving an 
overwhelming majority in that regard. Indeed not. Indeed the fact 
of the matter is that our party on this side of the House gained 
more votes than did the government party. So in that context it is 
particularly inappropriate for the government to be using its 
majority, in terms of the number of seats, to be ramming through 
changes to our rules. 
 
And it is idle to make the point that in this legislature, the 
majority governs. It is idle to make that point because those are 
our rules. They are as much my rules as they are the rules of the 
member from Kindersley. And he owes it to me and to all of the 
members on this side of the House to approach this question in 
the time-honoured and traditional way, by setting up a 
committee. 
 
And I say to him, through you, Mr. Speaker, that he knows that 
that’s correct. He knows that this is not the appropriate way in 
which to be changing these rules, and even at this late date, with 
all of the things that have been said in this debate, it is still not 
too late for us to agree to take advantage of this mechanism. 
 
Indeed, it is a form of tyranny, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that 
to be completely parliamentary as a term to be applied to what’s 
happening in this House. It is a form of tyranny — the tyranny of 
the majority in a situation where the majority ought not to be 
exercised, where the fact that 

the government has the number of seats that it has is being used 
to change rules which have always been changed by discussion 
and by consensus. 
 
And there’s a reason, Mr. Speaker — this argument has been 
made to you before, but I want to make it again because it’s so 
important — there’s a reason why changes in the rules have been 
approached in the manner that they have. There are good, logical, 
compelling reasons, most of which I’ve mentioned already, and 
we ought not to depart from that format because if we do, if we 
do, then those of us in this House and those people who will come 
to this House after elections in the future are going to have to live 
with this precedent, and governments in the future will not feel 
constrained, as they have felt prior to this, about changing the 
rules to reflect advantage to themselves. 
 
The effect of this precedent will be that the rules will be regarded 
as the government’s rules to change as they like; that the 
government is the master of the rules of this Assembly because 
it is prepared to use its parliamentary majority, no doubt with a 
firm whip and discipline, in order to ensure that the majority 
votes for the motion. 
 
And with that precedent in existence, then who can argue that the 
government does not have the right to change the rules 
unilaterally whenever it likes, whenever it wants to? And how 
are we to live with that kind of a precedent, and suggest to 
ourselves that we have the same kind of democracy that we had 
before? It is a serious backward step, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 
think I exaggerate one bit by putting it in those terms. It is a very 
bad precedent. We should not be doing this. 
 
Now the other important thing, Mr. Speaker, is that we don’t have 
to be doing it this way. We don’t have to be doing it this way. 
We on this side of the House made it perfectly plain to 
representatives of the government side of the House that we were 
prepared to sit down in a committee, beginning immediately, 
with representatives of both sides of the House to in fact discuss 
this precise rule change. 
 
And we suggested other things that should be included in those 
discussions, and the government suggested other things which 
could be included in those discussions. And we very quickly 
found in those discussions, Mr. Speaker, that there was a 
substantial area of agreement as to a number of rules that could 
be changed. And it was clear from what was said on both sides 
that amendments could be made to this rule as well as to other 
rules. By “this rule,” I mean the rule about the ringing of the bells. 
It was also agreed that question period could be extended. 
 
I know these agreements were subject to caucus approval on both 
sides but the representatives themselves, who were important 
members of the two sides of the House, important members from 
the opposition side together with the high-ranking 
representatives from the government side, quickly agreed that the 
question period could be extended. 
 
They quickly agreed on certain adjustments or rearrangements as 
to private members’ day — what we would do on Tuesday. They 
discussed the regularizing of   



 
May 29, 1989 

1453 
 

the tabling of certain documents, such as public accounts and 
annual reports. They discussed an idea about notice of the order 
of government business on a weekly basis, rather than on the 
most informal arrangement that exists now, which is at best on a 
daily basis, even in fact sometimes on an hourly basis, if that  
_- sometimes with no notice at all. But the representatives were 
easily able to sound each other out on the question and agree that 
some kind of longer period of notice, such as a weekly period of 
notice, would be appropriate. 
 
And they also discussed the response to orders for return and 
elements of oral questions, and found good reason to believe that 
there could be agreement on those things as well. Now that’s a 
substantial list of rules, Mr. Speaker. And included in those rules 
that could be changed was the rules respecting bell-ringing. And 
our representatives made that clear, and government 
representatives understood exactly what we were saying. 
 
So that there was a substantial agreement between those 
representatives that a committee should be constituted, and that 
it should get to work, and that it should report at a relatively early 
date. No date was agreed upon, but from my understanding of 
what took place and my experience in negotiating various kinds 
of agreements, it was clear that agreement could be reached that 
that committee would report back to this House within a 
reasonable time. And therefore, it wasn’t a question of parking 
this suggestion or sidelining it indefinitely, but was rather a 
question of moving it off into another forum where it could be 
discussed dispassionately, logically, and with an eye to the better 
running of the House business in a general way. 
 
Now, why . . . That agreement, if I may call it that, Mr. Speaker, 
that understanding between representatives fell apart because the 
government caucus turned it down. Now that’s well-known; 
that’s a matter of public record. The press has reported that and 
I’m not telling the House anything that the House doesn’t already 
know. But you have to ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, why in the 
world the government members would turn down such a 
proposition. Why? 
 
(2000) 
 
The only reason I can think of, Mr. Speaker, is that they want to 
engage in the exercise of a demonstration of power. They’re 
going to take this rule change and they’re going to stuff it up our 
nose no matter what we do. There’s no way in which we can 
avoid that. We can signal to them and tell them in no uncertain 
terms that we’re prepared to deal with this, and deal with a 
number of other things that they want to deal with too, and that 
we’re prepared to do it within a reasonable time. And yet they 
say no, no, we’re going to do it our own way; we’re going to 
teach you guys a lesson. We’re going to teach you guys a lesson. 
And here they are teaching us a lesson. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
just not going to be taught a lesson like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — You may be the big school-yard bully; you may 
think that you’re the big school-yard bully and 

you’re going to push around the kid that’s been giving you a 
problem. But this kid, these kids over here are just not going to 
be pushed around like that. These kids are going to stand up here 
and they’re going to make the kinds of arguments that I’ve been 
trying to make tonight, and they’re going to make them over and 
over again, and the people of Saskatchewan are going to hear 
them over and over again. 
 
And the more these arguments are made, the more the people of 
Saskatchewan will realize that this is a government that is not 
interested in governing. This is a government that has been 
publicly humiliated because of its misadministration and its bad 
handling of the affairs of this House and its complete misreading 
of the temperament and the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan 
— completely out of touch, proceeding with a privatization 
agenda that enjoys less support than any public issue I can ever 
remember a government going with. 
 
And we simply are going to keep telling it as it is, Mr. Speaker, 
keep saying to the members opposite and to the people of 
Saskatchewan what is at stake here and why these people are 
doing it, because, I repeat, this is absolutely unnecessary, 
absolutely unnecessary. 
 
I’m still waiting for someone on the government side of the 
House to stand up in his or her place and explain to us why it’s 
necessary that this motion be proceeded with in the way that it is. 
Why is it necessary to force its passage on the floor of this House, 
in light of the position that we have taken as to all-party 
negotiations for the changing of rules? Because I repeat, Mr. 
Speaker, those discussions did take place. The representatives 
from the opposition were the most senior people, two or three of 
the most senior people in our front bench, and the meeting was 
with at least two of the most influential government members in 
the government caucus. 
 
And those discussions produced a substantial area of agreement 
in the areas that I mentioned. And included in those areas of 
agreement was the very question that is before this legislature 
tonight, and which if the government keeps calling it, will be 
before this legislature tomorrow night and the next night and the 
night after that, until finally, finally they understand that the 
weight of public opinion is simply not on their side. The public 
is not . . . The public has no intention of allowing this government 
to run over the rights of the opposition, the rights of this 
Assembly, in the way that they’re seeking to do with this 
particular motion. 
 
And in those circumstances, Mr. Speaker, I know you would 
agree that any fair-minded person would agree that it is the 
obligation of the opposition to keep hammering these points 
home. And hammer them home we will, because the school-yard 
bully simply doesn’t have a right to force this kind of a change 
on us. The school-yard bully does not win in the end, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s literally what we have going here, a 
school-yard bully . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — . . . a school-yard bully trying to use its   



 
May 29, 1989 

1454 
 

strength to enforce its will, and to enforce it in a way that is just 
not acceptable having regards to the traditions of this place, not 
appropriate having regard to the traditions of this place. And it is 
a subject which could have been handled and should have been 
handled, and almost was handled in the traditional way, before 
some of the bad tempers and the hurt feelings and the macho 
pride on that side of the House got going and decided that this 
was going to be the way in which you would teach the opposition 
a lesson. 
 
Well we’re a little slow at learning lessons when people come at 
us like a school-yard bully — like a school-yard bully. Your 
approach is immature; your approach is inappropriate; your 
approach is antidemocratic, all the more so, because, as the 
member from Melfort well knows, the machinery for the 
resolution of these problems was obviously machinery that could 
be set up easily and would function smoothly and efficiently and 
quickly. And the member from Melfort knows that; every 
member in this House knows it. So we know what you’re up to. 
We know what your game is. 
 
Let me tell you, I don’t think it’s going to make you feel any 
better at all. I don’t think it’s going to make them feel any better 
at all, Mr. Speaker. If, after a month or two or three of debating 
these rules, they can manage to drive this change through, they’re 
going to find that the sores opened by the SaskEnergy debate are 
still there. The sores are still going to hurt just the same way. The 
humiliation that they felt, as the tide of public opinion rolled in, 
is still going to be there. And like any school-yard bully, giving 
the little kid a bloody nose is not going to make them feel any 
better at all. They’re still a school-yard bully, overlain with all of 
the psychological and other problems that a school-yard bully 
has. It is not an appropriate way to act in a school yard, and it is 
most certainly not an appropriate way to act in this House. 
 
I want to say again, Mr. Speaker, that the temperature in here is 
too high. I feel it myself in the remarks that I’ve just made. You 
know that this is the kind of debate that ought not to . . . a rules 
debate that ought not to generate much heat. We should be 
standing in our places in this House dispassionately discussing 
the way in which the rules of this House affect the way in which 
we do business. And that kind of dispassionate discussion can’t 
take place when I’m angry, and you’re angry, and my colleagues 
are angry, and all of the members over there are saying things 
that I haven’t heard them say before in my two and a half years 
in this House — very inappropriate things. Personal relationships 
that have been developed in this House have been disrupted, and 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not the atmosphere in which this debate 
should be taking place. This debate ought to be taking place in an 
atmosphere of calmness and coolness and reason and rationality 
and logic and care, because what we’re doing here has very little 
to do with what happens in this legislature or this session of this 
legislature. It has to do with what will happen in this House for 
countless generations. 
 
Not because the rules respecting the ringing of the bells are 
changing, although, as the member from Prince Albert pointed 
out, that itself is a subject that ought to be considered. The pros 
and cons ought to be considered with some care. But what we’re 
doing is going to be 

affecting future generations, not because of the ringing of the 
bells but because of the precedent that we’re setting in terms of 
process, and this process is wrong. I know it; with respect, Mr. 
Speaker, you know it; and the members opposite know it. 
 
Now they somehow feel justified in doing it because the 
opposition walked out on first reading during the SaskEnergy 
Bill’s introduction. And I can understand that they’re cranky 
about that. The member from Yorkton is indicating that I’m right 
on with my analysis. And I understand how the member from 
Yorkton feels about that; I mean, I would too if . . . I quite likely 
would if I’d seen the political consequences of the public 
awareness about what was happening in this House. 
 
The act of walking out of here fastened public attention on the 
government’s privatization agenda, and when the people got a 
sense of the depth and the breadth of the government’s agenda 
respecting privatization, their reaction was immediate, swift, and 
almost total. 
 
I mean, you’ve barely held support for your privatization agenda 
within your own party. Within your own party, you’ve barely 
held a consensus. And across the province, of course, you’re 
getting clobbered. So I understand why you would feel sensitive 
about it and why you’d be in a mood to teach us a lesson and 
make sure that couldn’t happen again. 
 
Well I’m afraid that that is not any kind of a convincing rationale, 
and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite know it. They 
know that’s not a rational reason for doing what they’re doing. 
It’s not a question of teaching us a lesson; it’s a question of 
making this House work, it’s a question of making this House 
work. And for this House to work we have to, in my submission, 
follow the time-honoured traditional way of dealing with our 
rules. We have to do a lot of other things too, Mr. Speaker, but 
that’s one thing that we have to do, that’s one thing that we have 
to do, and if we don’t do it, then I despair for the rest of this 
session. 
 
Somehow or another this government has got to get its act 
together and start behaving like a government. To behave like a 
school-yard bully is not to behave like a government. 
Governments don’t behave like school-yard bullies, governments 
don’t behave like school-yard bullies. Governments behave 
normally with wisdom, with compassion, with firmness, with 
understanding, with a plan, with an idea about how they’re going 
to go about doing what they have to do during a legislative 
session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the wheels have fallen off the machine that was the 
Tory party in this province. The wheels have completely come 
off, and we’re seeing a government who has just lost control of 
its agenda; not even lost control of its agenda so much as 
abandoned control of its agenda. And they’ve reduced itself to 
this kind of petty action that we see with respect to this motion 
that’s before the House tonight; this kind of petty action where 
the motivation is to somehow teach the opposition a lesson, 
shove it up their nose, show them who’s the boss around here, 
show them who’s got the most seats in this House, and in so 
doing break one of the longest . . . well one of the   



 
May 29, 1989 

1455 
 

invariable traditions of this House, namely the way in which we 
deal with our rules. 
 
Now before sitting down, I just want to sum up what I’ve said to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to my friends opposite, 
because I just have to know from all of the conversations that 
I’ve had with them over the past two or three years, that they 
know I’m right, that they know that the points that I’m making 
tonight are right on. 
 
We haven’t always agreed on some issues. My friend from 
Weyburn, for example, and I have an unsolvable difference of 
opinion with respect to the free trade agreement. But I don’t think 
that we have any difference with respect to the points that I’ve 
been making tonight. I think he recognizes the truth of what I’m 
saying. I think he recognizes full well that it is a bad and a 
dangerous precedent for the government to be changing the rules 
in the manner which it is using — a very bad and very dangerous 
precedent. 
 
And if it’s not, in his view, I would like to hear him get up and 
explain to this House why it is a good idea to change that 
precedent, why it would be a good idea in future years and future 
generations for the government to have control over the rules of 
this House. And particularly, I’d like to hear him make that 
argument in light of the discussions that I say took place between 
representatives of the two sides with respect to the composition 
of a committee. 
 
I’d like to hear him stand in his place and make that argument 
and make it as convincingly and persuasively as he can because 
I would certainly like to be convinced and persuaded that what 
we’re not doing here is not only an absolute, utter waste of time, 
but a very, very dangerous and highly inappropriate way for any 
government to be acting. 
 
The interesting thing is that, in my opinion, not only can this 
course of conduct on the part of the government not be justified, 
not only can’t it be justified, Mr. Speaker, but it is most 
interesting that government members aren’t even trying to justify 
it. The only justification that we’ve heard from the government 
side of the House that had any effort behind it, maybe the only 
speech at all that we’ve heard from the government side of the 
House on this motion, was the Minister of Justice on introducing 
the resolution. 
 
I’m reminded that the Minister of Highways made an 
intervention, and I recall that, and I could not understand what 
point the Minister of Highways was addressing when he made 
his speech. I think the Minister of Highways didn’t know the 
point that he was trying to get. But in the subsequent debate, as 
speaker after speaker on this side of the House has made 
arguments which are to the same point as mine, Mr. Speaker, as 
the arguments that I have made tonight, members on the other 
side of the House have sat mute, reading their magazines and 
their articles, and chatting with each other while this debate goes 
on and on, and not participating in it — no one over there 
standing up trying to justify what they’re doing. 
 
(2015) 
 

Certainly not the member from Saltcoats who is intervening 
again from his seat, and who I know has very interesting thoughts 
on why it is that these rules should be changed in this manner, 
and why I am wrong when I call him and his colleagues over on 
that side of the House, school-yard bullies — school-yard bullies. 
 
And no doubt later in this debate we’ll see him get to his feet and 
explain to us that he’s not a school-yard bully; he really is the 
soul of rationality, logic, and intelligence as he throws aside some 
84 years of tradition, as far as these rules are concerned, and 
makes these rules of this House the government rules — the 
government rules. That’s a precedent we can’t live with and 
that’s a precedent that you can’t live with, because some day, my 
friend, you’re going to be in the opposition. Some day you’re 
going to be in the opposition. 
 
The minister from Lloydminster indicates he will not be in the 
opposition, and I agree that he will not be in the opposition. I 
quite agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — But the point remains that the Conservative 
Party in opposition cannot live with a situation where the 
government feels free to change the rules according to the 
government’s own wishes. You can’t live with that; we can’t live 
with it; our children can’t live with it; future generations can’t 
live with it. The member from Thunder Creek knows I’m right. I 
think his silence is assent. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, the point simply is that this is not the 
appropriate way to go. We shouldn’t be doing it this way; we 
don’t have to be doing it this way. We’ve indicated that in the 
strongest possible terms. It’s still not too late. Surely it’s still not 
too late for government members to sit down in their caucus and 
think this thing through again and signal to us that there is some 
way in which this matter can be referred to the committee in some 
appropriate, face-saving way, and we’ll deal with these rules as 
we have always dealt with them: calmly, dispassionately, and in 
the interests of the future of this Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, for the second time in two weeks, 
it doesn’t give me a great deal of pleasure to have to participate 
in this debate which, in many respects, changes the rules in this 
legislature without the agreement of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
In our view, the government’s decision to bring forward this 
motion to limit the opposition’s ability to ring the bells, if they 
so choose, on controversial issues, is really a change in procedure 
and rules without the agreement of the opposition. 
 
This government, in my view, Mr. Speaker, will set a dangerous 
precedent if it uses its majority to force through the new rule 
changes. Never before have the rules changed without all-party 
consent. A departure now . . . And I want to remind the members 
opposite that a departure now will permit, will permit future   



 
May 29, 1989 

1456 
 

governments to change the rules at will. 
 
These members of the government need to realize that their 
decision to ram through this rule change, the rule change that will 
limit bell-ringing in the future, without opposition consent, gives 
us the right and the ability, when we are the future government 
of this province, to change the rules at will, without your consent. 
And I want to remind the members of that. 
 
Now there is no denying that bell-ringing can be viewed as 
parliamentary obstruction; there’s no denying that. But 
parliamentary obstruction in this country and in other 
Commonwealth countries has a long and respected history. 
Majority rule puts road blocks in front of the opposition. There’s 
no question about that. The majority rules and has ruled in all 
democratic countries in the world and particularly in 
Commonwealth countries. 
 
There are times, however, I’d like to remind the government, 
when issues are so important, so extremely important, that it 
requires that the opposition’s objections be put forward in an 
exceptionally forceful way. On contentious issues, informed 
debate alone does not always show the opposition’s concern. 
Sometimes obstruction, Mr. Speaker, exerts pressure on 
governments to reconsider their position. Sometimes obstruction 
does that, and it encourages the majority government to move 
slowly and cautiously. 
 
If used wisely, Mr. Speaker, bell-ringing gives the opposition the 
ability to allow the public to get involved in the debate on 
controversial issues. And when the opposition made the decision 
to walk out on first reading of the Bills to privatize the 
Saskatchewan Energy Corporation, or the natural gas division of 
SaskPower, we made the decision knowing that we were 
treading, Mr. Speaker, on thin ice in terms of parliamentary 
tradition. 
 
But we felt it so important that the public, the citizens of our 
province, the taxpayers of our province, have the opportunity if 
they wish to, to participate in the debate that would privatize the 
gas company, a company that has been publicly owned for many, 
many years. 
 
Now as I said, bell-ringing gives the opportunity for the public to 
get involved in controversial issues, and it gives the public the 
ability and the right to advise the majority government of the 
public’s opposition. And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
thus far in this Legislative Assembly, the members of the 
opposition have tabled 90,000 signatures from citizens across 
Saskatchewan opposing the government’s intentions to privatize 
the natural gas division of SaskPower, and there are more to 
come, Mr. Speaker. The bell-ringing for that two-week period 
gave the public the opportunity to participate; that it wasn’t only 
the government in this province that was going to rule the roost. 
It wasn’t only the PC government that was going to tell the 
people what it was going to do. 
 
The people had the ability and the right and the opportunity to 
participate. They participated by signing petitions. They 
participated by going out to rallies held across Saskatchewan. 
They participated by ringing the telephones of cabinet ministers 
and Tory back-benchers. They participated on open line shows. 
They participated 

through their letters to the editor. And newspapers across this 
province participated by writing editorials condemning the 
government for breaking its word that it would never privatize a 
utility in this province. 
 
And this government has broken its words to the people of 
Saskatchewan. So the opposition party, the New Democratic 
Party, took the drastic step, a parliamentary obstructionist step, 
of ringing the bells. 
 
Now I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, that in this province we 
have had a history of having the right to ring the bells. It has been 
totally within the democratic framework, it’s been totally within 
the rules as set out by this Legislative Assembly. The members 
of the opposition, Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, had the right 
and the ability to ring the bells and that’s what they did. 
 
Now political conviction and knowledge of procedure makes an 
opponent worthy of begrudging respect. And I think that because 
the opposition party, the New Democrats, took the step to ring 
the bells, because this government was breaking its word to the 
people of Saskatchewan not to privatize a utility, that we have 
won the begrudging respect of the members opposite. 
 
I don’t think that they thought that we were going to ring the bells 
on first reading. I think that they have to respect us for taking that 
step because they certainly have slowed down their decision to 
privatize the natural gas company. 
 
Bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, can also be used to gain legitimacy 
because of what it accomplishes. It can be successful in forcing 
a compromise, and it can turn divisive legislation into legislation 
of consensus. And I think on this occasion, all people in 
Saskatchewan will acknowledge that the opposition’s decision to 
ring the bells over the privatization of SaskPower, natural gas 
division, has slowed this government down. 
 
Had we not taken that step, we wouldn’t be debating rule changes 
before this legislature, we would be debating the SaskEnergy 
sell-off, the decision by this government to break its word not to 
privatize utilities. But because the opposition rang the bells, the 
public got involved in the discussion over whether or not 
privatization should proceed in this province. 
 
The message was extremely clear to the government, and what 
did they do? They compromised, Mr. Speaker; they sent the 
legislation to a committee — a committee with lots of problems; 
a committee that has some faults in terms of some of the people 
that are on that committee; a committee that doesn’t have the 
mandate that I would like to see it have. But nevertheless it 
slowed the government down. And that has been the history of 
bell-ringing in this country — it has slowed the government 
down. 
 
And I just want to review for those people who are listening 
tonight, the recent bell-ringing episodes in this country and how 
bell-ringing came about. Now my review of the literature tells 
me that the history of bell-ringing is impossible to discover, but 
it certainly has been used by oppositions in this country since 
1982 when the Conservative government . . . or the   



 
May 29, 1989 

1457 
 

Conservative opposition in Ottawa decided that it was going to 
fight the Liberal government’s omnibus energy Bill. 
 
Now different experts tell us that the Lester Pearson government 
lost a budget vote in the mid-1960s and that the bells rang on that 
occasion for an unusually long period of time. In 1979 I 
understand that Joe Clark’s minority government went down to 
defeat with an episode of bell-ringing. 
 
One report of the 1982 Ontario bell-ringing incident describes 
that situation as the first time that the bells had run for longer 
than 24 hours in Ontario. And I understand that in 1984, before I 
was a member of this legislature, the opposition party rang the 
bells for the longest in history, I understand, in the province, for 
six hours. And this was to call in the members to vote on a 
decision on a situation where the member from Regina Centre 
was being sued as a result of some comments that he made in this 
legislature. 
 
Now since 1982 there have been a number of bell-ringing 
incidents in our country. The House of Commons, on February 
16, 1982, had the energy security Bill before it. Now the official 
opposition, led by Harvie Andre, was concerned that the Liberal 
government under Pierre Trudeau was bringing forward too big 
a Bill and they wanted the Bill to be divvied up into different 
parts in order to allow the opposition to discuss it in a reasonable 
way. It would assist in the discussion of the Bill. 
 
And a decision was made by the Speaker that failed to touch on 
any of the points that Mr. Andre raised in his discussion on 
breaking up the Bill, and she ruled in such a manner that caused 
the Conservative opposition members to leave the House, to exit 
the House. 
 
Now what that protest did in the end, Mr. Speaker, and I 
understand that that was the longest period of time in Canadian 
history that the bells had rung, but what that did in the end was 
cause the Liberal government to reconsider its position, and it 
broke the Bill up into eight parts. So in that sense, Mr. Speaker, 
the opposition was successful in getting the government of the 
day to do what it wished. 
 
Now in Ontario in 1982 the Liberals protested a raise in the sales 
tax by refusing the traditional unanimous consent for leave to 
introduce the Bill. The walk-out was symbolic and it only lasted, 
I understand, for about three days. 
 
On December 14, 1982, the bells in the House of Commons rang 
for five hours as part of a plan to delay the passage of Canagrex 
Bill, which would establish a Crown corporation to sell Canadian 
implements, farm implements. 
 
And in 1983, the New Democrats refused to give leave to 
introduce a Bill that would allow changes to the Crow’s Nest 
Pass freight rates because of the kind of outrage that was 
expressed in western Canada. The government, I understand, was 
caught by surprise and allowed the bells to ring for a good long 
time while they scurried to get members to win the vote. 
 

In 1983 the bells rang again on a motion to adjourn, and that 
lasted, I understand, for about seven days. What happened was 
the Liberal government tried to introduce measures that would 
prevent the NDP opposition in Ottawa from introducing petitions 
signed by western grain farmers and prairie farmers against 
changes to the freight rate charges. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now we’ve got the historic example of the Manitoba opposition 
under the Conservatives, of ringing the bells in that province on 
several occasions. I understand between July 1983 and February 
1984 the Conservative opposition, friends of this government 
opposite, rang the bells on 24 occasions. Sometimes the bells 
rang for as little as five minutes, but usually they rang for two 
hours or more. And the last bell-ringing exercise launched by the 
now Filmon government lasted 263 hours before the government 
prorogued the session. 
 
Now what I’m trying to say here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
there are occasions in our history in this country when 
oppositions need the right to ring the bells. Oppositions don’t 
take that right lightly, or they shouldn’t, because they do so at 
their own peril — they do so at their own peril . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well what do you call 17 days? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now the minister says, the Minister of 
Education, the member from Weyburn, says, now what do you 
call that, what do you call that? 
 
In this province, Mr. Minister of Education, your government 
gave its word that it would not privatize utilities. You gave that 
word in the 1986 election; your Premier and your Deputy Premier 
gave their word in January of 1988, in June of 1988. And what 
did they do? What did they do? They broke their word; they 
broke the mandate that had been given to them by the people of 
Saskatchewan. They promised that they would not privatize 
utility companies, and they broke their word. 
 
Now the opposition members could have sat here and debated the 
destruction of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, because after 
all it’s the natural gas side of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation that makes money for the people of the province. It’s 
the natural gas side that makes money; that’s the side these 
people would like to sell off. And it’s the electrical side that loses 
money; this is the side they want us to keep. 
 
Now any opposition, any opposition in this province would not 
be doing its job if it failed to use all of the tactics and strategies 
available to it in preventing this government from going against 
its word. And we used a tactic and strategy that is quite 
legitimate. It has been a tactic and strategy that opposition parties 
have used in the past. It should be a tactic that opposition parties 
can use in the future, but this government wants to put it to us. 
 
Now what really have we here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we 
have is a government out of touch. People in Saskatchewan know 
who’s in government; they see it in   



 
May 29, 1989 

1458 
 

every day of their lives. They know the reality of this 
government. This government socks it to the people of our 
province day in and day out. They know who’s in power; they 
know who’s in charge. But this government doesn’t like it; they 
don’t like it when the little people stand up to them and say no. 
They don’t like that. 
 
And the ordinary people of our province — the little people, not 
the big shots that are associated with that government, but the 
little people of this province stood up, they signed petitions, they 
came out and rallied, they came out to meetings, and they showed 
this government that they’re opposed to what they’re doing. They 
showed this government. They showed this government that they 
won’t put up with this kind of shenanigans any longer, that they 
don’t want this government to proceed with its privatization 
agenda, which really is about putting more money and more 
assets and more resources and more power into the hands of 
Conservative Party supporters. 
 
That’s what this government’s all about. It rewards its friends, 
but it doesn’t do a whole lot for the people that live on Main 
Street in Saskatoon where I live. Doesn’t do a whole lot for those 
people; doesn’t do a whole lot for the people that live in 
exhibition area, in the area that I live in. This government’s not 
about employment opportunities and job creation for people, it’s 
about rewarding its friends, the friends of the Conservative Party. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan rose up and said no to 
privatization. And they have the right to do that. They have the 
right to do that through the official opposition. We have the right 
to be here; we have the right to speak on this motion, and we have 
the right to oppose. And we have the right, if necessary, to ring 
bells to draw to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan, and 
to the government, that they’ve gone too far. 
 
Now there were very few people that were opposed to what the 
members of the opposition were doing in terms of ringing the 
bells. The people that seemed to be opposed were calling our 
offices because they had received phone calls from department 
of rural affairs officials, or Urban Affairs officials, or Education 
officials. Those were the people that were contacting our office 
worried that they weren’t going to get their grants. That’s what 
they were worried about. 
 
But at no time did the members of the opposition intend to harm 
the people of our province in any way. There was no time we 
intended to harm them. There was at no time the members of the 
opposition would have allowed the interim supply Bill to go 
unanswered for, in terms of members of the opposition being in 
this legislature. The members of the opposition don’t want to hurt 
the very people that we represent. 
 
But we certainly did want to send a message to this government, 
and the people of this province have sent a message to this 
government that privatization is not what the people of 
Saskatchewan want. What they want is real economic 
development that will mean jobs and employment opportunities; 
that will mean opportunities for real small business, opportunities 
for the youth, the young people in our province; the opportunity 
for young people to stay in Saskatchewan instead of having to 

migrate to Alberta or Vancouver or Ontario. 
 
And you will note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that over 14,000 people 
left this province last year, and we’ve had several thousand leave 
this province thus far this year. And why is that happening? It’s 
because this government isn’t in control of what’s happening in 
Saskatchewan. Things are out of whack in this province because 
this government’s pursuing its privatization agenda, and the 
people have said no, they don’t want this government to proceed 
with that kind of agenda. 
 
Now the government is really mean-spirited. We came back into 
this legislature after two weeks of being out and about 
Saskatchewan talking to people, going to their doors, knocking 
on their doors with the petition, talking about the privatization of 
SaskEnergy and other privatizations. And this government came 
back into this legislature knowing that the people of 
Saskatchewan had won. The people of Saskatchewan had won 
and put this government in its place. This government clearly 
should have understood that it had no mandate and has no 
mandate from Saskatchewan people to privatize. And they think 
that’s a problem. They think that’s a problem, and so what they 
planned to do, by this motion to limit bell-ringing, is put the 
opposition in its place. 
 
And then what this government wants to do, at some later stage, 
is to bring back the Saskatchewan energy Bills, knowing that the 
opposition will not be able to hold the Bills up for any real length 
of time. That’s what this government wants. This government 
doesn’t want the opposition to be able to protect the public from 
unwarranted attacks by the members opposite. That’s what this 
government doesn’t want. They don’t want an effective 
opposition. 
 
Well this opposition has been extremely effective. I mean, here 
we have a government that hasn’t passed a Bill in this legislative 
sitting, hasn’t put forward one estimate because this government 
continues on its privatization agenda. It has unwarranted attacks 
on the auditors in this province. This government can’t even get 
a Bill passed. And instead of debating tonight what really is 
happening in this province in terms of the family farm crisis, 
we’re debating rule changes; that’s what we’re debating. 
 
Why don’t you bring forward your legislation on agriculture; 
why don’t you bring forward your legislation on environmental 
protection; why don’t you bring forward some legislation on 
child care and adoption; why don’t you bring forward some 
legislation on how to create real jobs in this province instead of 
bringing forward silly rule changes? Why don’t you do that — 
why don’t you do that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And some 
person yelling and yipping from the back says, read your order 
paper. 
 
We very well read the order paper, and every day the House 
Leader says, “stand” when it comes to Bill 1, “stand” when it 
comes to Bill 2, “stand” when it comes to Bill 3. And what do 
they want to get on to? They want to get on to rule changes, 
because this government wants to sock it to the people by 
limiting the opposition’s ability to debate legislation in this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1459 
 

You want to limit our ability to represent the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, and I’ll tell you this: you may get away with it, 
but you will pay dearly, members of the government, you will 
pay dearly in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now you want to teach us a lesson, but you 
will be taught a lesson come the next provincial election when 
the people of this province toss you out on your ears and send 
you back to the private sector, I can assure you of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now this government is supposed to have a 
trust relationship between the people of our province. They are 
supposed to have a trust relationship between the public and the 
elected officials. But trust is the basis of any elected 
government’s mandate, and this government has broken its trust 
with the people of our province, that’s what this government has 
done. 
 
This government can no longer, in my view, function as a 
government because they are totally out of sync with what the 
people in Saskatchewan are talking about. When I went home on 
the weekend, people were saying to me, gee, it’s interesting down 
there. What are those guys doing? — and I’m quoting them. 
Whose pockets are they filling? Are they as corrupt as the auditor 
says they are? Where’s the money gone? The people of the 
province know exactly what’s going on, and they know why you 
won’t let the auditor audit 50 per cent of the money. 
 
And the question the people have is: where is the money? They 
see revenues doubling since you people came to office; they see 
expenditures doubling; they see their income taxes going up, and 
they see the services deteriorating in this province like never 
before. That’s what the people of our province are wondering, 
and they’re wondering why is it that this government doesn’t care 
enough about them, the people who you people serve, to start 
providing good government in this province? 
 
Instead, what are we on to? We’ve been into the first Bill on 
privatization, then you bring forward the SaskEnergy 
privatization Bills. You bring forward the . . . The auditor brings 
forward his report, and what does the Minister of Justice do? He 
attacks the auditor because he has to shoot the messenger. And 
then we’re on to rule changes without the consent of the 
opposition. And never in the history of our province have rules 
changed without all-party agreement. But you people are going 
to sock it to the opposition, and you’re going to sock it to the 
people in the process. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my view that in order to get this 
legislature back on track we have to get off of rule changes and 
on to the real business of the people of Saskatchewan. And the 
members over there say, forget it. They say, forget it. We have 
record unemployment amongst young people; we have record 
numbers of people leaving our province; we have record numbers 
of 

bankruptcies; we have houses for sale and no one will buy them; 
we have record numbers of no starts in terms of new housing 
starts, and these people don’t listen — don’t listen. They’re 
concerned about bell-ringing. They’re concerned about 
bell-ringing. Well what about the people of Saskatchewan, and 
what about their hopes and dreams and future? It’s time you 
people starting paying attention to the real needs of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now as I was trying to say before I was interrupted, this 
afternoon the House Leader, the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, on instructions from our caucus, sent a letter to the 
Deputy Premier, the member from Souris-Cannington. And the 
House Leader, on behalf of the New Democratic Party, put 
forward our position in terms of what we wanted to occur in this 
legislature in the next few months. And I want to read the letter 
into the record just in case the back-benchers and some of the 
cabinet ministers didn’t have an opportunity to see the letter. And 
I quote: 
 
(2045) 
 

Dear Mr. Berntson: I am writing to you with respect to the 
orderly disposition of Government business in the 
Legislature. 
 
Once the Assembly has resolved the two questions of 
privilege now on the Order Paper . . . 
 

And I’m deviating from the context of the letter. This is the 
questions of privilege in terms of the attack on the auditor. 
 

. . . I believe that the Government may (then) wish to turn to 
consideration of other Government business such as the 
budgetary estimates for departments, agencies, and 
Government Bills. 
 
 The Government may wish, for example, for the Legislature 
next to move on to consideration of Bills already on the Order 
Paper, including Bills regarding Clean Air, Adoption, Family 
Services, Child Care, or the Grasslands Park. Alternatively, 
the Government may wish to introduce and proceed with 
certain measures which have been announced but not yet 
tabled, including further environmental legislation, or 
pension reform, or the new Farm Finance Act. 
 
The Official Opposition would be prepared to co-operate 
fully with the Government in order that such legislation, or 
budgetary (expenditures) may be addressed in an orderly 
and an expeditious manner in the (legislature). 
 
With respect to Private Members’ Business tomorrow, May 
30, I am also writing to advise that the Opposition is 
prepared to allow a Government Member’s resolution of 
your choice to be debated, after one opposition resolution. 
Yours sincerely, Dwain Lingenfelter, Opposition House 
Leader. 
 

Now here is an olive branch; here is an olive branch on behalf of 
the opposition. We want this legislature to start functioning. We 
want to co-operate with the government members opposite in 
terms of getting on with the business   



 
May 29, 1989 

1460 
 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And how were these letters met? How were these letters met by 
the members opposite? What kind of reaction did they express to 
the media? They expressed a reaction of outrage. That’s what the 
members opposite expressed, a reaction of outrage. How dare the 
opposition? How dare the opposition send us this letter? 
 
Well I just want to say to all people listening tonight, it’s not the 
opposition that wants to be on bell-ringing motions; it was never 
the opposition that attacked the auditor, it was the members 
opposite; it wasn’t the opposition that brought in the SaskEnergy 
privatization legislation — that went against their promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan — it wasn’t the opposition; but the 
opposition had the obligation and responsibility to respond, and 
that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question to the members opposite is: 
who’s in charge over there? Who’s in charge? This is a 
government that obviously has gone amok. This is a government 
that’s totally out of control; it can’t even control its own agenda. 
 
It is not the members of the opposition that decide what 
legislation will be debated in this House. It is not the opposition 
that decides which spending estimates will be debated in this 
House and when. It is not the opposition that decides anything 
other than what we are going to discuss in question period and 
on private members days. That is what the . . . all those other 
things in this legislature are determined by the government. 
 
And the member from Rosthern says, why didn’t you discuss the 
Saskatchewan Energy Bill? All I can say to you, Mr. Member 
from Rosthern, is that your government, your Premier — and I 
know that you are a Christian — that your Premier broke his 
word to the people of Saskatchewan. He told an untruth, he told 
an untruth. He promised the people of Saskatchewan that his 
government would not do anything to privatize the utilities, 
Crown corporations. And your Premier went against his word. 
 
And you surely, Mr. Member from Rosthern, should understand 
that. And you surely, Mr. Member from Rosthern, should oppose, 
should oppose any premier and any member of your party that 
breaks their word. Obviously in Saskatchewan a handshake is no 
longer valid; obviously in Saskatchewan your word is no longer 
your word. And that has been the tradition of this province and 
the pioneers in this province and our mothers and fathers and 
other people, that your word is your word. In Saskatchewan you 
can count on that. You have been able to count on that in the past; 
you can’t count on it in terms of the Tory members opposite, but 
I can assure the citizens of Saskatchewan, when this government, 
the New Democratic Party, is elected, our word will be our word. 
I can assure you of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

members opposite say it will be a change. I think that the 
members on this side of the House have some integrity — we 
have some integrity. We will fight this government’s attempts to 
privatize and break its word to the people of Saskatchewan 
because they have no mandate, no mandate to sell off the utility 
companies in our province, no mandate to sell SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), no mandate to sell 
SaskPower, SaskTel, and numerous other utility companies; they 
have no mandate to do that — none whatsoever. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve put my remarks on the record. It seems 
to me that the members opposite don’t understand the issue 
before us, and I just want to remind them again that their decision 
to come forward with this motion without the consensus of the 
members opposite, the members of the opposition, will set, and 
does set, a dangerous precedent in our province. It sets a 
dangerous precedent that the majority in this province, the 
members of the government, will force its will through the new 
rule change. 
 
I just want to remind the members opposite that this departure 
from history and procedure, where we’ve had all-party consensus 
in terms of rule changes, will permit future governments — and 
I just want to remind them of this — it will permit future 
governments to change the rules at will. And I want to remind 
the members opposite that some day you will be the official 
opposition, some day soon. 
 
And by pursuing your strident position that only you know 
what’s best for this Assembly, and only you know what’s best 
for the people of Saskatchewan, that you do so at your own peril, 
because future governments will remember this. They will 
remember that you forced your will of the majority on the 
minority, and that your departure now will lend to us the very 
arguments that will permit a New Democratic Party government 
to change the rules in the future at will. 
 
And I want members opposite to think about that because some 
day you’ll be sitting on the back-bench of some opposition party. 
And there may be a time in this province when the New 
Democratic Party is doing something that it shouldn’t be doing, 
and you will want to have the right, you will want to have the 
right to use the parliamentary tradition of bell-ringing, and you 
won’t be able to do that. That time is coming soon. I just want to 
remind the members of this fact so that they may wish to 
reconsider their decision to force through this motion. They may 
want to do what the opposition has been suggesting you do and 
send this to a committee on rules so that we can talk about all 
kinds of democratic reforms that are needed in this province. 
 
We’d like, for instance, to have public accessibility to this 
building so that if the public wished to address the members of 
the legislature they could come before the bar and do that. 
 
We would like to have an elected Speaker, but that’s something 
we can’t discuss. We think an elected Speaker would certainly 
have more respect on both sides of the House because we’re all 
involved in electing and choosing that Speaker. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1461 
 

We would like to extend the sitting hours to 28 hours a week. 
 
We’d like the government of the day to serve public notice of the 
order of business, because right now when we go into this 
legislature at 2 o’clock, some afternoons we have no idea what 
this government’s bringing forward. We have no idea. And I 
think that that, in fact, is very rude behaviour on the part of the 
members of the government. But we think that that would be a 
courtesy that could be extended to the official opposition. 
 
We think that there needs to be timely releases of Public 
Accounts, that this government should have to table Public 
Accounts, not whenever it wishes to — a year and a half, two 
years later — but should have to release those Public Accounts 
no later than November 1st after the March 31st time period. 
 
We think that this government should release annual reports on 
time, and there have been years when annual reports haven’t been 
released for a year and a half. 
 
We think that there needs to be an enhanced role for private 
members. We think that that needs to occur. 
 
We think that there are some roles that the committees can play 
that they’re not playing now, if the rules were changed. 
 
We think that there needs to be a timely response to oral and 
written questions. There are days when we ask questions in this 
legislature and the government doesn’t bother to respond. There 
are days when we send over written questions and it takes them 
two and a half years to respond to those questions. We don’t think 
that that’s proper. 
 
We think that budgets should be prepared before the middle of 
March. There’ve been years when we’ve been in here in June 
with a budget. We think a throne speech should come down at a 
particular time. There are all kinds of legislative reforms that 
could be handled by this committee. Perhaps we need to have a 
longer question period. There are all kinds of things that would 
make this forum accessible to the public through their elected 
members. 
 
But this government’s just going to sock it to us; they’re going to 
ram through this rule change to limit bells without dealing with 
other reforms that are necessary in order to make this institution 
truly democratic. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve put my remarks on the record. I 
would urge the members opposite to reconsider their decision to 
force through this . . . to consider the possibility of going with 
parliamentary tradition in this province and sending rule changes 
to a committee — an all-party committee, where it could be dealt 
with away from the thrust and parry of debate of this particular 
forum, and we could bring in a report that enjoys the solid 
support, the consensus, of all members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I enter into 
this debate tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not because I want to 
but because this government gives me no alternative. 
 
When we talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion before us 
to limit the number of hours the bells can ring in this legislature, 
to limit the effectiveness of the official opposition, we have no 
option but to stand up, each one of us, and voice our opinion on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to this government’s 
high-handed, arrogant, undemocratic method of running 
government. 
 
I just want to cite a couple of examples while I start. Here’s a 
quote from The Melville Advance. The member from Melville is 
talking about the bell-ringing, and he says: 
 

Why? Because it is wrong to shut down a democracy, the 
democratically elected legislature. Opposition parties in the 
Assembly should take their cause to the people, through the 
media and in elections. They do not stop the democratic 
process for their own political purposes (he says). 
 

For their own political purposes. And I read that, I had to sit down 
to think. And I said, I’m not doing this for my own political 
purpose; I’m doing it because the people of Saskatchewan, the 
feeling that we have for the people of Saskatchewan must be 
heard, their concerns must be heard. 
 
And that is where a certain member is coming from because that 
is from where the government comes from. Everything that is 
done is for their own political purpose. So I had to sit back and 
read this, and then I understood, after viewing how this 
government operates, that this statement is just probably natural 
for some one of their members to say, because everything that 
comes out of their mouths is for their own political purpose. 
 
And in another article, from the Prince Albert Daily Herald on 
May 9, the Justice minister is quoted as saying, and I quote: 
 

Andrew said the NDP walked out before the SaskEnergy 
legislation was tabled in order to keep people from seeing 
what it really said. 
 

And he’s talking about the degeneration of the legislature. And I 
can also see how this member would say that, the way they took 
it on the chin when the people of this province responded to their 
attempt to ram through legislation on SaskPower, to privatize 
SaskPower. But what happened? He said, “ . . . in order to keep 
people from seeing what it really said.” What happened after that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? There were a number of polls done, one by 
Angus Reid and Associates, and I quote: 
 

The government’s drive to privatize SaskEnergy is opposed 
by 67 per cent of Saskatchewan residents (67 per cent). 
 

 
It says: 
 

  



 
May 29, 1989 

1462 
 

The poll, by Angus Reid Associates, found two out of every 
three respondents oppose (SaskEnergy’s) plans to privatize 
SaskEnergy by making a public offering of shares (to the 
community) while . . . about one in five . . . support the idea. 
 

One in five support it. 
 
(2100) 
 
And the total . . . Part of the poll also says, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I’m going to just go down the five or six points that’s in the 
Star-Phoenix on May 3, 1989. 
 
Question number one . . . And just keep in mind, this is actually 
the government that said we were stifling the people by not 
letting them see what the legislation was. But I tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the people don’t fool around when it comes to 
privatizing a public utility. They know what is right and wrong 
in this province, and they have said this is wrong. 
 
Question one is: 
 

Do you support or oppose plans to privatize SaskEnergy (or 
SaskPower)? Oppose, 67 per cent (as I said). 
 

Question number two: 
 

Do you support or oppose privatization in general? 
 

Fifty-eight per cent oppose it — oppose privatization in general 
when this government is hidebound in everything they’ve done 
in the last three months to push forward their privatization. 
 
Question number three: 
 

Do you support or oppose privatization of (potash 
corporation)? 
 

Fifty per cent opposed that. 
 
Question number four: 
 

Do you support or oppose the NDP tactics in the legislature? 
 

This is referring to the bell-ringing, and this is my point, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 

 
Do you support or oppose the NDP tactics in the legislature? 
 

And 50 per cent of the people said that they agree with us. 
 
And number five. It says: 
 

Should there be an election on SaskEnergy? 
 

And over 50 per cent said yes, there should be an election, 
because they realize how important this issue is. They realize 
that. 
 

And this government is trying to muzzle those people, when it 
comes to the whole privatization process, with their bell-ringing 
motion. This is the point that we’re looking at right here. Why is 
the government trying to stymie the whole process by limiting 
bell-ringing? It’s because of polls like this, after the fact, when 
they said the people didn’t know what was going on because they 
don’t trust the judgement of the people of Saskatchewan, and we 
the opposition gave them the opportunity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government likes to say in their rhetoric 
that the New Democrats, this side of the House, were trying to 
stymie the democratic process. They said that we were holding 
the legislature up for hijack for 17 days, that we were wasting 
money. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the present rule, 
the present rule in this legislature gives the opposition the 
opportunity to engage the people in an exercise known as 
participatory democracy. This is especially evident in the whole 
process dealing with SaskPower and the privatization. 
 
The rules are laid out before us and we all know the rules, and 
when this government brought forward the legislation, they knew 
the rules and we knew the rules. We used those rules, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we used those rules to let the people voice their opinion. 
We used those rules to let the democratic process take its natural 
course. We used those rules because in 1982 and 1986 this 
government said absolutely nothing about privatizing a public 
utility. 
 
So what we did in that time was, we gave the people of 
Saskatchewan the opportunity to voice their opinion on a topic 
that was not breathed a word of by this government in two 
previous elections. We gave them the opportunity to voice their 
opinion to this government. 
 
We didn’t stymie the legislature; we didn’t waste money; we let 
the democratic process work. And it absolutely did work, 
because after all people do not believe in secret workings of 
government. They believe in open, honest, sincere government 
with some integrity. I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re not 
getting that in this government. 
 
Not only will this motion to limit the length of time that the bells 
ring, not only will it muzzle the opposition, an opposition who, 
like I said, gave the people the opportunity to speak, but it will 
also muzzle the people of this province, because if we have to 
depend on the media, we have to depend on general elections, 
what opportunity do the people of this province have to speak in 
between elections and if the media don’t pick up their cause? 
That is the role of the official opposition. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we gave the people that 
opportunity, and did they ever respond! They responded by over 
90,000 people signing a petition to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy, and more coming in every day. 
Over 90,000 people, when given the opportunity that was not 
given to them by this government. 
 
If they wanted to give the people the opportunity to speak, they 
would have talked about it in the two previous   



 
May 29, 1989 

1463 
 

elections. They would have said, we are going to start privatizing 
public utilities. But no, the Premier and the Deputy Premier, both 
on two separate occasions said, no, we’re not going to privatize 
utilities. And what did they do? Not long later they turn around 
and they began the process to privatize public utility. How good 
are their words from here on in, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now over 90,000 people voiced their opinion. And of public 
meetings that were held around this province, thousands and 
thousands of other people joined those people who signed the 
petitions by saying, no, we do not want to see the privatization of 
a public utility. Thousands more had the opportunity. After the 
people had spoken, then the government went around with their 
little road show. And they were going to say, well, you know, 
we’re going to explain this to the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I realize the hon. member 
would like to dwell on that topic. It’s probably a topic dear to his 
heart; however, that is not the topic under discussion at the time. 
We are discussing rule change, rule 33(1) with some additions to 
it, as a matter of fact, and I would like the hon. member to come 
back to the topic under discussion. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I am on the topic of discussion. 
And I will relate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The hon. member does not 
stand and challenge the Speaker’s ruling. I am simply asking the 
hon. member to directly relate his topic, what he is discussing, to 
the topic under discussion. I will not allow lengthy discussions 
on SaskPower or whatever other topic he brings up. I’m simply 
reminding him again that we are discussing a rule change. And 
while I allow some latitude, there has to be limits. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I accept your ruling 
and I would just like to say this. On the motion of bell-ringing, 
I’ve just laid out before this House the fact that during that period 
of 17 days when we gave the people of Saskatchewan the 
opportunity to speak, which the government did not at any time 
before that give them the opportunity to voice their opinion, we 
gave them the opportunity by using the rule that was in place by 
ringing the bells. 
 
I was just going to summarize that by saying . . . or finish that off 
by saying that after we did that, after we gave them the 
opportunity to voice their opinion while we rang the bells, the 
government saw fit to go ahead and try to convince them that this 
was a good legislation. 
 
But my point is this. How many people showed up at those 
meetings? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, by the 5’s. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — By the 5’s, as one of my colleagues said, by the 
5’s. Every meeting, time and time again, had very, very few 
people. And that tells me one thing, Mr. Speaker — that the 
people have already spoken. The government is too late with 
their propaganda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Upshall: — The people have spoken. They see no need to 
continue the whole process. So therefore the bell-ringing gave 
them the opportunity to speak. And now, since they have spoken, 
they see absolutely no need to go to the government meetings and 
be brainwashed by the government propaganda. Using the rules, 
we gave them that opportunity. And now the government is 
attempting to muzzle the people of Saskatchewan by limiting the 
length of time that the bells can ring. 
 
This is a very important issue, Mr. Speaker. The issue of 
privatizing a public utility in Saskatchewan is very close and dear 
to the hearts of the people of this province. Because I tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, there is only one gas line coming into every 
household here. There is only one telephone line coming into 
every household. There is only one power line coming into every 
household. And the people of Saskatchewan know that because 
this monopoly situation is occurring; that they do not want 
anybody but control of the government to manage that utility. 
And they voiced their opinion. 
 
And what we have here, Mr. Speaker, with this bell-ringing 
motion, I think, is total disrespect for this institution. It’s total 
disrespect for democracy, and it’s total disrespect for the people 
of Saskatchewan who have proven, when given the opportunity 
to speak, they responded by saying that no, the government 
cannot tell us one thing by saying that they’re not going to 
privatize the utility and then go ahead and carry forward a Bill to 
privatize SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rule changes in this House are traditionally done 
with the consensus of both parties, a situation where we have 
some people from the government side along with some people 
from the opposition getting together and working out a process 
by which the rules of this Legislative Assembly can be changed 
with agreement from both sides. It’s a bargaining, a bargaining 
type of situation. 
 
And what happened? This government, first of all they said they 
were going to bring in the rule of bell-ringing motion to limit the 
number of hours. And then they said, well maybe we should do 
it the right way, maybe we should ask the opposition to be part 
of this. So that little procedure went forward, and we have 
members from the government side, members from the 
opposition, getting together and talking about some of the 
changes that could be made to the rules, some positive changes, 
a number of them that we could bring forward and help this 
democratic institution become a better institution. And that was 
okay. 
 
But what happened just a few days ago? Ten minutes before this 
legislature sat at 2 o’clock a few days ago, the government 
changed its mind, and they said, no more; we’re going to go 
ahead with our motion. So what they said is that we’re not going 
to make this democratic process work. We’re going to change 
our minds, and we’re going to go ahead and change the 
bell-ringing for one objective. And that is because they do not 
want anything to stop the procedure of this Bill to pass, which 
means that the public utility of SaskPower will be privatized. 
That’s their objective. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1464 
 

They don’t want anything to stand in the way of privatizing a 
public utility. They’re trying to ram through a Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
that the people of Saskatchewan do not want. The people of 
Saskatchewan said, no, they do not want to privatize this utility. 
The opposition let them speak. The government said, no, we’re 
going to ram it through anyway. It doesn’t matter about 
democracy. It doesn’t matter about the process. It doesn’t matter 
about history in this legislature, and we are going to unilaterally 
display our power to achieve the end that we want. It doesn’t 
matter what the people say. 
 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, has a history of this. And I’d 
just like to go through a few of the points that relate to this 
bell-ringing incident where this government shows its disrespect 
for democracy. It started with Bill 5 in 1986, where they 
attempted to muzzle the opposition by controlling the regulations 
and the rules and the procedures of this House behind closed 
cabinet doors, with no opportunity for debate, with no respect for 
democracy. 
 
We saw the present Minister of Justice, in 1985, intimidating the 
law clerk. We saw the Minister of Justice lashing out at the 
Provincial Auditor, lashing out at the Provincial Auditor for a job 
that it is his duty to carry out, and the government was trying to 
stop him from doing that. 
 
(2115) 
 
We see Bill 1 of this session — privatization. Again, an all 
encompassing Bill that would give the cabinet power to do 
anything it wanted to do behind closed cabinet doors again, with 
no respect for the democratic process. We’ve seen this 
government change the ward system with no consultation; Public 
Accounts, where the auditor says there’s no information. 
 
And I could go through the whole auditor’s report again, but just 
to make the point, Mr. Speaker, that all these things point toward 
a government who want to muzzle the people, the opposition, and 
the democratic process of Saskatchewan. They do not believe in 
democracy. They have one agenda, and that agenda is to push 
through their political agenda. It doesn’t matter how it affects the 
people. It doesn’t matter who it affects positively or negatively, 
it’s just their agenda. 
 
And this government refuses to facilitate the democratic process. 
It refuses to let the process work. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that by ramming through a Bill like SaskEnergy, whether it be by 
limiting the number of hours the bells to ring or any other 
procedure that they might wish to put forward, it simply will not 
work because the people of Saskatchewan will not stand by, and 
they proved that. When given the opportunity, they will not stand 
idly by and let this government run over top of them, roughshod, 
just because they, the government, think it’s the right thing for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, this whole process that we have 
gone through in this legislature tells me one thing: this 
government’s agenda is pushed on only by their 

ideological agenda. In Saskatchewan we have many, many issues 
that are important, pressing issues to this province — many 
issues like depopulation, like unemployment, like the number of 
people forced to be on welfare, like small businesses going 
bankrupt, like the working poor, like the devastating situation the 
agricultural economy is in. 
 
And what do we have? We have gone nearly three months since 
March 8, when we started sitting in this legislature this session. 
We’ve gone nearly three months, and today — not to mention 
they haven’t passed any important Bills, but today, only today, 
they brought down a Bill that is going to deal with the agricultural 
credit corporation. And at first blush, it’s not much because 
again, again the indication is in this Bill that everything is going 
to be done through the regulations made by cabinet — another 
indication that they have no respect for the democratic process. 
They have no respect to give the people the opportunity to 
discuss what the government is doing. They simply are going to, 
by regulation, make the rules and change them whenever they 
feel it’s necessary. 
 
But the privatization agenda is first and foremost with this 
government. And is it working? Well I say no, it is not working, 
because for the most part the privatization initiative in this 
province has lost jobs for people, it has lost revenue for the 
province of Saskatchewan, and it’s lost economic control. But 
most importantly, it has made money for a very few Tory friends, 
and that’s the sad part of the whole situation. And that’s why by 
muzzling the opposition, by muzzling the people of this province, 
this government will eventually see that that will come back to 
haunt them. It will come back to haunt them whenever they have 
the nerve to call a provincial election. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in wrapping up my few comments, I would just 
like to say this. The privatization agenda of this government, their 
attempt to muzzle the opposition, their attempt to get the people 
of this province to succumb to their type . . . to get them 
brainwashed into their type of single-minded, narrow ideological 
perspective, that of privatization, will simply not work, because 
the people are bigger than that. They know what’s necessary; 
they know what the agenda should be; they know that we should 
have the full accountability from this government, and to date we 
have not seen that. 
 
This government has had ample opportunity to bring forward 
legitimate legislation to deal with the real problems. They’ve had 
ample opportunity to deal with the motions in this legislature, to 
deal with the problems of this Assembly in a democratic fashion 
with both sides of the House. They have chosen not to do that. 
 
I think the people, Mr. Speaker, will choose not to re-elect this 
government, and that’s why I will be opposing this motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I waited for a 
moment, assuming perhaps that members opposite would want 
to rise and defend this action. They appear not to. Members 
opposite appear to be uninterested in defending what they’ve 
done. They appear to be   



 
May 29, 1989 

1465 
 

uninterested in discussing these issues. This appears, Mr. 
Speaker, to be a cranky, tired government that is tired of the 
democratic process and just wants to ram things through. 
 
I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t think I’ve seen a 
government which is so impatient, so arrogant, out of touch, so 
absolute in its refusal to consider other points of view. It’s a 
government, Mr. Speaker, which has become tied to a certain 
ideology, and they’ve proceeded towards that in a blinding 
fashion, like lemmings heading for the cliffs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this matter arose in this instance out of the attempt 
to privatize SaskPower, a portion of SaskPower. Members 
opposite take great offence at that comment. They like to pretend 
that they were not were not privatizing part of SaskPower, but 
SaskEnergy. SaskEnergy is of course nothing but a section of 
SaskPower. 
 
They chose once again to ignore a fairly clear expression of 
public opinion opposed to it. To some extent the privatization of 
SaskPower was irreversible; to some extent the damage was 
irreversible. It was in that sort of a context that the bells rang for 
some 17 days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government would like to pretend that that was 
an abuse of the process, that we were on strike. I may say, Mr. 
Speaker, for a group that were on strike we enjoyed remarkable 
degree of public support, and those opposite enjoyed very little 
public support. 
 
People did not of course feel strongly about . . . did not feel that 
bell-ringing was a good tactic or a bad tactic. They simply felt 
that privatizing SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) was the 
wrong thing to be doing, would be injurious to this province’s 
economic health. Like us, Mr. Speaker, they have little faith in 
this government’s willingness to listen, to consider other points 
of view. And they assumed, as we did, that if the normal 
legislative process took its course, the Bill would pass. That Bill 
would pass notwithstanding public opposition; notwithstanding 
the polls; notwithstanding, I might add, Mr. Speaker, a clear 
undertaking by the members opposite when they were 
campaigning for election that this would never happen. 
 
It would be difficult, Mr. Speaker, to think of a government . . . 
It would be difficult to think of as clear an example of a 
government abusing public trust. During the last election the 
government said, we won’t privatize it. They said, trust us — 
wouldn’t consider it. What happens? They do it anyway. 
 
The public had come to understand, with respect to members 
opposite, that these are not people of honour, these are not people 
who keep their word, and certainly not people who are amenable 
to reason. 
 
And I think that’s why, when we did ring the bells, we enjoyed 
such overwhelming public support, because I think the public felt 
as we felt, that this was the only way to deal with people such as 
members opposite, who really have no respect for the ordinary 
rules of fair play — no respect at all for the ordinary rules of fair 
play. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment about this Assembly, 
and I don’t wish to be misunderstood when I say this. In some 
degree it reflects the comments made by the member from 
Saskatoon, whose name escapes me . . . whose riding escapes me 
at the moment. The name doesn’t escape me, but I can’t use it. 
When he spoke a moment ago, he stated that the temperature was 
too high. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Saskatoon Fairview, thank you. When the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview spoke, he said the temperature 
was too high. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is as unproductive an 
atmosphere as I think I’ve ever served in in the entire 13 years. I 
don’t think I’ve ever seen a legislature or an atmosphere as 
unproductive. 
 
It goes to illustrate, Mr. Speaker, that this place operates by 
consent, by trust, by agreement, or it does not operate at all. This 
is not an institution in which the government is in a position to 
be autocratic, unless they enjoy a very broad degree of public 
support. And if they proceed in an autocratic fashion, they 
generally lose that broad public support. 
 
The legislature is an institution whose function is to ensure that 
public opinion is brought to bear on the issues of the day. That’s 
what its function is. One of the things that the whole bell-ringing 
incident reminded me, and the whole incident with respect to 
SPC reminded me, was that it still serves that function. 
 
The public were adamantly opposed to the privatization of SPC; 
didn’t believe a word of the drivel being spouted by the Premier 
or the member from Souris-Cannington; didn’t trust them to 
listen to reason; and thus, by an absolutely overwhelming figure, 
supported this caucus with respect to the bell-ringing incident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said this is an institution which . . . and this 
institution ultimately ensured public opinion prevailed. 
Ultimately it was the legislature of Saskatchewan, and only the 
legislature of Saskatchewan, which ensured that on a 
fundamental issue, such as the privatization of this province’s 
largest utility, ultimately it was this institution which ensured that 
public opinion prevailed, and it wasn’t done. 
 
Had it not been for this institution, had it not been for the rules 
and for the bell-ringing, it would have almost certainly become 
law. 
 
The bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, served a number of functions. It 
gave us an opportunity to get out of Regina. And one isn’t a 
member very long before one realizes the limits of 
communications in this province. So many members have the 
experience of spending a week here, in what is thought to be 
vigorous, spirited debate, then they go home to their ridings and 
go to church on Sunday, and the most commonly asked question 
is: are you people still in session? This, after we think that we 
have given vigorous debate and given a full, fair, and very 
aggressive treatment to the issues of the day. The most 
commonly asked question is: are you people still in session? 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1466 
 

(2130) 
 
What it illustrates is that the means by which we communicate 
our message in the legislature, to the public, is very, very poor. 
Most people, a great many people, are not aware that the session 
is on, much less what’s being said in here. 
 
The bell-ringing thus, Mr. Speaker, gave us the opportunity to 
take the message directly to the people. The dramatic and unusual 
nature of ringing the bells served to dramatize our concern. 
 
I think as well, Mr. Speaker, it caused people to think about it, to 
decide whether or not they liked the idea — very, very quickly 
made up their minds they didn’t. They supported us fully. We 
had rallies of 500 to 1,000 people on very, very little notice. The 
meetings were called for two days hence, and people just came 
out naturally. Without such overwhelming public support, we 
never could have maintained the bell-ringing for 17 days, and 
that ought to give members opposite some pause for thought. 
That ought to give them some pause for thought. If members 
opposite think that you can make the argument that we abused 
that rule, and if you think that you can sell that to the public, then 
you ought to think about what happened over the few days we 
were in . . . the 17 days we were gone. We began with broad 
public support. Within a few days, that turned into overwhelming 
public support, and it remained firmly there. 
 
The government opposite, members opposite, made a great deal 
of noise about hijacking the legislature. None of that, Mr. 
Speaker, cut much ice with the public. None of that bought 
members opposite any degree of relief from the intensity of the 
public disapproval which they faced . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Why didn’t that one . . . well the member from Regina 
Wascana is intent on making his usual contribution from his seat 
where it isn’t heard. 
 
And I may say, with respect to the member from Regina 
Wascana, he’s very fortunate that that is where he makes his 
contribution. If he ever actually got to his feet and made some 
those comments in public, your chances of re-election would be 
even dimmer than what they are, if that’s possible — if that’s 
possible. 
 
Well indeed, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle is back again. 
Welcome back to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I’ve . . . I do not recall a period of time 
in which public opinion was as intensely focused on what the 64 
people here were doing, as they were during that 17 days. I really 
. . . I was not, of course, a member of this Assembly during the 
medicare crisis, so I cannot speak from that point of view. It was 
probably as intense and certainly, I think, took place over a 
longer period of time. But there have been very few instances in 
Saskatchewan when public opinion was focused as intensely on 
this Assembly as it was during that period. And people thus had 
every opportunity to consider whether they liked the tactic or not. 
They never wavered in the support of it. 
 

Members opposite claim to do their own polls, but very wisely 
didn’t show them to anyone; didn’t show them to anyone because 
I suspect that they illustrated precisely the same point. In spite of 
being subjected to the intensity that they were, the public opinion 
didn’t change their mind. 
 
There are occasions, Mr. Speaker, when some of the antics of 
members here escape public attention, and that’s well for the 
members for whom it happens. A good deal of what we see is not 
done, and sometimes that’s merciful. This wasn’t one of those 
occasions when what happened occurred without the public 
being aware of it. There was an intense interest in this. 
 
I myself, Mr. Speaker, spent some time during the period of the 
bell-ringing, put that time to use doing a number of things, but 
spent a good deal of time picking up names for the petitions 
which we ultimately filed here when we came back. It was a most 
interesting experience. 
 
A number of people who I don’t think ever have voted for us, I 
don’t believe ever will, signed the petition, and as they left, said, 
keep those bells ringing. The public disapproval of what the 
government was doing was intense, it was very widespread, cut 
across public lines. The public out there were of the view that 
these people couldn’t be reasoned with and there was just one 
way to stop them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that this place operates on a basis of consent 
and trust and agreement. This session illustrates what happens 
when that disappears. When a government decides it doesn’t 
want to seek consent of the opposition, when it wants to ram 
things, when it believes that it governs by something approaching 
the divine right — and the pun was intended — then, Mr. 
Speaker, we see what happens in this session. It grinds to an 
absolute halt. 
 
This has always been a place which has operated by consent and 
agreement. Government House leaders meet with opposition 
House leaders to discuss the day’s business. Each side knows that 
it’s in the best interests of all concerned to be co-operative. Both 
sides, under normal circumstances, recognize that if they aren’t 
co-operative, they lose; that if they’re obstreperous, ultimately 
they will be the loser. They may gain something in a single day, 
but over the long run all sides have usually understood that this 
place operates on a basis of a consensus and agreement and 
co-operation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s the way it was in the good old days, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s not only the way it was in the good old 
days; it’s the way it has operated, to some degree at least, up until 
this session. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Starting in 1215. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’m not going back to 1215, but I do 
think it’s worthwhile to consider how this place operates because 
this motion and the fashion in which you’re bringing it forward 
illustrates, as nothing can, why you people have simply almost 
ceased to govern — almost ceased to govern. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1467 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You almost ceased the government. You’ve 
done it because you believe that you don’t have to consult; you 
believe that you can ignore public opinion; you believe that you 
can perceive to do what you want, when you want. It matters not 
what the opposition say; it matters not what we want to do; it 
matters not what our priorities do. All that matters to members 
opposite is their agenda, their timetable. 
 
This session illustrates what happens when one government, 
when one side decides it’s going to ram it. It doesn’t produce 
results, rather it produces a stalemate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is typical of how this government has 
proceeded with this session, and why we are here on day 
40-something 
 
An Hon. Member: — Forty-five. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Day 45 indeed, why we are here on day 45 
with the . . . No that’s not accurate. If you include . . . Members 
opposite are assisting me with arithmetic here. Are saying that if 
we . . . Are typically wrong. Indeed I think they’ve been getting 
assistance from the Minister of Finance in this arithmetic. 
 
This session has sat for 45 days, and the 17 days which were 
interspersed between the beginning of the bell-ringing and the 
end count as one day. So if you count those 17 days, we have 
been here . . . I suppose that would actually be 11 days, we’ve 
actually been here 58 days if you counted those 11 days. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fifty-six. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Fifty-six, someone says. 
 
So we have been here 45 days. What have we accomplished? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we had the Lieutenant Governor in about a 
week ago; she gave consent to one Bill. I would stake money that 
I couldn’t afford to lose that the Lieutenant Governor has never 
come on the 45th day to give assent to one Bill — never happened 
before. 
 
Members opposite should ask themselves how this impasse came 
into being. This impasse came into being because you people 
decided you didn’t need to work with the opposition, you didn’t 
need to consult, you didn’t need to worry about public opinion, 
you’d do what was right, and that was just simply the end of your 
thought process. If the public caught up, if we agreed to it, fine; 
if we didn’t, you’d proceed. If the public agreed with you, fine; 
but if it didn’t, you were going to proceed anyway. 
 
And so you did. And so we have . . . this legislature has been 
brought to an almost complete standstill. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a fair assumption that we aren’t going to get this legislature 
moving and dealing with the public’s business until this 
government gets away from this mindset that what it wants, it 
wants, and must have right away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Until this government abandons this kind of 
an approach, which is illustrated by this Bill, by Bill 1, by the 
Bill with respect to potash, by the Bill with respect to SPC — 
until it gets away from this mindset that what it wants, it wants 
now, and doesn’t want any opposition and doesn’t want any 
argument, then this legislature, I think, is going to remain 
thoroughly mired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, one would have expected that 
the House Leader, who was elected at the same time I was in 
1975, who is now one of the veterans of this Assembly — I think 
only one or two people have served longer than he has, and only 
one of them, I think, continuously, for a continuous period — one 
would have thought that the member from Souris-Cannington 
would have understood that. 
 
One would have thought that in 13 years you would have come 
to understand how this place operates. This is not a debating 
forum. It is not an opportunity for the government to explain, as 
if he were dealing with so many patient children, what you were 
going to do and when you’re going to do it. It is a place which 
operates by consensus, by agreement, and by co-operation. 
Destroy that and you destroy the workings of a legislature of 
parliament. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with some of the 
past bell-ringing incidents. And, Mr. Speaker, just before I leave 
this government’s attitude, I may say there’s no evidence 
whatsoever that this attitude . . . that this government has learned 
this or is shedding itself of this attitude. This whole motion would 
appear to be unnecessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Elphinstone, who is the 
opposition House Leader, sent a letter today to the Government 
House Leader, which was conciliatory in tone and conciliatory in 
substance. The letter outlined that we were prepared to deal with 
government business. We were prepared to deal with estimates. 
We were prepared to deal with Education estimates, Agriculture 
estimates. Indeed I think members of this side look forward to 
dealing with those estimates. 
 
I for my part, Mr. Speaker, have some questions that I am dying 
to ask the Minister of Finance about his budget and the fashion 
in which he arrived at some of those revenue figures. I expect his 
expenditures are underestimated, his revenues are overestimated; 
moreover his revenues come from sources which cannot be 
sustained. I therefore want to question him about that, and I want 
to question him about his comment that he expects to balance the 
budget. I don’t think he expects for a moment that that is really 
possible except in the most cosmetic of senses. 
 
Therefore we ought to adopt a different approach in this 
Assembly. We ought to stop ramming things like bell-ringing, 
and we ought to get back to the way this place has and should 
operate, which is by co-operation and consensus. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1468 
 

(2145) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — As I say, that is what my seat mate and 
colleague, the member from Regina Elphinstone, proposed in a 
letter which was courteous, diplomatic, and intended to be 
constructive in approach. That is what he proposed. What 
happened? Members opposite, and the government opposite, 
behaving as they have since this session began, ignored it — said, 
no, it’s our way or no way, and away they go. 
 
Well I can say to members opposite that when this place gets 
back to functioning as every parliament does and as every 
legislature does, when it gets back to functioning so that we work 
out our agenda . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m really very 
sorry that I’m boring the member from Weyburn with a 
discussion of what’s wrong. I see the member from Weyburn 
yawning at a decibel rate which would deafen anyone within a 
country mile. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like the new Co-op upgrader looks . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s right, it makes the new Co-op 
upgrader look quiet. I want to say to the member opposite, I’m 
sorry that I’m boring you. I’m sorry I’m boring you with a 
discussion of what’s wrong with this session, and how we could 
get this session working. Because until members opposite take 
some cognizance of what the problem is, we’re going to continue 
to be mired in what is a very unproductive session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session is absolutely without precedent — 
absolutely without precedent. I see some members opposite 
agreeing on that point. I only ask of members opposite that you 
ask yourselves why, why you have almost lost your ability to 
govern? You’ve done it because of your arrogance. The member 
from Melfort starts to point at me. Mr. Member, you’re pointing 
at 180 degrees in the wrong direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s not them, it’s you. It’s you, Mr. Minister, 
who have completely forgotten how a legislature operates. It 
doesn’t operate in this fashion, it has never operated in this 
fashion, and it never will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the question of 
bell-ringing, it’s worthwhile to review some of the bell-ringing 
incidents which have taken place in the past. It’s worthwhile to 
consider, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this has been the subject 
of abuse in the past. I suggest to members opposite that by and 
large it has not been abused. 
 
Members in here are all aware that ultimately we are judged in 
the court of public opinion. Ultimately, if we abuse the rules, we 
will suffer the consequences. I think members opposite were 
conscious of that when they were in opposition, and I think we’ve 
been conscious of 

it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if my understanding is correct, bell-ringing began, 
was given birth, was thought of actually by Erik Nielsen, former 
member from Yukon, who was then opposition leader in the 
House of Commons for the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
The Liberal government brought in a Bill on energy, which was 
a real monster, Mr. Speaker. The Bill was a very large Bill and 
had mixed up in one Bill several subjects: energy, criminal law, 
statute amendment, and several others. It was a monster. The 
opposition — and it was indicative of the mind set of the Liberals 
of the day, they were shortly to be defeated, but they felt they 
didn’t have to work with the opposition. They’d give the 
opposition this unmanageable mess of a statute called the energy 
Bill, but which, as I say, included four different subjects, four 
unrelated subjects. The opposition objected to that. They rang the 
bells for 11 days. They had fairly broad public support, as I recall 
that. As I recall it, the public understood that the Bill was very 
difficult to deal with. The public understood that the government 
was arrogant — Liberal government was arrogant and insensitive 
and out of touch. Public opinion was largely behind the 
Conservatives, and eventually the Liberal government, to its 
credit — the Trudeau government, to its credit, relented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite might then cast their minds back 
to that incident and ask themselves what happened to the two 
parties. Well within less than 24 months they changed places. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Pierre Trudeau became Leader of the 
Opposition for the first time in his 20-year career in the House of 
Commons, and Joe Clark went on to become Prime Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Joe who? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from High River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been used often, for a half an hour or an hour, 
sometimes for a couple of hours, sometimes over the supper hour 
when an opposition feels itself has been dealt with in a fashion 
which isn’t fair. I don’t think members opposite are complaining 
about those sorts of one- or two-hour incidents. 
 
The next place it was used was in Manitoba. This time again by 
a Conservative opposition; this time against an NDP government. 
Brought in legislation which I personally supported at the time, 
do now, but which was very, very unpopular in Manitoba, very 
unpopular in Manitoba. It was legislation which would have 
created, to some limited extent, a bilingual province in Manitoba, 
which the government said, we have no choice but to do 
constitutionally, but the public didn’t want it. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say of the Conservative 
opposition in Manitoba, whether you agree with them on the 
substantive issue or not — and I think, by and large, I do not — 
it’s fair to say they enjoyed   



 
May 29, 1989 

1469 
 

overwhelming public support. But if I would have lived in 
Manitoba at the time he described to me the depth of the anger 
that Manitobans felt at that legislation, whatever the 
constitutional necessity of it, I think the Pawley government 
would have been better off to have stepped back and said, this 
needs another look. It needs to be better explained, but we should 
not be proceeding with it. 
 
Somewhere, Mr. Speaker, about 19 . . . Once again, I think it’s 
fair to say that that really was not an abuse in the sense that the 
public gave the Conservative opposition in Manitoba 
overwhelming public support. 
 
That’s another point I would make, Mr. Speaker, to members 
opposite. I don’t think the bells have ever been rung for longer 
than a few hours without overwhelming public support. Just goes 
to show that there are some weapons that should be used only 
sparingly, and which are used only sparingly, but served as a 
useful check and balance when a government becomes arrogant 
and overbearing. 
 
It was used in the Saskatchewan legislature, Mr. Speaker — in 
1984, someone prompts me — in an incident in which once again 
there was a fair degree of evidence that the government was 
abusing their position. I remember this with some clarity because 
I was in the centre of this one. 
 
I had made some comments in the Legislature about a company 
called Silver Developments. He sued me. When he did so . . . If 
you ever want to get your wife’s attention, Mr. Speaker, go home 
and tell her, as I did, we’re getting sued. And when she says how 
much, I said, 2 million bucks. I tell you the preparation — that 
was on a Friday night — the preparations for supper ground to a 
very prompt halt. She didn’t ask how we’re going to pay it, 
cheque or cash. She keeps the cheque book in our family and 
knew that the chequing account was a little light for a cheque of 
that size. 
 
Eventually your predecessor in office found a prima facie case of 
privilege, found my rights as a legislator, parliamentarian, had 
been abused. Then the member from Lumsden proceeded to 
throw . . . it would be generous to him to say that he threw 
gasoline on a burning fire; I think he threw nitro-glycerine on a 
burning fire. He then moved the motion which I think upset 
everyone. He moved the motion which in fact rode roughshod 
over the Speaker’s view that there was a prima facie case. That, 
Mr. Speaker, produced a walkout that lasted for four days. Once 
again we enjoyed overwhelming public support, and once again 
the government backed off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That, it seems, Mr. Speaker, however, was 
a younger government, a government with a little more 
flexibility. 
 
For whatever reason, in the face of overwhelming public 
opposition, which I know members opposite were sensitive to, I 
know members opposite were sensitive to — I heard reports of 
members opposite, during that 17 day period, leaving church 10 
minutes early so that they 

wouldn’t have to face people outside afterwards. If the members 
of the cabinet were insensitive to public opinion, back-benchers 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Name them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I will if you like; I will if you like. I will if 
. . . I would have said the member . . . I will spare the member 
from Melville that comment. If the member from Melville thinks 
I am referring to him, I have no evidence that he’s ever gone to 
church. I have no evidence at all that he’s ever gone to church. I 
have no evidence that you’ve ever darkened a church door, so I 
wasn’t referring to the member from Melville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hour is drawing late. I have not really begun yet 
my comments. I therefore, Mr. Speaker, ask leave to adjourn the 
debate in order that my thoughts could be fully developed on a 
lengthier day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates and Supplementary Estimates to 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, before adjournment I would 
seek leave of the Assembly to deal with a matter of a rather 
housekeeping nature. It is a matter that the members of the 
opposition have been notified of by the Acting Clerk, and it’s a 
motion respecting the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates 
being withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred to 
the Standing Committee on Estimates. I seek leave of the 
Assembly for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my 
seat mate, the member for Melville, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the Estimates and the Supplementary Estimates for the 
Legislative Assembly, being subvotes 1 to 3, 5 to 7, 17, 20 
to 23, and 26, of vote 21 be withdrawn from the Committee 
of Finance, and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Estimates. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of the Special Report of the Provincial Auditor to 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would also seek leave 
from the Assembly that the Special Report of the Provincial 
Auditor be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts, in light of the developments here today in having dealt 
with the two issues this afternoon at hand. So I’d seek leave of 
the Assembly to move that special report of the auditor to the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

1470 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded again by my seat mate, the member for Melville: 
 

That the Special Report of the Provincial Auditor, tabled on 
May 23, 1989, be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to have a close look at 
that motion. We may want to amend it in order to expand what 
can be done with the issue. I therefore would beg leave to adjourn 
the debate for the time being. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


