


















































June 20, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 20, 1989 
 
 

2035 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Acting Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 11(7), I have examined the 
following petitions and found them to be in order: 
 

Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 
urge the provincial government to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and to other members of the Assembly, 24 students from 
Lakeview School in Regina who are sitting in the gallery 
behind me. They are accompanied by their teacher, Marie Anne 
Gutfriend, and Mrs. McCudden. I have met with the students 
this morning at Lakeview School. We had a very interesting and 
lively discussion, and they certainly are a bunch of bright young 
children, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be meeting with them after for drinks 
and further questions. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to introduce to you, and through you to other members of this 
legislature, a group of students from the Dr. John G. Egnatoff 
School. This introduction is somewhat complicated today 
because the school is in my constituency; most of the students 
are in the Sutherland constituency. And not only that, but the 
students are split today — some are in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, some are in the east gallery. And Mr. Koenker and I 
will be having a joint venture here today during the discussions 
and so on, and picture taking. 
 
So in the spirit of co-operativeness that is existing in the 
legislature, we will continue on. 
 
I just want to add, Mr. Speaker, that Dr. John G. Egnatoff 
School has a special meaning for me because Dr. Egnatoff was 
my instructor in teacher’s college many years ago, so I’ve been 
following his illustrious career over the years. And I would ask 
all members at this time to help me to welcome the students 
from the Dr. John G. Egnatoff School please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with my colleague 
from Regina Lakeview in welcoming the students from 
Lakeview School. I went to that school, as did our four 
daughters, and I surprised a few people by graduating from 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I recognized some of the students when I came into the

building, Mr. Speaker, so I want to join with my colleague from 
Regina Lakeview in welcoming them here to the Assembly. I 
hope you enjoy yourselves, and good luck for the summer 
holidays. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to introduce to my colleagues in the legislature, and 
of course to you, sir, 35 students from St. Timothy School 
seated in the east gallery. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Kevin Anderson. I understand we’ll be having pictures 
at 3 o’clock, following that a discussion on what they see here, 
and any other questions that they may have resulting from 
question period and so on. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming this group from St. 
Timothy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, Greg 
and Aurore Faucher and their daughter, Leanne, who come 
from Lisieux, Saskatchewan. They are seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery, and I’d ask all members here to welcome them to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce through you, and to the members 
of the House, some 22 grade 7 and 8 students from the 
Annaheim School. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Paul 
Kolenick, Les Kunz; chaperons, Mr. and Mrs. Niekamp, Mr. 
Nienaber. I want to take this opportunity to welcome the 
students here. I hope you have a very enjoyable trip here to 
Regina. I look forward to meeting you following the question 
period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure today to introduce some guests seated in your 
gallery. They come from Bishopbriggs in Scotland, which is 
part of Glasgow. They are Heather Lindsay and her niece, 
Yvonne Lindsay. They are accompanied today by some of their 
relatives from Canada, David Ferguson and Valerie 
Fleischhacker. I would ask hope that they have a pleasant stay 
in Canada and enjoy the proceedings here today and a good 
visit in Regina. And I would ask all members to join with me 
and give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 
and through you, some students, grade 4, 5, and 10 students 
from Kistapiskaw School from Deschambault. There is 16 
students accompanied by Mrs. Deborah Seib and Miss Janice 
King, and also Gregory Seib. 
 
(The member spoke for a time in Cree.)  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2036 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Fertilizer Plant at Belle Plaine 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister responsible for Trade and Investment, and it concerns 
his betrayal of rural Saskatchewan by doing everything in his 
power to kill the fertilizer plants proposed for Rosetown, 
Melfort, and Yorkton-Melville. 
 
Mr. Minister, after promising the developers of these plants that 
your government would never provide financial support for a 
huge fertilizer plant Cargill proposes for the Belle Plaine area, 
your government turned around and gave 175 million in 
financial support. 
 
Can you, Mr. Minister, tell us whether the $350 million price 
tag for the Cargill plant of which the government is on the hook 
for 175 million is a firm price, or is this just a ballpark figure 
that could increase substantially? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same question 
the hon. member asked before. The proposal with regards to the 
Cargill plant which is a state-of-the-art plant to be built between 
Saskatoon and Regina . . . between Moose Jaw and Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to be a quality operation, as endorsed by the 
members from Moose Jaw, I note, in opposition to the various 
members from Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a venture that I thought the hon. members 
opposite thought that was a proper strategy where you had a 
joint venture operation between the government and the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker, to build a large-scale operation in the 
province of Saskatchewan to (a) supply fertilizer to farmers in 
this province; and (b) to export some of that product into the 
United States, which yesterday the hon. members were 
complaining that we weren’t doing enough of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat my question. Mr. 
Minister, are you telling us that the 350 million is going to be 
the full and final price of that project, and the taxpayers are only 
going to put 175 million at risk, or are you telling us something 
else? I want a guarantee today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I believe when this project 
was in fact announced, Mr. Speaker, by the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier, that the intention was to go into a joint venture 
operation; that the government’s involvement in it would be to 
kick-start this; that the government would not see their 
involvement as something that would last for ever. 
 
Once we get that up and running, Mr. Speaker, then we take the 
particular share that the government has, put it out to public 
participation, let the people or other companies share in that 
operation, Mr. Speaker. Then government has served its 
function, and that is to get projects like that going, Mr. Speaker, 
get projects like that 

built in this province, create jobs in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
And the money we were committed to is what we’ll be 
spending on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question. Mr. Minister, your 
personal attacks on the Provincial Auditor and your 
government’s involvement in the GigaText scandal does 
nothing to increase any credibility that you might have. What 
we want to know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . is, Mr. Minister, if you’re willing to 
table any feasibility studies that you’ve done on this project or 
any cost estimates to back up that $175 million figure. Why 
don’t you put that whole package on the table and let the people 
of Saskatchewan decide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this particular project was 
developed, I can advise, through Crown Management Board 
and the Deputy Premier. But what I say . . . Let me say this to 
the hon. members. Let me say this to the hon. members, and the 
member from Prince Albert. The same type of attack came, Mr. 
Speaker, when we were proposing to do the Weyerhaeuser 
project in Prince Albert. The Weyerhaeuser project was built in 
Prince Albert, and it’s a new technology and it’s a good 
business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The same complaint came, Mr. Speaker, when we were going 
through the Co-op upgrader, that you shouldn’t have had any 
money in it; or when we went into the Husky project, you 
shouldn’t have had any money in that; or a number of other 
projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality of what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is diversifying 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Every time you set 
about to diversify the province of Saskatchewan, the members 
opposite are against it, Mr. Speaker. They’re against any 
diversification; they’re against any new projects, Mr. Speaker. 
They want the status quo, Mr. Speaker. They want . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, part of the reason people are concerned is because that 
very minister has had involvement in it, and we know his record 
of throwing millions of taxpayers’ dollars around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Now what I want to know, what I want to 
know today and what the people of this province want to know 
is if the 50 per cent, the $175 million that Cargill is supposedly 
putting in here, is backed up with any kind of a low-interest 
loan from the Government of Saskatchewan. Will you confirm 
or deny that there’s an arrangement of that nature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2037 
 

launches in his first attack with the attack on the Deputy 
Premier, saying, why should we look at anything he did? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier was one of the key ministers 
involved in putting the Weyerhaeuser deal together. The Deputy 
Premier was very much involved in putting the Meadow Lake 
. . . the new Meadow Lake pulp mill . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Deputy Premier was involved in 
putting together the deal with regard to the Co-op upgrader, 
with regard to the Husky upgrader; the Deputy Premier was 
very much involved in the Rafferty-Alameda project — all 
things, Mr. Speaker, that I believe helped to diversify the 
economy, to create jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker, that are 
forward looking. 
 
We cannot simply stand still, Mr. Speaker. We cannot be 
isolationists in this province. If we do, Mr. Speaker, we do at 
our own doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Minister. Does your 
refusal to answer in this House the question that I’ve asked you 
twice now, mean that in fact you have offered a low interest 
loan to Cargill? And if not, would you table those documents to 
prove that it hasn’t happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from P.A. gets into a wild barrage of what is going to 
be done. He’s not consistent with his information. This 
particular minister put that deal together. There’s not some 
hidden agenda whereby they have low interest loans, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not in fact the case, Mr. Speaker, and I can 
assure the House it is not. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Minister. Would you 
in this House indicate whether or not your government has 
guaranteed a loan on behalf of Cargill for their 50 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. The 
member will not be able to give a good answer if he’s 
interrupted constantly, if he’s interrupted constantly — and 
that’s happening. So let us allow the minister to give his 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the House and 
to the hon. members that the project being put together with 
regard to Cargill and the Government of Saskatchewan is going 
to be an excellent project for the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. What it is going to do is create fertilizer, Mr. Speaker, 
where the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan will be able 
to buy fertilizer, Mr. Speaker, made here in Saskatchewan, 
using natural gas that has been drilled, found here in 
Saskatchewan, creating jobs for the people of this province here 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

More jobs, more use of natural gas, cheaper fertilizer for the 
farmer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question. Mr. Minister, Canadian 
“88”, the proponents of the Rosetown, Melfort, Yorkton, 
Melville fertilizer plants have provided the news media with all 
of the copies of their proposal. If you have offered, sir, no loan 
guarantees — if you have offered, sir, no interest rate reduction, 
will you table the very proposals that are going to see this thing 
happen? Will you table that in this House today? We don’t want 
you skirting around the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Canadian “88”, Canadian 
“88” . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Canadian “88” put forward 
a number of proposals to the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, we found those wanting. And I think before the 
members opposite get on their great white charger and ride the 
banner of Canadian “88”, they should talk to some of the people 
that used to work with Canadian “88” and might get a different 
story on that whole situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Final question. Mr. Minister, Cargill 
plans to market product from its Belle Plaine plant through the 
Cargill elevator network in this province. Do you not agree that 
this arrangement will put Cargill — backed by $175 million of 
taxpayers’ money, perhaps subsidized, perhaps with a loan 
guarantee — in direct competition with independent fertilizer 
operators and dealers around this province as well as 
Saskatchewan wheat pools. Can you explain to these dealers 
why their tax dollars should be used to help subsidize Cargill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this particular proposal 
that you talk about was attempted to be done with a number of 
companies in the past, and we weren’t able to quite put the deal 
together. Mr. Speaker, one of those companies was the Co-op, 
which I assume the hon. members are not against. One of those 
companies was the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, which I assume 
those companies were not against. 
 
Attempting to do that particular deal, Mr. Speaker, the product 
that will be produced out of that plant, Mr. Speaker, will be sold 
both in retail and in wholesale, and will be made available to 
the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. They will no 
longer have to rely upon product manufactured in the province 
of Alberta. 
 
Anybody understands, Mr. Speaker, what you’re doing is using 
our natural resources to make fertilizer to go on the farmers’ 
land of the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s a great deal 
cheaper, Mr. Speaker, if you can buy the 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2038 
 

product manufactured right here by Regina than having to bring 
it in from Lethbridge, or Medicine Hat, or plants north of 
Edmonton. The transportation costs are cheaper, Mr. Speaker, 
the product that this plant will produce will be cheaper, and in 
the end, Mr. Speaker, that will mean lower fertilizer crop costs 
for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier promised that in the last election, and we are 
delivering on that promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Translation of Statutes by GigaText 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to address my question to the Deputy Premier, and we don’t 
know what kind of a scheme that you have cooked up to try to 
justify your outlandish investment into this scam of a 
technology. We know that when you entered the deal that you 
said you’d have it proven in three months. Then you set June 
17, and now you said, some time into the future. And I know 
the world is just holding its breath for that final date. 
 
But my question to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, in light of the fact 
that you have blown $5.25 million up till now, I wonder 
whether you could confirm that it’s going to cost about 25 cents 
a word in addition to the 5.2 million that you’ve squandered in 
order to do the translation from English to French. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m quite happy to take 
responsibility for GigaText, and I’m quite happy, Mr. Speaker, 
to take credit for several others that I’ve been involved in, 
including Babcock & Wilcox and Phillips Cable and SK 
Turbines and the Shand power plant and Weyerhaeuser and 
Meadow Lake and a couple of upgraders, and even 
Pocklington’s bacon plant, Mr. Speaker — I’d like to take 
credit for that one too. And Bondars in North Battleford, and 
rather than use up the whole of question period, I’ll now deal 
. . . oh yeah, there’s DuPont Plastics and Phillips Cable — 
what’s that outfit in Swift Current? — and cattle farm and 
Athabasca transmission line, and the first underground 
distribution system in the world, Mr. Speaker, a 20-year 
program to . . . 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m told that the going rate 
for manual translation — manual translation is a kind of 
translation that Neanderthals opposite would expect that we 
should carry on with for ever — I’m told that the going rate 
there is about 25 cents a word, Mr. Speaker. If this technology 
proves up, and I’m optimistic that it will, Mr. Speaker, if this 
technology proves up, I hope that it can go into the market at 25 
cents a word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well it’s fairly clear the Deputy Premier was 
not prepared to indicate to the taxpayer how much it’s going to 
cost in addition to translate the legislation here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to go to a new question to the Deputy Premier, and I 
have here, Mr. Deputy Premier, a news clipping of 

Tuesday, January 31, and this is from the School of Journalism 
newspaper in Regina, which . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Let’s allow 
the member to put his question so we can all hear him. 
 
Order. Let’s just all settle down a bit and allow the member to 
put his question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I know 
they’re very uneasy about this here situation. I understand 
they’re nervous, and I’ll be very patient, because the people of 
Saskatchewan want the facts. 
 
This is my question, Mr. Speaker: I have here an article from 
the School of Journalism newspaper, where it quotes the 
regional director of the federal Secretary of State, in which he 
states in that article, as he’s interviewed, he indicates that the 
federal government does not believe in the feasibility of your 
technology that it can in fact do the translation, and if you 
attempt to send in Bills using computer translation, that they 
will not share the cost of the translation. Is that a fact? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he made reference to the 
fact that there may be a little embarrassment on this side of the 
House. I can tell you that there’s nowhere near the 
embarrassment that there should be by the members opposite, 
including the deputy leader, the group of technological wizards, 
Mr. Speaker, that invested $5 million in Nabu, the boys who 
were going to become the IBM (International Business 
Machines) of the PC world, Mr. Speaker — those dudes. Five 
million, and what did they get for it? They got 12 per cent of a 
company that a group of entrepreneurs brought together and 
kept 50 per cent for themselves, and then through an executive 
share option they diluted it further to about 8 per cent, and the 
thing finally went into receivership, Mr. Speaker. Do you know 
what we got out of it? Zip. Saskatchewan people got not one job 
or one ounce of technology. And when they wrote it off, it had a 
book value of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand that the Deputy 
Premier is enjoying these questions so much by his answers that 
I want to continue to ask another one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to read, Mr. Deputy Premier, from this 
article, and you know exactly what the director, regional 
director, said. He said that you asked them to invest in this 
project, that they refused. And he went on to say: 
 

But if Saskatchewan government submits bills on the basis 
of computers, we basically are saying, we’re not paying it. 
 

Is this the deal that you worked out? Have you rectified 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2039 
 

this? In fact, have you changed the federal government into 
paying a portion of the translation costs of the French? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know who speaks 
for the federal government, but it’s interesting to note . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. It 
seems that the member should be given the opportunity to 
answer the question. And we’ll give him that opportunity now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know who speaks for the 
federal government in matters of technology or translation, Mr. 
Speaker, but perhaps the Secretary of State hasn’t talked to the 
Department of National Defence lately, because the Department 
of National Defence recently — when I say recently, a few 
months ago, Mr. Speaker — let a $21 million contract to 
translate manuals for the frigate program to a New Brunswick 
firm whose technology, Mr. Speaker, has been demonstrated to 
be inferior to ours but acceptable to the federal government. 
 
So I don’t know who talked to the federal government. The 
Department of National Defence thinks it’s great; Sec State 
doesn’t. Perhaps we can persuade them all that our technology 
is superior. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the Deputy Premier. 
Obviously if I keep asking enough questions, there might be 
one simple enough for him to answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to direct the question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier . . . A new question, Mr. Speaker. 
Under the agreement, the federal government had said that it 
would pay 75 per cent of the cost of the first $3 million spent on 
translation, and 50 per cent of the second million. That is a total 
potential investment by the federal government, in respect to 
the translation, of $3.5 million. 
 
I want to ask you: is it not true that you have, in fact, blown 
over $5.2 million in this technological computer scam that you 
entered into and got fleeced? And is it not, in fact, true now that 
the federal government . . . you have jeopardized the federal 
government’s contribution in respect to sharing the costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, anybody that thinks that 
this technology was brought to Saskatchewan simply, simply 
for the sole purpose of translating Saskatchewan law, simply 
doesn’t understand the technology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This technology, if it proves up, could translate all of 
Saskatchewan’s law in an afternoon. Now then what do you do? 
Then what do you do? Lock the door? No, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
commercial venture for this company. I know members 
opposite don’t want to hear this, but out there in the world, Mr. 
Speaker, there is opportunity for translation services amounting 
to hundreds of millions of 

dollars a year. If we got a small percentage of that, the company 
would do very, very, well. I think that it is an opportunity. Mr. 
Speaker, already we have hardware, we have technology, we 
have jobs. Compare that to their $8 million boondoggle. They 
just sent a cheque to Toronto, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, are you aware that the estimated cost to translate all of 
the provincial statutes is approximately $3 million, under $3 
million, if it was done the manual way; that the federal 
government was prepared to pay 75 per cent of that, which is 
$2.25 million; and that means that the provincial share would 
have been less than three-quarters of a million dollars? 
 
I want to ask you: do you really stand up here and say that that 
has been a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan when you 
already squandered $5.2 million and now you have to pay for 
the translation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the 
estimated costs of translation is, Mr. Speaker. I’m told that the 
actual costs in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, was between 12 and $15 
million. My guess is that ours wouldn’t be much different from 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, I don’t know how much it takes to penetrate 
that thick head, Mr. Speaker, but I said a thousand times that 
this was not brought in solely for translation. We brought it here 
as an economic opportunity to diversify, Mr. Speaker; to 
reverse a brain drain, Mr. Speaker; to build Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker — all of the things that is absolutely foreign to the 
mentality particularly of that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Talking about thick heads, we look at one 
across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the Deputy Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! Order, order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When they’re 
embarrassed, of course they’ll make noise. 
 
But I want to ask the Deputy Premier: it has been indicated by 
the regional director of the federal Secretary of State that the 
provincial government in fact asked the federal government to 
invest in respect to going into a joint venture into this here 
technological nightmare that you entered into. He indicates 
here: 
 

The province tried to convince us to invest in some 
computer system that would do it, and we so far have not 
been impressed with that proposal. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2040 
 

I want to ask you, in fact, did you have any negotiations with 
the federal government to enter into this here technological 
nightmare that you entered on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Printer Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Queen’s Printer Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Plant Breeders’ Rights 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day, I would like to ask leave of the House to present a motion 
of urgent and pressing necessity. The issue is Bill C-15, an Act 
respecting Plant Breeders’ Rights, which is going into second 
readings in the House of Commons. 
 
I will ask leave of the House to move a motion along the 
following lines: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Government of 
Canada its strong opposition to the recently introduced 
plant breeders’ rights legislation which, if passed, will have 
the effect of shifting research from our universities to 
private, profit-oriented, international corporations, with the 
result that farmers will pay higher prices for seed and 
consumers will pay higher prices for food. 
 

I ask leave, Mr. Speaker, because this is the fourth attempt . . . 
This is the fourth attempt, Mr. Speaker, to bring legislation on 
patent rights before the House of Commons, and on three 
previous occasions it has died on the order paper from public 
pressure. 
 
This Bill would enable breeders of new plant varieties . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve given the hon. member a 
little opportunity to explain the reason for his motion. I now ask 
if there is leave granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I have to ask the 
hon. members to settle down. We’re having a little difficulty 
here this afternoon, and we’re having difficulty hearing each 
other — and hearing the Clerk in this instance. And I believe 
you know if you want to carry on a debate you should carry it 
on outside the Chambers. Let’s calm down and allow the House 
proceedings to proceed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 16 — Poverty in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
 

Speaker, the topic under debate today is the very pressing issue 
of poverty in the province of Saskatchewan. And at the end of 
my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its policies which continue to cause 
widespread hurt and hardship for Saskatchewan families, 
which are forcing families and children into poverty, and 
which are depriving families of security and opportunity 
for their future, and calls on the Government of 
Saskatchewan to repair our social safety net and to 
introduce a program of full employment geared to 
alleviating the crisis of poverty in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we have seen in the last seven years, 
since the PC government was elected, an unprecedented crisis 
in the province of Saskatchewan with respect to poverty that 
we’ve not seen, frankly, since the 1930s. And we’ve also seen a 
government that’s prepared to do nothing about it. In fact, the 
Minister of Social Services goes so far as to deny that poverty 
on a mass basis exists in this province at all. And obviously a 
government that denies that poverty exists is clearly not 
prepared to act to alleviate the serious poverty that many people 
in this province face. 
 
And the people who are most affected, Mr. Speaker, by this 
sharp increase in poverty in the province of Saskatchewan are 
women, particularly single parents, Mr. Speaker, and children. 
Women and children have been hit hardest by the policies of the 
PC government when it comes to increased poverty in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. And in fact we see a situation today 
where some 19,600 children, or 70 per cent of the children who 
live in homes that are headed by single parents who are female, 
headed by single mothers, 70 per cent of those children, or 
19,600 of them in this province, live in poverty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a situation where the policies of the provincial 
government over the last seven years have now resulted in us 
having the second highest level of poverty of any province in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, both with respect to the rate of family 
poverty and with respect to the rate of child poverty. There are 
42,600 families in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
that are currently living below the poverty line, and that gives 
us the second highest rate of family poverty in Canada. Sixteen 
and a half per cent of Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, are 
living below the poverty line, as defined by Statistics Canada. 
And that compares, Mr. Speaker, with just over 12 per cent of 
families at the national level. So clearly, Saskatchewan has now 
a much higher level of poverty than the national rate of poverty, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The situation is even more tragic with respect to children. And 
we should not be surprised that the rate of child poverty is 
higher than the rate of family poverty, because larger families 
tend to be hit particularly hard, Mr. Speaker, by the kind of 
economic circumstances that this government has created in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, one in four children in this province  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2041 
 

— 25.7 per cent of all children in the province of Saskatchewan 
— now live below the poverty line in this province. And we 
have the second highest rate, not only of family poverty in 
Canada, but of child poverty in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Only 
Newfoundland has a higher rate of child poverty, at 26.8 per 
cent. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that these figures that I’m citing 
do not take account of the full impact that escalating poverty 
has had in our province, because these statistics do not include 
Indian children who live on Indian reserves, Mr. Speaker. And 
we have many Indian families in the province of Saskatchewan 
who reside on reserves. 
 
They are excluded from these statistics, and I think everyone 
will acknowledge that Indian reserves suffer from very high 
rates of poverty in this province, Mr. Speaker. No one would 
deny that. And clearly, when Indian children are included in 
these statistics and they’re excluded by the Statistics Canada 
figures that I’ve been citing, then I believe we have the highest 
rate of poverty among children of any province in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is truly a tragedy in our time. 
 
It’s also, Mr. Speaker, a tragedy that is unnecessary, and I think 
that nothing more clearly demonstrates that the situation that 
I’ve described has come about as a result of the policies of the 
PC government, nothing better demonstrates that than the 
formation and the dramatic increase in the use of food banks in 
the province of Saskatchewan, all of which, Mr. Speaker, have 
occurred since this government was elected. You know, in 
1981, the last year that the NDP was government, and I might 
add in 1982, there were no food banks in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s because there were no need for food banks 
in this province. 
 
The New Democratic Party government of the day had put in 
place a policy of . . . a combined policy, Mr. Speaker, of full 
employment on the one hand, as full as you could achieve — an 
unemployment rate that ranged from about 4 to 5 per cent. We 
needed to continue to work at that, Mr. Speaker. I think we 
really only achieve true full employment when we get 
unemployment down to about 3 per cent in this province, which 
should clearly be the target of any government, Mr. Speaker. 
But at least, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government of the day, in 
the late ’70s and early ’80s had consistently kept the 
unemployment rate below 5 per cent in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
And combined with that, Mr. Speaker, we had a policy where 
our social safety net — whether you looked at the family 
income plan, or whether you looked at workers’ compensation, 
or whether you looked at social assistance rates in the province 
of Saskatchewan, or whether you looked at essential health 
programs like our prescription drug program — the social 
safety net in this province, Mr. Speaker, was in place in such a 
way that no family was pushed into dire poverty in this 
province, no family was forced to resort to the use of food 
banks in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, upon assuming office, one of the first things 
that the PC government made a conscious decision to do is to 
begin to erode the social safety net of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And they’ve continued that process of erosion, 
Mr. Speaker, now for seven years to the point where the erosion 
has created a crisis for thousands of families in this province. 
And that is best borne out by the statistics that we now see in 
terms of the use of food banks in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
though that is only one measure of the crisis. 
 
We see now a situation in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, where instead of having no food banks, as we had in 
1981, we now have a food bank in Saskatoon and in Regina and 
in Moose Jaw and in Prince Albert. There’s a small food bank 
in Assiniboia. There’s a small food bank in Melfort. There’s a 
food bank in Lashburn. There’s a food bank in Lloydminster. 
 
What a tragic record for any government, Mr. Speaker, to 
preside over the development of at least eight food banks in the 
province of Saskatchewan that were unnecessary in 1981, but 
are essential for the lives of thousands of people in this province 
in 1989, Mr. Speaker. That is truly a human tragedy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only have these food banks had to 
establish themselves in this province, but since becoming 
established, Mr. Speaker, the numbers of people who depend on 
these food banks has steadily risen in this province. And now, 
Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where in Regina, for instance, 
food bank use last year was up 70 per cent over the first full 
year of operation of the Regina food bank back in 1984, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And there are now some 2,500 children a month depending on 
the Regina food bank. There are some 2,600 adults a month on 
average, in 1989, in the first months of 1989, Mr. Speaker, 
depending on the Regina food bank. In other words, Mr. 
Speaker, on an average monthly basis, there are well over 5,000 
people who depend on the Regina food bank every month for 
their basic survival, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here we are in the city of Regina, living in the midst of one 
of the bread-baskets of the world. We’re surrounded, Mr. 
Speaker, by a rich harvest of grain all around this city. Mr. 
Speaker, times in this province have not been easy over the last 
three years, but surely we have the resources in this province to 
ensure that at least our people can be fed and can have the basic 
essentials of life provided for. 
 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, has failed to do that, not 
only for a few people in this province but for tens of thousands 
of people in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have a situation last 
year where over 42,000 people at some point in the year 
depended on food banks in the province of Saskatchewan for 
their survival. 
 
And in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, in my home city, there the use 
of food banks and the dependence on food banks has grown 
more sharply than in any other city in this province. 
 
The use of food banks in 1988, Mr. Speaker, was up in 
Saskatoon 165 per cent over what it was in the first full  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2042 
 

year of operation of the Saskatoon food bank, some five years 
ago, Mr. Speaker. And there are now in Saskatoon an average 
of 3,000 children a month this year, in 1989, who are relying on 
the Saskatoon food bank for their basic needs every month, Mr. 
Speaker. And there is an average of 4,400 adults a month using 
the Saskatoon food bank. 
 
And these figures, Mr. Speaker, and the human reality that they 
reflect is being borne out all around this province. In 
Lloydminster, for example, in last year, 1,095 children and 
1,207 adults in the community of Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, 
relied on the food bank in that part of the province for basic 
necessities. 
 
And so we see, Mr. Speaker, a situation in which clearly the 
Government of Saskatchewan has chosen to use food banks as a 
substitute for an adequate social safety net in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They have basically said to people, don’t rely on 
us to meet your basic needs when you are in a crisis situation, 
you have to turn to the food banks of this province instead. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province owe a great debt 
to the hundreds of volunteers across Saskatchewan who have 
made the operation of food banks in this province possible over 
the last seven years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the real test of a government, I believe, is . . . 
one of the real tests of a government is whether it is prepared to 
ensure that everyone in the province of Saskatchewan have their 
very basic needs met. This government has failed that test, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know that the New Democratic Party is 
committed, among other things, to making one very important 
promise to the people of Saskatchewan, and that is, Mr. 
Speaker, when we are returned to government and we have had 
a term in office, there will be no need for food banks in the 
province of Saskatchewan any more, Mr. Speaker. There will 
be no need for any community to operate a food bank to ensure 
the survival of the citizens in that community. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to look at some of the causes 
of this crisis, but before I do that I want to talk for a moment 
about what these statistics that I’ve been citing mean in terms of 
the everyday life of people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the crisis that I’ve been citing in terms of 
figures is reflected in terms of the casework that comes into my 
own office as Social Services critic in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that an average day in our office 
means 80 to 120 phone calls a day? And I might add that the 
bulk of those come from outside my riding, Mr. Speaker, 
because I represent one of the more well-to-do ridings in the 
province. But we get between 80 and 120 phone calls a day into 
our office; the large bulk of them relate to families in crisis 
because this government’s social safety net has broken down, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I write to the Minister of Social Services. He hardly ever 
answers my letters, I might add. Writing to the Minister of 
Social Services on behalf of a constituent is like sending a . . . 
throwing a stone down a 200-foot well and wondering if it will 
ever come back. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, the chance of hearing a 
reply from the Minister of Social Services on behalf of a 
constituent is about as high as winning a  
 

lottery in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what this tragedy means, Mr. Speaker, in terms of families, 
is first of all, Mr. Speaker, many families having to make basic 
choices between whether they’re going to provide food for their 
children, whether they’re going to provide for the prescription 
drug needs of their children, whether they are going to be able 
to purchase . . . they are forced to choose on many occasions, 
Mr. Speaker, between whether or not they purchase a winter 
coat for their child or feed their child. That’s the kind of 
choices, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Social Services is 
imposing upon families in the province today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that really strikes me, in terms of 
people who contact my office, is that this collapse of the social 
safety net in the province of Saskatchewan is resulting in a 
tragic inability of many families to participate in our society. A 
lot of people, Mr. Speaker, are just not able to participate in the 
society in any meaningful way any more because their 
economic means are now so limited. 
 
It means, Mr. Speaker, that families are having to, for instance, 
say to their children,, no I’m sorry we can’t afford to have you 
participate in sports at school, or, we can’t afford to send you 
away to camp during the summer, or, we can’t afford for you to 
take part in any of the recreational programs in the community, 
or to buy you skates, or whatever the case may be, Mr. Speaker. 
What being poor for a lot of families means, Mr. Speaker, is not 
only worries about the ability to provide basic requirements for 
the family, but also a real inability to participate in the society, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, what this government has done is it 
has imposed incredibly dehumanizing circumstances upon 
thousands of families in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And that kind of dehumanizing situation is a 
circumstance that no family in this province should have to 
face. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I say that the elimination of 
poverty in the province of Saskatchewan should be one of the 
very top priorities of the next provincial government. And if 
members on this side of the House are elected, it will be one of 
our highest priorities in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to examine what 
some of the causes of this tragic situation that I’ve described 
are, and also what some of the solutions are, because there’s 
nothing mystical about how you solve the problem of poverty in 
the province of Saskatchewan. While it’s not an easy task to 
address, it can be done. And it’s only a lack of political will, as 
exhibited by the members opposite, that prevents governments 
from achieving this end, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I would say it’s 
more than just a lack of political will. 
 
I would argue, Mr. Speaker — and I will be substantiating this 
in my remarks as I go on — that this government has 
intentionally created poverty in the province of Saskatchewan; 
that this government has set about  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2043 
 

carefully in a calculated way to make families, thousands of 
families, poor in this province. And that may seem like a rather 
dramatic charge at first, Mr. Speaker, but I think when you have 
finished listening to my remarks this afternoon, you will 
understand what I mean. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the major reasons, of course, for 
poverty in the province of Saskatchewan is the failure of this 
government to create jobs for people in this province and, when 
employment is created, the failure of the government to ensure 
that people are paid fair wages in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have some 15 . . . First of all, we have 
43,000 people in the province of Saskatchewan who are 
officially out of work, and we all know that the official statistics 
always underestimate the real incidence of unemployment in 
any province, Mr. Speaker. Many people in Saskatchewan have 
given up looking for work. Thousands of people, Mr. Speaker, 
every month are leaving the province of Saskatchewan because 
they can’t find employment in this province. And so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have a situation where really the figure of 
43,000 out of work very much underestimates the real extent of 
unemployment in this province. 
 
But of those 43,000 who are out of work, 15,000 of those 
people are on social assistance because they’re unemployed, 
Mr. Speaker. And they in turn have 21,000 dependants, Mr. 
Speaker, who again are relying on social welfare because their 
parents or their spouses have been unable to get work in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House believe that job 
creation is not the inevitable result of economic growth and that 
it cannot just be left to the market-place. Full employment, Mr. 
Speaker, must be an explicit goal of government, and full 
employment must be considered to be, in my judgement, the 
most single important objective that any government seeks to 
achieve for its people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has abandoned the objective of 
full employment. In fact, Mr. Speaker, a full employment 
economy, according to the PCs, both in Saskatchewan and in 
Ottawa, is not in the interests of their big-business friends, 
because it’s difficult, Mr. Speaker, to pursue a cheap labour 
policy when you have full employment. If you want to pursue a 
cheap labour policy, Mr. Speaker, that relies in large part on 
having significant levels of unemployment in the province. 
 
(1500) 
 
If at the national level, Mr. Speaker, you want to keep interest 
rates down, as some governments have chosen to do, that could 
be done, Mr. Speaker, in one of two ways: either, Mr. Speaker, 
you can fight inflation through pushing up interest rates and 
presuming that you will maintain a high level of unemployment 
in your economy; or you can, as the New Democratic Party has 
maintained in Ottawa for years, have a “made in Canada” 
interest rate policy that will be set by the Bank of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, with the objective of seeking out full employment in 
this land instead of with the objective of setting, as the head of 
the Bank of Canada suggested  

earlier this year, an unemployment rate of at least 8 per cent in 
order to keep inflation down and to prevent interest rates from 
being pushed too high in this land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In other words, what we’ve seen at the national level, Mr. 
Speaker, is an intentional policy by the head of the Bank of 
Canada and by the PC government to keep unemployment rates 
at least a minimum of 7 to 8 per cent. And what we’ve seen in 
the province of Saskatchewan is an intentional policy, a cheap 
labour policy that is founded, among other things, on keeping 
unemployment reasonably high in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s a scandalous situation that I believe is unnecessary 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, and members of the opposition 
are committed to ensuring that when we form government, full 
employment will be our number one objective in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another reason for the high levels of poverty 
that we’re now seeing in this province relates directly to the 
government’s decision to freeze the minimum wage, which of 
course is part of their cheap labour policy in this province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we now have a situation, you know, where many 
people who are on minimum wage in this province also have to 
rely on social assistance even though they’re working full time, 
Mr. Speaker. I mean, that’s really quite a scandalous situation. 
And that is because, Mr. Speaker, this government has allowed 
the minimum wage to drop below the poverty line. And it has 
allowed the minimum wage for individuals who are supporting 
families, Mr. Speaker, to drop very sharply below the poverty 
line. 
 
If someone is working full time in this province, and they’re a 
single person, Mr. Speaker, and they’re working full time at 
minimum wage, they are still $1,653 a year below the Statistics 
Canada poverty line for a single individual in the province of 
Saskatchewan. If that same minimum wage earner, Mr. 
Speaker, is trying to support two children, then that minimum 
wage earner, working full time, is $10,012 a year below the 
poverty line, Mr. Speaker. The government in effect has forced 
many families who are working full time for minimum wage to 
have to rely on welfare as well in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is an insult to those families. 
 
I see some of the members opposite snickering, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, it really is disgusting. We’ve reached a new low in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, when members of the government side 
of the House laugh about the poverty of families in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this kind of a cheap labour policy, one of the 
things that it does, Mr. Speaker, is it discourages people from 
working. I mean, why bother to work, Mr. Speaker, if you can 
actually make more on social assistance under this government 
if you’re an individual supporting one or two children and 
you’re earning minimum wage, or even 50 cents above it? Why 
bother working when you can actually get more on social 
welfare? That’s the kind of a situation that the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, have created in the province  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2044 
 

of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, all the rhetoric on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, is about how this government is committed to getting 
people back to work. But, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I get 80 to 120 
calls a day into our constituency office, and one of the things 
that I have found in dramatic fashion that is displayed every day 
in my office is that rather than creating incentives for people to 
work, this government has put in place obstacle after obstacle 
for people to work in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the decision to freeze the minimum wage ever since 1985, 
and to increase it only 25 cents in seven and a half years, Mr. 
Speaker, is just one example of that. The minimum wage in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, has gone up less in the last seven years 
than it has in any other province in the dominion, Mr. Speaker. 
Every other province has increased its minimum wage by a 
higher percentage than the province of Saskatchewan has. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one of the first things, clearly, that we need if 
we’re serious about eliminating poverty in our province is an 
end to the government’s cheap labour policy. And the first place 
to start with that is a significant increase in the minimum wage 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is one of 
the first obvious things to do to alleviate poverty in this 
province because there are thousands of people who are 
working at or above minimum wage in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, who are poor and who need not be poor, Mr. Speaker, 
with a fair minimum wage in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I want to elaborate a little bit on what I meant by some of 
the road-blocks that this government is creating to helping 
people to become more self-reliant in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And as part of addressing that, I want to comment on 
the government’s work-for-welfare program, because the 
government has used its work-for-welfare program for, I think, 
largely public relations purposes, Mr. Speaker. It wants to leave 
the impression that it is encouraging — in fact, forcing — 
people to get off welfare and out into the work place. 
 
But really, Mr. Speaker, in my experience, and I have dealt now 
with hundreds of people who have gone through the 
government’s work-for-welfare program and who at one point 
or another have contacted my office, and my experience is that 
basically all of these work-for-welfare projects, with the 
exception of the New Careers Corporation — and I want to 
point to that as the one notable exception, Mr. Speaker — but 
all the other work-for-welfare projects are basically 20-week 
projects, Mr. Speaker, at minimum wage that are just . . . their 
sole purpose really is to get people off welfare, working for 20 
weeks, just long enough to qualify for unemployment insurance 
benefits, Mr. Speaker. Then they go onto the unemployment 
insurance rolls where they’re no longer the responsibility of the 
PC government in Saskatchewan. Instead they become the 
responsibility of the federal government, and so they don’t 
show up in the provincial government’s welfare statistics any 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s exactly what the Government of Saskatchewan 
wants. They want their statistics to look a little better, Mr.  

Speaker, because the statistics, as I’ve pointed out, have been 
. . . their record in the last seven years has been pretty dim. 
 
But in my experience these projects are not designed, Mr. 
Speaker, to help people gain new skills; they’re not designed, 
Mr. Speaker, to train people in order that they can move into 
full-time jobs; and they’re not designed to create long-term 
employment opportunities for people, Mr. Speaker. They are 
simply designed to move people off welfare and, after 20 weeks 
of work, onto unemployment insurance. And that is a shoddy 
objective for any government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The real objective, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to be serious 
about addressing the problem of large numbers of people who 
are able to work and want to work but who have to face the 
dehumanizing situation of being on social assistance, the 
solution is to put permanent, long-term jobs in place at a living 
wage, Mr. Speaker. And that is what the government’s 
Saskatchewan employment development program has failed to 
do. And it’s failed abysmally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the only exception to that is the government’s New 
Careers project, run not by the Minister of Social Services, but 
by the Minister of Parks and Recreation. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a project that has some merit. Unfortunately there are 
only 2 or 300 people in any one year who are involved in that 
program, but that’s the one make-work project in the province 
for people on social assistance that has some merit, because it 
allows them, after several months, to obtain a living wage. They 
can earn wages of up to 8 or $9 an hour. 
 
There’s opportunities for training through New Careers, Mr. 
Speaker. And while the New Careers Corporation has many 
shortcomings, at least, Mr. Speaker, it provides some 
opportunities for people to advance their situation and to 
gradually work their way out of poverty, that none of the other 
government’s work-for-welfare projects do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Basically, work for welfare in this province has been a dismal 
failure, and you can see that by the fact, Mr. Speaker, that there 
are basically just as many people who are unemployed and on 
social assistance now as there were in 1987, Mr. Speaker. The 
numbers have barely fallen at all. And when they drop, Mr. 
Speaker, the only way that the government has succeeded in 
reducing the number of employable people who are on social 
assistance at all is by simply cutting them off illegally, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And there are now at least 1,500 people in this province who 
have been illegally cut off social assistance by this government, 
Mr. Speaker, in violation of the terms of the Canada Assistance 
Plan Act. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a matter of great concern 
which I will elaborate on at some other point. But this 
government’s consistent violations of the Canada Assistance 
Plan Act are something that I believe, Mr. Speaker, border 
really on a national issue, rather than simply a provincial issue. 
 
And the only reason that they’re able to get away with these 
violations, Mr. Speaker, is because the PC  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2045 
 

government in Ottawa is prepared to turn a blind eye to them, 
Mr. Speaker. But no one can question that the Act is being 
violated. And, Mr. Speaker, I have dozens and dozens of people 
contacting me every month who’ve been illegally cut off in 
violation of CAP (Canada assistance plan). 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to elaborate on some of the other 
things that the PC government has done to place obstacles in the 
way of people being able to find work in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And one of the most obvious ones, Mr. Speaker, 
one of the most obvious things that the government has done 
which is a clear disincentive for people going out to look for 
work when they’re on social assistance, is that they have 
changed the regulations governing the deduction of 
employment earnings from social assistance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like members opposite, some of the 
back-benchers, to listen to this because I bet that none of them 
know this, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the back-benchers in the 
PC government who like to talk about creating incentives for 
people to work, Mr. Speaker, know that if somebody now, as a 
result of the changes that your government and your Minister of 
Social Services implemented last year, Mr. Speaker, someone 
working at a part-time job who’s on social assistance, Mr. 
Speaker — a single individual — if they earn $100 working 
part time, they can only keep $40; the other $60 is deducted 
from their cheque. 
 
If somebody, Mr. Speaker, if somebody in a family with two 
parents and four children, who’s on social assistance, goes out 
and gets a job at minimum wage and earns $720 in a month, do 
you know how much they get to keep, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
under this government’s new policy? — $244. They earn $720; 
they get to keep $244. All the rest is deducted off their cheque. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, no account is taken of the fact that they will 
have additional clothing expenses when they start work. No 
account is taken of their additional travel cost to work. No 
account is taken of the additional child care expenses in the 
event that they are working. Mr. Speaker, they are not 
compensated for any of those additional costs, and they lose 
about two-thirds of their cheque, Mr. Speaker. Now what kind 
of an incentive is that for people on social assistance to go out 
and find work? 
 
And yet, you know, to show how inaccurate it is, Mr. Speaker, 
when members opposite claim and try to paint a picture of 
people on social welfare being lazy, despite the fact that this 
incredible policy of disincentive to work has been put in place 
by this government, there are still thousands of people on social 
assistance in this province who go out and try to get part-time 
or full-time jobs so that they will have the dignity of working 
— despite this new policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t even allow 
disabled people in the province of Saskatchewan, who will have 
to be on social assistance all their lives in many cases . . . When 
they go out and find work, even they, Mr. Speaker, at the very 
most — it doesn’t matter  

how much they earn — they’re only able to keep $150 a month. 
They can earn 6 or $700 a month; they can be, because of their 
severe disability . . . I’ve got several examples of this — people 
who’ve come into my office. They’re severely disabled. 
They’re going to rely on social welfare all their life. They’re out 
trying to earn 4 or $500 a month, and they work very hard to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. And this government now let’s them keep a 
maximum of 150. 
 
You know, it’s just insulting, Mr. Speaker. It’s insulting to the 
dignity of these people. And it’s an example, Mr. Speaker, of 
what I say is a policy that this government has put in place, not 
of incentives for people who are on social assistance to work, 
but they have intentionally created a new regime of 
disincentives for people who are on social welfare to find 
employment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other things that this 
government has done to social assistance recipients that are 
obstacles to them looking for and obtaining work. Mr. Speaker, 
for instance, they have abolished the travel allowance for social 
welfare recipients in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, I attended a meeting with several 
people who were on social assistance who were looking for 
work and had in fact been out looking for work that day, Mr. 
Speaker. And they came to a meeting, Mr. Speaker, to meet 
with me in downtown Regina, Mr. Speaker. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the things that so . . . These people had been out 
slogging the pavement all day. Many of them were then going 
to have to make their way back five or six miles to the outskirts 
of the city where they lived from the meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
They were doing that on foot. I gave a couple of them a drive 
home. 
 
But the point is, Mr. Speaker, what a humiliating situation! 
These people don’t even provide somebody who’s out 
searching for work and on social assistance with money for a 
bus pass, Mr. Speaker. And so their ability to do a job search 
and the number of people, the number of employers that they 
can call on each day, Mr. Speaker, is now dramatically reduced. 
 
You know, this government, Mr. Speaker, has chosen to 
eliminate the clothing allowance and the personal allowances 
for all people on social welfare who are employable. And, Mr. 
Speaker, if you’re out looking for work, you like to go in a 
presentable fashion. And it’s very difficult to do that when 
you’ve been provided with no allowance for clothing by the 
Government of Saskatchewan on your social welfare cheque for 
months at a time, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very embarrassing 
situation to be in. So no travel allowance, no clothing 
allowance, no personal allowance, Mr. Speaker, for people who 
are employable, and then this government expects those same 
people to be out searching for work. 
 
And they go out and they try to look for work, and it’s hard to 
find it when you’ve got an unemployment rate in a city like 
Saskatoon of 11 per cent, Mr. Speaker. But it’s even harder to 
find it when you’ve got no means to travel around the city to 
look for work, Mr. Speaker, and no clothing allowance that 
would permit you to present  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2046 
 

yourself in a presentable manner. And those are the kind of 
humiliating circumstances that this government has 
intentionally created for thousands of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what’s the obvious solution to this dilemma? 
The solution to this dilemma, Mr. Speaker, is to remove those 
disincentives to employment that the government has put in 
place, Mr. Speaker, and an NDP government will do just that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will create a social assistance system that provides financial 
incentives for people to go out and look for work, rather than a 
social assistance system that deducts practically everything that 
someone who makes part-time earnings gets, from their cheque. 
 
We will, Mr. Speaker, ensure that people who are on social 
welfare and out looking for work have bus money to travel 
about a city or about, if necessary, to different parts of the 
province to go to job interviews and to get work in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will ensure, Mr. Speaker, that a system is set up that 
rewards those on social assistance who are out seeking 
employment, Mr. Speaker. We will ensure that the system of 
disincentives that this government has created is abolished, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to a third area. To date I’ve 
touched on the need to establish a full employment policy in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’ve talked about the need to 
abandon the cheap labour policy that this government has 
created, and to increase the minimum wage significantly in the 
province of Saskatchewan as a second vehicle for alleviating 
poverty in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve talked about the need, Mr. Speaker, to reform the social 
assistance system so that work for welfare is dropped in favour 
of . . . Mr. Speaker, instead of the current work-for-welfare 
program, what we need is a policy of permanent jobs at decent 
wages for those on social assistance in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve talked about the need, 
Mr. Speaker, to do away with the numerous disincentives that 
this government has created for those on social welfare to go 
out and look for work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to examine the inadequacy of the income security 
system that this government has put in place in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that it’s the 
inadequacy of this income security system that perhaps more 
than anything else is accounting for the dramatic increase in the 
use of food banks that we’ve seen in this province. As I 
mentioned earlier, we now have a situation where last year 
42,000 people in Saskatchewan relied on food banks at some 
point during the year in this province, and 45 per cent of those 
people, Mr. Speaker, were children. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that this situation has 
occurred is because this government has chosen, over the last 
seven years, to not once increase social assistance rates in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Now the government opposite, of 
course, deny this. And the  

Minister of Social Services about every two years puts out a 
little news release announcing that he has increased the basic 
allowance for social assistance recipients in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Weyburn is trying to get into this debate. Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to say something to the member from 
Weyburn. Mr. Speaker, I am getting tired of receiving calls 
from the constituency of Weyburn from people on social 
welfare in that constituency who obviously can’t get any help 
from the member for Weyburn and have to phone my office in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had, Mr. Speaker, in the last six 
months, I’m sure I’ve had a dozen calls from Weyburn alone, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m tired of getting those calls, Mr. Speaker. I 
wish the member from Weyburn would provide some assistance 
to those constituents, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I wished he would, I wished . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d like to call the 
House to attention and allow the member from Saskatoon to 
continue his speech. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The member for Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, 
has said that he doesn’t believe that I’m getting 120 calls a day 
into my constituency office. I invite him, Mr. Speaker, to come 
to my constituency office and to answer the 120 calls a day, the 
large bulk of which are from people on social welfare who call 
me because they can’t get any help from your government. A 
lot of them, Mr. Speaker, I might add, are from rural areas. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many from Meadow Lake? Tell me 
about my riding. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the member says, how many 
from Meadow Lake? How many from Lloydminster? I can 
assure the members from Lloydminster and Meadow Lake, Mr. 
Speaker, that in the last three months we have had at least 20 
calls from those two ridings together, Mr. Speaker, at least 20 
calls . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
member is saying, name a social assistance recipient. 
 
And I say to the members, they know full well that social 
assistance recipients in this province are to be protected with 
respect to their confidentiality. That if I named those names, 
Mr. Speaker, I would be violating The Saskatchewan 
Assistance (plan) Act, Mr. Speaker, which those members, Mr. 
Speaker, regularly violate, Mr. Speaker. They have chosen, Mr. 
Speaker, to violate the confidentiality of hundreds of recipients 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. I am not going to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. I am going to respect their confidentiality. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m going to call you on this. Have you 
taken them to the minister? Has it come to the minister’s 
attention? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And the member from Weyburn says, have I 
brought some of those cases to the minister’s attention? And in 
many cases, yes I have. But as I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
virtually given up dealing with the Minister of Social Services 
because he never answers my letters, Mr. Speaker. He never 
does, Mr. Speaker. The  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2047 
 

chances of the Minister of Social Services answering one of my 
letters is as good as the chances of winning Lotto 649 in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I think I will return to the 
essence of my comments before I was interrupted by the 
members for Meadow Lake and Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to address for a moment the tragic inadequacy of social 
assistance rates in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, the rates have not increased at all, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last seven years since this government was 
elected. Every time that this government increases the basic 
allowance for those on social assistance in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it decreases some other part of the social 
assistance rate structure. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, last time that there was a rate 
increase in the province of Saskatchewan in the basic 
allowance, the government simultaneously abolished the 
transportation allowance in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
reduced the laundry allowance for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And those two cuts offset the increase in the 
basic allowance, so that people on their cheques didn’t have a 
penny more than they had the month previous to the Minister of 
Social Services’ supposed increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have seen a situation now where single people in this 
province have had their rates cut from some $540 a month in 
1981, to a maximum of $375 a month in 1989, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where families have in effect, as I 
mentioned earlier, had their rates frozen for the last seven years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, during those seven years, inflation has 
increased in excess of 35 per cent. And so in effect what we 
have now, Mr. Speaker, is a situation in which a family on 
social assistance, in real dollar terms, is making 35 per cent less 
than they were in 1981, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that, probably more than anything else, helps to explain 
why there are now so many families who have to rely on food 
banks in this province, Mr. Speaker. And you’ll see that, 
generally speaking, the use of food banks increases sharply at 
the end of the month, Mr. Speaker. And that is because the 
social assistance cheque has run out and people are forced to go 
to food banks. 
 
Now I want to . . . so that members opposite will understand a 
little better why families trying to live on these terrible rates, 
Mr. Speaker, are having a difficult time, members may 
understand this a little better when you look at the rates that are 
now in place in this perspective. 
 
If you are on social assistance and you are single, Mr. Speaker, 
after you have paid your rent and utilities, you are basically left 
living on $16 a month in the province of Saskatchewan — $16 
a month for food, for clothing, for all household expenses and 
personal items. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you are trying to support a family and 
you are relying on social assistance, the rates have  

now got to the point where after you pay your rent and your 
utilities, you will be left to live on $26 a month for each 
member of your household, Mr. Speaker — I’m sorry I said a 
month and I meant a week — $26 a week; $16 a week for 
single individuals, Mr. Speaker, on social assistance to cover 
their food, clothing, household and personal items; $26 a week, 
Mr. Speaker, for each individual in a family. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, simply put, no one can feed their family on 
$26 a week as well as have to look after all clothing expenses, 
all personal expenses, all household expenses, everything other 
than rent and utilities. That’s what the rates mean now, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what the rates mean. They mean, Mr. Speaker, 
trying to feed and clothe and provide all of the support needs 
for each member of your family on $26 a week. And simply 
put, that can’t be done and that’s why the cheque runs out 
before the end of the month, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we 
see thousands of people lining up at food banks in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the obvious solutions to this problem 
therefore is to try to increase the rates. No one, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, would deny that a seven-year freeze in the rates is 
simply shameful in this province and that there is an urgent 
need to significantly increase social assistance rates in the 
province of Saskatchewan as part of rebuilding the social safety 
net in our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s another very important income 
security program that I want to comment on and that is the 
family income plan. And for those, Mr. Speaker, who are not 
familiar with the family income plan, the family income plan is 
a plan that is an income security program that is available to 
families in this province, poorer families in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are working, who have at least one member 
of their household, Mr. Speaker, who is working, but who, 
despite the fact that they are working, do not earn enough to 
live on. 
 
And originally, Mr. Speaker, the family income plan was set up 
by the New Democratic Party in the 1970s, and we had really 
seen this family income plan as the first step towards a 
guaranteed annual income in the province of Saskatchewan for 
working families. It was a plan, Mr. Speaker, that would ensure 
that any families with children in this province would not fall 
below a basic minimal level of earnings when they were 
working and trying to support their family, but when they were 
earning a wage that was not adequate to do so. 
 
Now what this government has done, Mr. Speaker, since being 
elected, is this government has, in effect . . . first of all, it has 
stopped advertising the existence of the family income plan in 
the province of Saskatchewan. It obviously doesn’t want poor 
families in this province to know that the family income plan 
exists. And the result of that, Mr. Speaker, is that only about 
one-third of the families in the province of Saskatchewan who 
would be eligible for the family income plan actually take 
advantage of it every year because so many thousands of people 
in this province don’t even know that it exists. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2048 
 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the government has chosen to freeze the 
family income plan now for the last four years. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s consistently cut back the budget of the family 
income plan. I can remember when in 1986, the family income 
plan had a budget of some $19 million in the provincial budget. 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the family income plan has a budget of 
$13.1 million — a cut of $6 million, Mr. Speaker. And the 
benefits, Mr. Speaker, that are available to families have in 
effect now been frozen for many years despite the fact that there 
have been sharp increases in the cost of living during that time. 
 
So we’ve got a government that has stopped advertising the 
plan. We’ve got a government that’s cut back the total budget 
for the plan, and we’ve got a government that’s frozen the 
benefits available under the plan now for many years. 
 
And the result of that, Mr. Speaker, is that the thousands of 
families who could be benefitting from this plan don’t get to 
take advantage of it, and that there are many other thousands of 
families, Mr. Speaker, who are still enrolled in the plan that 
would, if this plan had been properly maintained by the PC 
government, be getting significantly more in terms of an 
income security top-up to their wage than they do at the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I have not been able to 
understand is why any government, Mr. Speaker, would choose 
to set the cut-offs for the family income plan so far below the 
poverty line. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the member for 
Saltcoats, for instance, is aware of the fact that under his 
government’s administration, for a family of four, the cut-off 
for receiving the family income plan in the province of 
Saskatchewan is $14,265 a year of earnings, even though the 
poverty line for that family in urban Saskatchewan in cities like 
Saskatoon or Regina, would be over $22,000 a year, and in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is over $19,000 a 
year. 
 
We have a government, Mr. Speaker, that has chosen to stop 
paying out family income plan benefits to families with children 
who are living more than $5,000 below the poverty line, Mr. 
Speaker, more than $5,000 below the poverty line. In effect, the 
intention, the original intention, the original purpose of the 
family income plan has been completely lost sight of by the PC 
government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, clearly when one looks at some of the 
reasons for poverty in this province — high levels of 
unemployment, a government that has failed to create 
employment opportunities for its citizens, the only province in 
Canada in fact last year, Mr. Speaker, where there was a net 
decline in the number of people employed in the province, Mr. 
Speaker; when you look at the policies of the government that 
have intentionally created a cheap labour policy for people, 
forced thousands of people to work at a minimum wage that has 
only gone up 6 per cent in the last seven years while inflation 
has been in excess of 35 per cent; when you look at a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that has chosen to watch food bank 
use increase in the province of Saskatchewan without doing 
anything to aid food banks in this province or to assist them in 
their work; Mr. Speaker, when you  

look at a government that has put so many road-blocks in the 
way of people who are on social welfare finding work has 
intentionally created disincentives for people working, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve outlined; when you look at a government that 
has chosen to freeze social assistance rates in the province of 
Saskatchewan for seven years; when you look at a government 
that has chose to freeze benefits per child for working families 
in this province, under the family income plan, for five years, 
Mr. Speaker; when you look at a government that has chosen 
not to advertise the benefits available under the family income 
plan of the province of Saskatchewan to families in this 
province, Mr. Speaker — when you look at all those policies 
put together, it’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve seen a 
sharp incidence in the rate of poverty in this province. 
 
It’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that when you ask families to 
live on $26 a week, per person, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that they’re not able to meet the basic needs of 
their children, Mr. Speaker, and therefore we shouldn’t be 
surprised at the rapid rise in food bank use in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on another important 
cause of poverty in this province and that is the government’s 
failure to continue to ensure that decent housing will be 
provided for people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think, to be honest, Mr. Speaker, that this government has not 
done a bad job with respect to the construction of new senior 
citizens’ units in the province of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s done a terrible job with respect to the construction 
of low income housing for poorer families in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I turn to the statistics, for instance, that were quoted by the 
Minister of Urban Affairs during his estimates a couple of 
months ago when we asked him to compare the low income 
housing construction record in the early 1980s under the NDP 
government, with the record of his government over the last two 
years. And you know, Mr. Speaker, in 1981 in this province — 
and these are the statistics that the minister himself provided to 
this House — there were 421 low income family housing units 
built in Saskatchewan under the NDP. In 1982 there were 320 
units. 
 
To show you, Mr. Speaker, how that policy of constructing low 
income housing for families has been abandoned in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is turn to the 1987 
and 1988 statistics. In 1987, Mr. Speaker, there were only 112 
units for low income families built in this province, in contrast 
to the 421 in 1981 and the 320 in 1982. In 1988, Mr. Speaker, 
there were only 129 low income housing units built in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this government, as part of its overall 
policy of abandoning low income people in this province, has 
chosen to stop building low income housing units for poorer 
families in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s cut 
back its budget very sharply for that, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that that is most unfortunate . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . .  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2049 
 

. Now, Mr. Speaker, I note that the members opposite are 
wondering about the policies of the North, and the minister 
raises the question of northern housing units. 
 
I’m afraid I don’t have those statistics, but since the Minister of 
Urban Affairs seems to want to talk about northern 
Saskatchewan, I will entertain his desire to do that for a 
moment and provide another little example of the kind of game 
that the Minister of Social Services likes to play with poor 
people in this province. It’s a rather cynical game, and I’m 
going to use a northern Saskatchewan example since he has 
baited me into it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to go back to December of last year, Mr. Speaker, when 
the Minister of Social Services announced that there would be a 
$25 increase in the basic food allowance for social assistance 
recipients in seven northern communities, remote northern 
communities, Mr. Speaker, communities that are served by my 
colleagues from Athabasca and Cumberland, and, Mr. Speaker, 
communities where the expense associated with shipping food 
into the North is very great. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister announced that there was going 
to be a $25 increase in the basic food allowance for people 
living in those remote northern communities where the price of 
food is very high, Mr. Speaker. And what he did, Mr. Speaker, 
is he issued a news release in December of 1988, announcing 
this increase. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we examined this increase, we found in 
fact that it wasn’t an increase at all. The communities that were 
going to be affected, Mr. Speaker, were communities like Black 
Lake and Stony Rapids and Uranium City and Fond-du-Lac and 
Camsell Portage. These were all communities where food has to 
be flown in at very high cost. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what the minister neglected to mention in his 
news release was that everybody in these communities was 
already getting the $25 figure, Mr. Speaker, by way of a special 
needs allowance available to northern residents, Mr. Speaker. 
And all that the Minister of Social Services did is he announced 
that he was . . . when he announced, Mr. Speaker, that he was 
increasing the basic allowance of these people in the remote 
North by $25, what he neglected to mention was that every one 
of those people was already getting the $25, but they were 
getting it through another allowance, Mr. Speaker, which he 
was therefore cancelling. 
 
That’s the kind of game, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has been 
playing for some time. And what he neglected to mention, Mr. 
Speaker — and I’m going to provide these figures for the 
benefit of the Minister of Urban Affairs who asked about the 
North — what he neglected to mention, Mr. Speaker, was the 
fact that the cost of families living in these communities to feed 
their children, Mr. Speaker, is actually higher than the entire 
amount that they get from social assistance minus their housing 
costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For instance, as an example, if you look at the community of 
Black Lake, Mr. Speaker, studies done by the Prince Albert 
district chiefs show that it would cost a family of four in the 
community of Black Lake $867.60 a month to  

feed that family. And that is because of the very, very high cost 
of food in that community, Mr. Speaker, the very high cost of 
food because that food has to be flown into northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and therefore food prices are, at a 
minimum, two or three times higher than they are in the South. 
 
Now you know, Mr. Speaker, you know how much that that 
family gets to cover food, clothing, household, and personal 
supplies from the Minister of Social Services? They get $780 a 
month, Mr. Speaker. The cost of food alone is $867.60, 
according to a detailed study that has been done on food costs 
in that community, Mr. Speaker. The amount that they get from 
the Department of Social Services for that family is $780. In 
other words, Mr. Speaker, there is a shortfall of $87 a month 
just for food, and that assumes no money for clothing, no 
money for household expenses, no money for any other 
personal items, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite wonder why the 
people of northern Saskatchewan don’t vote for them. And I can 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, that after the next election, the members 
for Cumberland, and the members for Athabasca will be 
returned with the biggest majority ever in northern 
Saskatchewan, because of the policies of the PC government 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to address another obstacle that the 
PC government has put in the way of many lower income 
people in this province, Mr. Speaker, who are trying to make 
ends meet, who are out working, Mr. Speaker, and who are 
finding it more and more difficult to make ends meet under the 
policies of this PC government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the matters that I want to raise that I 
think is a real obstacle to many working people, is the changes 
that this government has made to its day-care policy, Mr. 
Speaker. Basically, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
abandoned the principle of helping low income people who 
need child care in this province, Mr. Speaker. And it has made 
the access to day care to middle income earners in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, almost impossible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has got the sorry record of 
having the second-lowest number of licensed child care spaces 
for our population in the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
Only the province of Newfoundland has fewer licensed child 
care spaces for its population, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government, in addition to failing to provide new 
day-care facilities to families who are working, Mr. Speaker, 
has frozen day-care subsidies in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Again, just like it’s frozen welfare rates for seven years, it’s 
frozen the day-care subsidy for low income families in the 
province of Saskatchewan for seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that has meant, Mr. Speaker, that low income families have 
to pay more and more and more of their weekly earnings in day 
care, because the subsidies  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2050 
 

remain frozen for seven years, and the cost of day care during 
that time has increased at least 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, for somebody who has two or three children 
in day care, can mean that often a third of their pay-cheque is 
being forked out in child care expenses, Mr. Speaker — 
expenses that in large part used to be covered through the 
day-care subsidy, but are no longer being covered by this 
government, Mr. Speaker. Now the combination of all of those 
policies, Mr. Speaker, has resulted in increased poverty in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to comment on just one more policy before closing 
and moving my motion, Mr. Speaker. And that is, Mr. Speaker, 
what this government has done with respect to workers’ 
compensation in the province of Saskatchewan. Because I think 
that NDP members on this side of the House find that one of the 
most frequent complaints we have about government policy is 
what a difficult time many people who are working and are 
injured have in dealing with the Workers’ Compensation Board 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More and more people, Mr. Speaker, who are being cut off 
workers’ compensation, more and more people who are having 
a difficult time, Mr. Speaker, in getting workers’ compensation 
to begin with, and who then find it extremely difficult to stay on 
workers’ compensation even though they have medical 
evidence showing that they are unable to return to work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government seems to have made it a practice to constantly 
make life difficult for those who are on social assistance, for the 
working poor, for those who are on workers’ compensation, for 
those who have inadequate housing and are seeking decent 
housing in this province, Mr. Speaker. The programs that used 
to be in place for those people, Mr. Speaker, have been steadily 
eroded in this province under the PC government. 
 
And so we have a situation today in which poverty in this 
province stands at an unprecedented rate — one in four children 
are poor in the province of Saskatchewan. And I think that the 
remarks that I have made this afternoon demonstrate that 
despite the fact that we have faced some difficult economic 
times in Saskatchewan over the last two or three years, this kind 
of a crisis doesn’t need to exist. 
 
The reason I say, Mr. Speaker, that this crisis is a crisis shaped 
by government policy and not a crisis that is related primarily to 
the difficult circumstances we’ve faced in agriculture in the last 
two or three years, which is what the Minister of Social 
Services likes to put it up to, Mr. Speaker — the reason I say 
that is that the establishment of food banks in this province 
began within 18 months of the PC government being elected. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just a coincidence, I bet. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now the member for Elphinstone says, was 
that a coincidence. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that all members 
will appreciate that this is not a coincidence, Mr. Speaker, this 
is not a coincidence. Mr. Speaker, no  

one can tell me, Mr. Speaker, that things changed so much 
between 1982 and 1983 in terms of the general state of the 
economy, and in 1984 and ’85 when oil prices, you will recall, 
Mr. Speaker, were far higher than they were at any time that the 
New Democratic Party was in government. I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that . . . why it is when all prices were at record levels 
and when things in agriculture were still fairly good, shortly 
after this government took office, that we saw food banks 
establishing in Saskatoon and in Regina, Mr. Speaker. I wonder 
why that was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that that was clearly as a result of 
government policy and it had nothing to do with the difficult 
circumstances in agriculture that we currently face — nothing 
to do at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at how carefully the government 
has gone about ensuring that every time . . . Mr. Speaker, when 
you look at how carefully the government has gone about 
crafting its cheap labour policy and intentionally freezing the 
minimum wage now for some seven years; and when you look 
at how it has gone about so craftily ensuring that the family 
income plan will never be advertised in the province of 
Saskatchewan any more and the benefits will be frozen for the 
last five years; and when you look at how it has changed its 
day-care policy so that benefits, the subsidies paid to low 
income parents will be frozen for seven years; and when you 
look at how it has frozen social assistance rates for families for 
seven years; and when you look at how it has dropped all its 
winter works programs that used to be available under the New 
Democratic Party government; and when you look at how it has 
basically cancelled all of its employment programs, Mr. 
Speaker, with the exception of the student summer employment 
program, which it’s cut back from 10 and a half million dollars 
in 1986 to $3.1 million this summer; and when you look at how 
the only employment opportunities it provides to social 
assistance recipients are its 20-week work-fare projects, Mr. 
Speaker, primarily designed to get people onto unemployment 
insurance so that they will become the responsibility of the 
federal government rather than the PC provincial government, 
Mr. Speaker; when you look at all those policies together, Mr. 
Speaker, then it’s plain for everybody to see why the Regina 
food bank had 2,500 children and 2,600 adults depending on it 
last month, and why, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon more than 
6,000 — in fact, Mr. Speaker, more than 7,000 people last 
month — relied on the Saskatoon food bank, Mr. Speaker, for 
their basic needs, Mr. Speaker — for their basic needs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say that this situation is intolerable. I say 
that no civilized society can accept the level of poverty that we 
see now in the province of Saskatchewan. I say, Mr. Speaker, 
that an NDP government — I pledge to all those listening this 
afternoon and to all members of this House, Mr. Speaker, that a 
New Democratic Party government will make as one of its 
highest priorities the elimination of food banks and the 
elimination of poverty for children and for families and for all 
people in this province in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the vehicles for doing this are 
clear. The vehicles, Mr. Speaker, are a full employment  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2051 
 

policy and establishing full employment as the number one 
objective of the provincial government. 
 
The second vehicle, Mr. Speaker, is a fair wage policy in the 
province of Saskatchewan and a significant increase in the 
minimum wage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third key plank, Mr. Speaker, in such an initiative is the 
creation of decent housing in this province; the re-establishment 
of a vigorous program of constructing low-income housing 
units for poor people in this province, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. 
Speaker, a program that ensures that houses will be well 
maintained in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need in this province to have a family income 
plan that will ensure that families who are low income and who 
are working, move significantly up towards the poverty line, 
Mr. Speaker, and get a significant top-up to their wages to 
ensure that they will be able to meet the basic needs of all their 
children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we need in this province, Mr. Speaker, significant 
improvements in the pension system, and I personally would 
like to see — I don’t say this on behalf of the NDP, but I say 
personally that I think that one of the things that we really need 
in this province that would go a long way towards easing the 
poverty of many of those who are sick and injured in this 
province, is a policy of a universal sickness and accident 
insurance program in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When you look at other countries that have such a program, 
countries like New Zealand, for instance, Mr. Speaker, there 
you see that people who are injured or who suffer accident, 
regardless of cause, Mr. Speaker, are protected with respect to 
their incomes. Here we only have such protection if people have 
private insurance, Mr. Speaker, or if people are injured at work 
or through an automobile accident. And automobile accident 
coverage is often very inadequate, Mr. Speaker. So that if you 
are injured outside the work place, Mr. Speaker, in effect you 
remain unprotected unless you have private insurance. 
 
And I think it’s time that we had a program in the province of 
Saskatchewan, an insurance program that would protect all 
people in the event of injury or sickness, regardless of cause. 
 
We have far too many people in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, who are disabled, for instance, and who were 
disabled in their early youth — in their teens or in their 20s — 
who are forced to live on social assistance at the deplorable 
rates that the government opposite has put into effect, Mr. 
Speaker, when really they ought to be able to live in dignity 
through an insurance program that would protect them, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that a universal sickness and accident 
insurance program would do just that. 
 
These then, Mr. Speaker, are some of the initiatives that I 
believe are required in order to ensure that those who are poor 
in the province of Saskatchewan need not continue to be poor, 
Mr. Speaker. And I believe, in closing, that the record of this 
government is such that in many ways the  

motion that we’re proposing, Mr. Speaker, is a mild one. It 
really is, you know. When you look at the government’s record 
and you look at the things that I’ve talked about this afternoon, 
“condemn” is really a light term to use. But I will move at this 
point, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its policies which continue to cause 
widespread hurt and hardship for Saskatchewan families, 
which are forcing families and children into poverty, and 
which are depriving families of security and opportunity 
for their future, and calls on the Saskatchewan government 
to repair our social safety net and introduce a program of 
full employment geared to alleviating the crisis of poverty 
in Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will move that, seconded by the member for 
Prince Albert. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak on this 
motion, I want to tell the members of government that are 
sitting here opposite, particularly members from the cities of 
Regina, the member from Regina Wascana, the member from 
Regina South, the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, and the 
minister from Weyburn, I think, would be included in this as 
well, and that is that the record that you people have wrought on 
this province with respect to what it’s done to those that are not 
quite always able to fend for themselves, is really going to do 
you a lot of harm. 
 
(1600) 
 
It’s particularly incumbent on you, the member from Regina 
Wascana, I think, to bring to the attention of the minister, bring 
it to the attention of the minister some of things, I would say, all 
of the things that the member from Saskatoon University has 
brought up today, because he, more than anybody else, has had 
to carry the ball on behalf of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan who are in that poverty category. And he, more 
than anybody else, has carried it because that minister has 
fumbled it and fumbled it badly. He has accused him of 
fumbling it deliberately. I sometimes think he’s fumbled it 
deliberately and I sometimes think he’s fumbling it simply out 
of ignorance, out of ignorance because he’s shrugging it off and 
not knowing what’s going on. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, Mr. almost-a-minister from Regina 
Wascana, I think that what’s going to happen to you is you are 
going to lose your seat, you’re going to lose your seat along 
with the other member from Regina, if you are unable to 
convince the Premier of the province to either can this minister 
or convince that minister to change his attitude with respect to 
how he deals with the people in this province who are in 
difficulty. 
 
You know what? I say that minister’s attitude is best 
exemplified by the statement: I’ll kick ‘em when they’re up and 
I’ll kick ‘em when they’re down. Kick ‘em when they’re up and 
kick ‘em when they’re down. You know, if there is somebody 
that doesn’t agree with him he kicks them, and when they’re 
down he kicks them worse. And there were many examples of 
that that the member from  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2052 
 

Saskatoon Sutherland brought up today, perhaps in more polite 
terms than I’ve just mentioned, but it effectively comes down to 
kicking them when they’re down. 
 
The problem is here that he has made himself completely 
immune from what is happening to people who are poor. Now I 
want to bring to your attention why I feel he’s done that. See, in 
rural Saskatchewan — and I’ve lived in rural Saskatchewan — 
in rural Saskatchewan if you can’t survive financially, you are 
eventually driven into the cities. You are eventually driven to it; 
you’re forced to it. 
 
If you’re forced off your farm, where are you going to go? 
Where are you going to go? So slowly, what happens is that 
some of the people that are poor, end up poor, end up moving to 
the city. So what happens is the minister becomes immune from 
it. He becomes immune from it. 
 
I think that if he took a week, one week, and actually mixed 
with people and listened, and sat down and listened to their 
problems instead of preaching from on high, preaching from on 
high from a perspective which is completely unrealistic, he 
would get a completely different picture of what his situation is. 
And it’s a result of him not doing that that’s going to hurt the 
member from Regina Wascana eventually. And it will reflect on 
you guys first, because you’re the closest to it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s interesting you should ask about a name, 
because this last weekend, as I joined some of the marchers 
who are protesting, protesting what was happening to the 
province of Saskatchewan, this fellow came up along side me 
and he says, by the way, he says, this Schmidt is always talking 
about names. That’s a quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Rather tenuous. Just bring it to 
his attention. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. This fellow came 
up to me and he says, they’re always asking for names. He says, 
give him my name. He says, I don’t mind. He says, I’m not 
afraid any more. He says, I used to be afraid, but give him my 
name. Give him my name, he says. So I took his name and 
address and I’m reluctantly wondering what I should do with it 
at this stage. But I think what I’m going to do is ask him to 
write in himself. 
 
But there are people out there, Mr. Member from Regina 
Wascana that definitely . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. I’ll have to 
ask both members to refrain from interrupting the speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shame on you. 
 
The Speaker: — Well you’ve been doing it for a while. I know 
it must be difficult to carry on when you’re always being 
interrupted, as I’m sure you’ve experienced, and let us allow the 
member for Prince Albert to continue. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I note by the 
members’ comments opposite that they, you know, that they 
still want to side with the Minister of Social Services. And 
that’s understandable, I suppose, you know, it’s a colleague of 
yours. 
 

But what I want to do is make a couple of points about how you 
have to really get a little closer to the situation of some of the 
constituents that you’re supposed to be representing in order to 
represent them well. One of the most . . . I suppose, the closest 
example that I’ve had of a person giving me what it’s like for 
somebody that’s in poverty and what it’s like to understand 
somebody that’s in poverty if you’re in the sort of middle 
income group, as you and I and everybody else is in this 
legislature. And the person gave me this example. If you take 
any group of students from a high school anywhere in the 
province, any random group of 50 students, and you took them 
and transported them from Saskatchewan and transplanted them 
in the business district of Tokyo, in the business district of 
Tokyo, and then see how many of them are going to survive — 
just test that. 
 
Now imagine what they’d be up against. First of all, there’s a 
language barrier, and many of the people that are poor in this 
province have a language barrier. First of all, there’s that. 
Secondly, there’s a visible difference of skin colour, very 
visible difference, so they’d stand out like sore thumbs. Thirdly, 
they’d know nothing about the economic system of Tokyo, 
absolutely nothing. Now you put them into that milieu and you 
say, survive. Matter of fact, if they don’t survive, what you 
maybe should do is say, well look, you’re not pulling your load. 
We’re going to cut your services to you. Maybe that will give 
you an incentive. That’s what I mean by kicking them when 
they’re down. 
 
The minister needs to grab a completely different perspective 
on the clients that he’s supposed to be serving. He’s not the 
Minister of Social Services; he’s the minister of entrepreneurial 
services. That’s what he’s there for; that’s really what his job is; 
that’s what he’s acting like. It used to be that the civil service, 
acting in the Department of Social Services, were able to act as 
advocates for two reasons. First of all, it was their attitudes. 
Their attitudes were such, when their clients come in, well how 
can I help you and how can I help you out of your situation. 
And secondly, they had time to do that. Now the civil service in 
that department is completely demoralized. All they have time 
for is to give out cheques — and mind you, they have to give 
out a lot because of the policies of this government, more than 
ever before, more than ever before. 
 
But they even feel intimidated in being able to . . . in trying to 
go out and help, go out of their way to help people — 
intimidated because the minister’s . . . the attitude that the 
minister is pushing on behalf of all of the members present. 
And that’s why I’m telling you, because I think you better get a 
hold of him. The only place that that washes is places where 
you don’t have to deal with people who are poor. 
 
And I know what happens. I go out to the rural area that I grew 
up in, and people there very rarely come across anybody that’s 
poor. And so it’s very easy and very natural to say, well there’s 
no poverty, because there isn’t in that district — it’s all been 
exported. 
 
But you know, as minister, you’re not just responsible for a 
certain portion of the province; particularly as Minister  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2053 
 

of Social Services, you’re responsible for everybody. That’s 
your job, and he’s not doing it. You guys got to get after him on 
that or it’s going to weigh on your shoulders. It’s going to 
weigh on your shoulders as well, those of you that are adjacent 
to the cities, and particularly the member from Regina Wascana 
and Regina South. 
 
That’s what’s going to happen. It’s going to weigh on you 
because his attitude is completely and deadly wrong. He’s 
kicking them when they’re up and he’s kicking them when 
they’re down, and that is not fair. That is absolutely not fair to 
do to people who are poor. That is not a Christian attitude. That 
is not a Christian attitude. 
 
If you’re walking down — and your grade 6 teacher would have 
told you this — that if you’re walking along the road and you 
see somebody that’s bruised and battered lying in the ditch, 
what should you do? Should you give him a helping hand or 
should you give him a kick? Well this is the minister of kicking. 
He does exactly the opposite thing that he should be doing 
because he thinks that if you just make it tough enough, that 
person will somehow get his way out of there — if you make it 
tough enough. But what it’s doing is it’s building up a whole 
series of resentments. That’s what’s happening. It’s building up 
resentments and it’s building up fears. 
 
Let me give you another example. I think in one sense his 
objective is right. He’s thinking that he wants to get people to 
establish the work ethic, and I agree with him there. He wants 
them to establish the work ethic. There’s no argument there. 
 
Now let me take the example of work-fare, and let’s think about 
the work-fare that’s going on right in your constituency, the 
member from Shellbrook-Torch. Let’s take a look at that 
situation, the situation of the people that are doing the work-fare 
program at Candle Lake. Now I often travel to Candle Lake and 
I’ve driven by that place and, you know, it kind of impresses 
me when I see the ditches and the road all cleaned up and I see, 
you know, people out there working. 
 
And I ask them, what’s happening? Well it’s people who have 
been on welfare. They’ve been asked to report by the 
department. They’ve been asked to report to a certain place. I 
think it’s PAR Industries, in this case, who’s doing the 
recruiting. 
 
And it turns out quite well for those of us that are vacationing at 
Candle Lake. And it’s turned out quite well also for the people 
who are doing the organizing, because they feel like they’ve got 
something done, and they feel like they’re, you know, helping 
these people go to work. 
 
And it’s turned out quite well for PAR Industries because, after 
all, they’re serving their purpose. They’re providing the . . . you 
know, the bridge. They’re providing the bridge so that those 
people who are unemployed can get temporary employment. 
It’s turning out quite well for them. 
 
So you put all those together and you say, hey, this is a dandy 
program — until you go and start talking to the people who are 
in it. Or better still, just wait and see what they . . . let them 
come to you, because they’ve come to  

me. And they say, you know, we don’t mind this program, with 
a couple of exceptions. Says first of all one of the problems is, 
is that we get paid, and by the time we get finished, we end up 
with less money than we had to begin with. And that’s what I 
mean by kicking them when they’re down. 
 
It would work if the guy paid them so that they had something 
to come out of there with. You know, if a guy went to work and 
come out with a couple of hundred dollars at the end of three 
months so that he could go home proudly and say, look what I 
done; I’ve earned a couple of hundred dollars, to his family — 
I’ve actually saved a couple of hundred dollars, and he was able 
to say that to his family. Wouldn’t that be great? 
 
And that’s the only missing component. Why? Well they don’t 
get paid enough, for one thing. And secondly, there’s some 
built-in costs there. One of the built-in costs is they each have to 
pay $3 a day for . . . $3 per meal, which they have to dish out. 
Okay? They have to dish it out. 
 
Now $3 a meal isn’t a heck of a lot for the member from 
Shell-Torch, and it’s probably not a lot for me either, if we’re 
quite frank. But when somebody is earning in the vicinity of — 
well, take it minimum wage: 4.50 an hour, eight hours, 40 
bucks a day. And you put nine of that, $9 away for food for 
yourself — let alone your family in the city or someplace else 
— then you might be thinking about better ways of spending 
that $9. They’d probably, if they were given that $9 and buying 
food themselves, they’d probably spend a heck of a lot less. 
Well . . . or even if that $9 was paid for and the food was 
supplied, they’d have that little bit more money. But what’s 
happening, it’s a disincentive because that money’s going out. 
 
In addition, of course, they’re into a situation where they’re 
doing some work, rough work. If you’re out there cleaning 
bush, and I’ve cleaned bush and the member from Shell-Torch 
I’m sure has — I guess he has, I haven’t seen him doing it, but I 
would suggest he has — you know, that’s not so darn easy on 
your clothes. And you can wear out a pair of gloves and a pair 
of jeans pretty quickly. And if you don’t have a good set of 
boots, it’s pretty hard on your toes and on your feet. 
 
So what happens is there’s another built-in expense of clothing. 
And if you’re working where there’s a lot of people walking 
back and forth and driving by, and you’re working with a group 
of other people, you don’t want to be dressed just in rags, 
tatters. You want to be sort of . . . you want to look decent. It’s 
very natural. So in a program like that there’s this built-in 
expense. 
 
(1615) 
 
So what I would ask the members opposite to tell the Minister 
of Social Services is they can make that program into a pretty 
decent program by adding two features. One feature is make it 
worthwhile so when those guys go to work they’ve got a dollar 
to come back with; and secondly, when they’ve got that 
program in place, not to cut it off after 20 weeks or 30 weeks 
just so they can transfer over to unemployment insurance. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2054 
 

What’s the point of teaching people how to get on 
unemployment insurance? What is the point? Because that’s 
exactly what’s happening in this program. You’re teaching 
them how to get on unemployment insurance. You’re teaching 
them how to jump out of one kettle right into another one. It’s 
no help — it’s no help. All it is is just a kick over to another 
puddle. That’s the problem. 
 
And that can be straightened out fairly simply, as long as you 
get over the idea that you have to really be tough on these guys. 
A lot of of these people are people that are 18, 19, maybe 20s, 
middle 20s, people with a lot of energy. They’re are looking for 
their first good job. They want a good reference. They try so 
hard. 
 
I had a member of the work-force come to me and he says, 
look, here’s the problems, but I don’t want you to use my name 
or another couple of people’s names on this because I really 
want to get a good reference. I says, well get your reference first 
before we do anything. Get it first, and then we’ll take it up 
with the government. 
 
But a couple of little things like that would go a long way to 
help eliminate poverty. And it would help people’s attitudes as 
well, help their attitudes, because they wouldn’t feel like they 
were always being kicked around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to dwell a little more about the way the 
minister has handled this whole department. And over the time 
that I’ve spent in this legislature since October ’86, I’ve had 
several opportunities — more than one — to see how he’s 
handled the Department of Social Services. And the members 
of the press have had ample opportunity to watch what’s 
happened as well. 
 
And it’s really interesting to go back over a period of time and 
see what kind of things the minister has done to help or to 
hinder — and I say, in most cases, hinder — the people of 
Saskatchewan who have been trying to get somewhere. If he 
really had been helping them, things wouldn’t be as they are. 
We would not have record numbers of unemployed — that’s his 
department — and record numbers on welfare. What’s 
happened, instead of helping them out, he’s setting policies 
which have just hurt the situation, a policy of high 
unemployment and low wages. 
 
And that’s going to reflect on every one of the members here. 
It’s reflecting on them already, but particularly it will reflect on 
the members that are in the cities. And I say the member from 
Regina Wascana and the member from Regina South and the 
member from Saskatoon . . . Saskatoon Mayfair, I believe it is. 
Why? Because they’re closest and they’re the ones that have to 
deal directly with the people in their constituencies who end up 
in the situation of poverty. 
 
I’m going to go through a few clippings, Mr. Speaker, a few 
clippings about what has been reported about the minister, and 
I’m just going to do some of these selectively about this 
minister. And that’s why I tell you, that’s why I tell you that 
what you’ve got to do is you’ve either got to work on the 
minister to change his attitude about how he deals with people, 
or convince the Premier to change his portfolio, because that 
thing is not working. 
 

Here is an editorial from the Star-Phoenix, June 14, 1989, and 
the headline is “Losing touch with reality.” And here’s the 
opening statement. It says, and I quote, with your indulgence, 
Mr. Speaker: 

 
When will Social Services Minister Grant Schmidt 
recognize people in this province are suffering from 
serious poverty, (and) not merely a collective inability to 
budget? 
 

Why did they say that in this particular Star-Phoenix editorial? 
Because they quoted the minister glibly saying this, that: 
 

“The people of Saskatchewan are not living in poverty,”. . . 
 

That’s what he said. That’s a quote of the minister. Somehow 
he seems to have ignored the fact that a single person earning a 
minimum wage makes about $1,600 less than the poverty line. 
Somehow he’s missed that point altogether. 
 
You know it’s interesting, Mr. Minister, that just recently, 
following that by three days, following that article, there was a 
cartoon in the Leader-Post of June 17 and this cartoon has got 
two figures in it here. It’s got one figure representing somebody 
that’s poor, with patches all over him, and then there’s another 
person here that’s sort of dressed as a voodoo magician. And 
this voodoo magician is waving his hands at this person that’s 
poor here, and he’s got his eyes blinded, as our minister does, 
and this voodoo magician says: 
 

Ali zama, inkadoo (or something like that) . . . There is no 
poverty and there is no you! 
 

Now written in alongside this cartoon here, Mr. Speaker, is the 
sign advertising this magician, this magician trying to make this 
poor person disappear. And the sign advertises “The Amazing 
Grant Schmidt’s Disappearing Act.” He wants them to 
disappear, or he believes they’re disappearing. 
 
That’s why I tell you that you’ve got to get a hold of him, 
you’ve got to get a hold of him and change his attitude on that 
because it reflects on every one of you, particularly the city 
members where these fellows live, particularly on them. You’ve 
got to get a hold of the minister and get his attitude changed. 
Get it changed from kicking them when they’re down to giving 
them a helping hand. You’ve got to help folks along. That’s the 
Christian attitude. 
 
Now there’s another editorial here that I want to . . . no, I’ll 
leave this one alone. This is the one I want to get at here, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is from the May 10 issue of ’89 of the 
Star-Phoenix. And this one relates to another area that the 
minister was responsible for, and it’s dealing with day care. 
And the headline here, and the headline is “Schmidt naive,” and 
the lead line is: 
 

There is still an acute need for rural day care services 
despite what (Social Services minister) seems to think. 

 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2055 
 

And his name is mentioned in there too, but I don’t want to 
belabour the point here. 
 
What I’m getting at, Mr. Speaker, is the minister has been 
known not only to kick those that are poor when they’re down, 
but here is a situation of day care . . . a lot of situations in the 
province of Saskatchewan, not only in the cities where there is 
an increased need for day care. 
 
There is, in my own home town, been a pressing need for a 
day-care licence at the technical institute, the Woodland 
Campus, and it took the minister opposite, the Minister of 
Education, I guess a year and a half, and I tried to help him out 
with this, but the Minister of Social Services was absolutely too 
stubborn. It wasn’t until he . . . to provide a day-care licence at 
Woodland, he was unable to succeed, so I think he ought to 
understand what I’m talking about that we’ve got to get the 
Premier to change this fellow’s portfolio. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now it’s fixed. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well the minister says now it’s been fixed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well sure it has. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Yes, I hope it has, and I record you on that, 
Mr. Minister of Education from Weyburn. The Minister of 
Education from Weyburn almost . . . says that the day-care 
situation has been fixed, and it’s supposed to come into place, I 
understand, July 1. Is that not true — July 1? That’s when he 
was quoted for the day that it’s supposed to take place, that he’s 
supposed to give us a licence. 
 
Now the Minister of Social Services was begged and pleaded 
with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the hon. member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The point of order is this, that in the 
Legislative Assembly, any member or each side wishing to 
speak has an opportunity to do so in debate, and to speak 
through you. Having said that, I think that a good heckle and 
bon mot, a good word is always in order because it enlivens the 
debate. But the incessant, aimless, and brainless chatter from 
the member of Weyburn is certainly not in order, and I would 
ask you to bring him to order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s point of order is well 
taken. Hon. members should not be interrupting the speaker on 
a constant basis. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that very 
thoughtful ruling. I appreciate it. It makes it a lot easier to go on 
with what I have to say. 
 
I want to carry on, Mr. Speaker, advising the members opposite 
about the difficulties that is being caused to the  

many people in Saskatchewan by the present Minister of Social 
Services, and in turn, the difficulties that are being caused 
politically for the members sitting opposite, by the attitudes that 
he displays. 
 
See, over the last year — and I’ve indicated here several 
examples of clippings of the attitudes that the Minister of Social 
Services has and how his attitude seems to be very 
single-minded. He’s using a sort of a whip or a penal approach 
to trying to solve the problems in the province when he should 
know full well that those are not solutions. 
 
I have an article here before me of April 20, ’89, and this is 
again from the Star-Phoenix and it’s on the third page. And the 
headline reads: “Welfare recipients lash out at Schmidt.” And 
again in this article, the lead sentence says: “Grant Schmidt has 
found just another way to penalize people on social assistance 
by making parents line up to get welfare cheques . . .” a certain 
recipient by the name of Betty Sammy said Wednesday. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this thing sort of develop over a 
year or two years of how it continually tries to use a sort of a 
disciplinary approach, and in some cases a discipline is what’s 
needed. But I say the discipline that’s needed has got to be 
internal, because it never works if it’s external. You know what 
happens; you know full well. 
 
And anybody that’s dealt with Social Services or dealt with the 
class-room or dealt with people knows that the best kind of 
discipline is internal discipline. And trying to do something like 
this, by making people line up for their cheques or by reducing 
their cheques just doesn’t help people, doesn’t help people at 
all. And surely the objective of the Department of Social 
Services should be to help people, to give them a helping hand 
when they’re in trouble. And what is he doing? — the exact 
opposite. 
 
Sometimes when the minister has been confronted on this, on 
his attacks on people on welfare or people on food banks or 
people that are perhaps of a different colour, then his answer 
has been rather interesting. Here’s one headline which kind of 
illustrates his point of view, or illustrates what kind of a defence 
he uses. And this is his response to some people who accused 
him of being prejudiced against homosexuals. His reply was, 
the minister’s reply was, as this heading says, “Rules of God 
dominate homosexuality decision.” The man goes and hides 
behind his interpretation of God. Now that’s a very, very 
dangerous thing to do as a politician. Some of the greatest, 
gravest crimes in the world have been created by politicians 
who have hidden behind the word of God, so-called, or their 
version of God. 
 
The Ayatollah Khomeini used God at every step of the turn, 
every step he went, to justify what he did, to justify every . . . 
and it’s simply unacceptable in this country to turn, any time 
you’ve got a losing argument, to turn and give an interpretation, 
your own interpretation of a view of God. 
 
(1630) 
 
You know, around the world there’s as many views of God as 
there are nations, and some of the views of God  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2056 
 

that have been used to justify wars or homicides are just 
completely irrational to us here in Canada. So in the same turn 
it’s just wrong — wrong, I say — for a politician in 
Saskatchewan to discriminate and justify some kind of 
discrimination on the basis of his religious views, not if you’re 
a representative or a minister of the Crown. 
 
Your values come from that. I understand that, and I think we 
all understand that. But to justify some kind of a put-down and 
say that that’s because a person doesn’t understand God just is 
not right. You see, it’s very difficult for somebody that would 
have a slightly different background — many people in this 
country who don’t necessarily have the same Christian 
background that I have — to be lashed out at with using my 
Christian values. We’re at a situation where we’ve got to try to 
learn to live together regardless of what our interpretation of 
God is. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, enough about the minister himself. I simply 
want to close this portion of my address by asking the members 
opposite, particularly again I say, the members from the cities, 
the member from Regina and that growing city of Weyburn, to 
carry the message to the minister and ask him to just change his 
attitude as to how he’s dealing with the people that are poor. 
And if he can’t do that, take the message to the Premier, 
because that’s got to change. Otherwise not only is it that the 
people aren’t benefitting, those people that he’s supposed to be 
serving, but also it’s going to hurt you fellows in your own 
seats. 
 
I now turn, Mr. Speaker, to some of the problems that people 
are faced with in this province, and I’m going to speak mostly 
about things that I heard and was advised of at a forum that my 
colleague and I sponsored in Prince Albert on March 4. And we 
did this in response to the great number of calls that we were 
getting in our office about what was happening in the 
Department of Social Services and what was happening in . . . 
two people who had to go to . . . who found themselves in a 
position out of work or found themselves in a position going to 
a food bank. So what we did is we invited people from various 
agencies, social service agencies in town, governmental and 
non-governmental, to attend a forum and just give us some 
points of view. 
 
And at this forum we were asking them for suggestions of what 
could be done to help the situation and help their situation or 
the situation of people they were working with. And even 
though we did ask him for that specifically, we found that 
people repeatedly wanted to mention, in addition to just 
solutions, they wanted us to understand they still didn’t believe 
that legislators understood the situation that they were in. They 
didn’t believe that we could really help them until we got a real 
good grasp of what they were faced with. 
 
We know that we’ll . . . we had the statistics before us before 
we started out. We knew that there were 40,000 people in 
Saskatchewan who were depending on the services provided by 
the food bank. We knew that nearly half of them, 45 per cent of 
these people, were children. Those are the statistics. They really 
can’t be denied; they’re there. They’re there for anyone to see; 
they’re there for anyone to question. But once you see a statistic  

like that, I guess it’s incumbent upon legislators like you and I 
to try to do something about it. 
 
We knew another statistic, that there were 64,600 people or 
children in Saskatchewan — that’s 25 . . . or a little over a 
quarter of the children in Saskatchewan — that are living in 
poverty at this stage. Those are rather alarming, so it was rather 
incumbent upon us to try to effect some ways of dealing with it. 
 
We knew that there was an increase in the number of people 
that were receiving social services from 1982 to ’87. It peaked 
in ’87 and I think it’s gone down slightly since then. But there 
was an increase by 13,665 beneficiaries, and that’s people who 
were taking social service in Saskatchewan between 1982 and 
1987. Rather a strong indictment in itself on the policies of the 
government which claims that what they’re trying to do is 
improve things here. 
 
As my colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland mentioned, there 
was an increase in the food bank usage in the province. I want 
to mention that specifically in the Prince Albert food bank, 
there were an average of 1,021 families per month that came for 
help, for assistance from the food bank. And this was up from 
924 per month in 1987, and up from 689 a month in 1986. 
 
So the trend is rather alarming. We were seeing a trend where 
the number of people attending the food banks, instead of sort 
of rising and then levelling off and perhaps falling, we saw the 
continual rise of people going to the food bank, a continual rise 
of people accessing the food bank. 
 
It’s interesting that we understand exactly how it is that people 
get food from the food bank. It’s not just a matter of people 
arriving at the food bank and saying, I need some food. You 
just don’t get food from the food bank that way. To get food 
there you have to go through a referral, and most of the referrals 
in our city came from the Indian-Metis Friendship Centre or the 
Salvation Army or the Native Co-ordinating Council or a 
couple of the churches. 
 
So these people were first of all screened, so it’s a matter of not 
. . . I don’t want anybody to have the impression that the food 
bank statistics go up just because somebody happens to be 
walking down the street and instead of going and spending his 
or her money on a hamburger at a local cafe, they can walk to 
the food bank. It’s not quite that simple. 
 
The people that issue the references use a screening process, 
and they attempt to have only one food bank service per month, 
although at times they tell me that that’s pretty difficult to do. In 
some cases, they kind of feel that if there’s children involved, 
that they would like to do otherwise. But they try to employ the 
policy of only letting people go to the food bank once per 
month, although when they do visit the food bank, they do give 
them enough food to try to get them over till the end, until they 
get their next bit of income. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we knew those statistics, we knew what was 
happening. And so we were asking for what  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2057 
 

people could do, what could be done, and what kind of help we 
could give. There’s one of the suggestions, one of the things 
that was brought to our attention was brought to our attention 
by a Catholic priest from St. Mark’s Church who has set up a 
soup kitchen on Saturdays along with the help of his social 
action committee, instigated by their social action committee. 
And there every Saturday, they simply put up a sign, and people 
from the community who want to come and have soup and 
sandwiches can come in and help them. 
 
Now at first they thought that perhaps this would be a solution 
to some of the cases of poverty that they had become aware of 
over the last few winters, because in this particular case there 
were a lot of . . . in many cases the priest was telling me that 
people would come and knock on his door because his manse is 
right beside the church. So in that case it was very handy, and 
people knew exactly where the priest lived. 
 
And he said he kept getting calls, and he’d get them at all times 
of night. People would come to him, and quite often they’d 
have young children, and he was put in a situation where he’d 
end up feeding them out of his own manse. And he thought that 
perhaps there was something he could do. So he organized this 
particular kitchen, or with the help of his parishioners, 
organized this kitchen. 
 
He came to us and told us that as a result of this soup kitchen, 
that one thing he’d learned for sure was that the soup kitchen 
was not the answer. He says, it may be a temporary solution, he 
says, and it’s helping me personally because I no longer feel 
that I have to turn people away, but it’s not the solution. 
 
And he says he hoped that we were able to do something that 
they wouldn’t have to offer this soup kitchen, or have this soup 
kitchen every week. And he asked us to aim to create a system 
which would create jobs for the poor, where they would get 
some dignity from a job creation program. And that is what the 
critic for this area, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, 
dealt with extensively in his address. 
 
We had a representative from the Gabriel Dumont Institute who 
came in, and he indicated that as far as he could see, that for 
those people who were in poverty and whose families had been 
in poverty for more than one generation, that we had to look at 
some kind of a different structure than we had now; that 
certainly the existing structure, our existing social structure and 
social service structure simply wasn’t getting people out of the 
poverty cycle. And he says, we just have to admit, he says, that 
there are things that are not working. Throw them out the 
window. Or at least while we have them there, the social service 
net is not working, that we have to be bold and try getting some 
new structures in place. 
 
Now unfortunately these things are hard to come by. And he 
admitted that, that it was difficult to come up with a new 
structure, but he says, and particularly — and he was 
representing to some extent the native community — he said 
that they’re trying very hard to get a better understanding of 
how they can become self-governing in their own sense, 
self-governing for their own families, meaning that how they 
could become self-sustaining,  

and that that’s the way that they were now trying to define their 
system of self-government, or their concept of self-government. 
 
We had a representative from the YWCA come in. The 
representative from the YWCA, the Young Women’s Christian 
Association — a very long-standing and respected institution 
not only in our city but across the province, across the country, 
across the free world, Mr. Speaker — and they had been dealing 
with several problems that are associated with poverty and with 
violence, and there were a couple of suggestions they made. 
 
One of the topics they dealt with was the topic of teen 
pregnancy and the need for some type of a system to help teen 
mothers not get into the welfare cycle. They themselves have a 
program at the YWCA, a teen mother program, where they try, 
and I think are quite successful, in teaching and helping young 
teen mothers with parenting skills. 
 
(1645) 
 
The thing that they feel that is missing . . . two things that they 
feel is missing: first of all, is their inability to help all of those 
that come to them because there is the cost of just running the 
YW, and they said if there was some way of helping just to 
meet the costs, they could help with a lot more; and secondly, 
the problem of once the teen moms leave them, where do they 
go. 
 
And their suggestion was that the government has a role to play 
to help here, because too many of the teen mothers end up 
going into a poverty cycle where they end up staying at home, 
not having any training, or not having access to training 
institutions or work. And it’s work really that many of them 
would like on a part-time basis and where their children would 
have access to day care. They cited the need for more day care 
centres. 
 
And they thought that there was a long way that we could go, 
and they didn’t want to see Social Services money shrinking in 
this regard; they wanted to see it increased because they felt that 
if they could just give this person a start, the person would not 
be a burden on society, number one; and secondly, wouldn’t 
feel that they were a burden on society. And with this attitude 
they would be able to get up and out of the system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are quite a few other comments I could 
make on this. There may be other members that want to speak 
on this topic. I will just then make my final remarks on it within 
the next minute then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I started out by saying that one of the real difficult things in our 
province, the greatest problem that people face with respect to 
our Social Services net is the attitude and the methods being 
portrayed by the existing minister. And I stand by that, Mr. 
Speaker, I stand by that. 
 
Those things have got to change and there’s two ways to change 
it. Either the minister has got to change his attitude, or the 
Premier’s got to change the minister, one or the other. Because 
we have given him enough, more than enough chance to prove 
that the system that he’s  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2058 
 

working on could succeed. And clearly it hasn’t. It’s been 
amply demonstrated. I used several examples today, and the 
member from Saskatoon University has given more than ample 
examples on this. 
 
The second thing I’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is dealt with some of 
the possible solutions, some of the solutions that were 
mentioned. It’s a topic that we could and should be spending 
more time on in this legislature, particularly the solution as 
related to the need for a full employment policy, something that 
the New Democrats and the members on this side advocate and 
stand for and will continue to fight for and we will put into 
place when we knock these people out of government in the 
next election. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s nearing the 5 o’clock mark, 
and it’s just too bad that the members opposite would not give 
people, the members on the government side, more opportunity 
to speak instead of stalling procedures in this legislature and 
filibustering, particularly on their motions. 
 
I want to indicate that they do not want us speaking on the 
government side of this House because there is a good story to 
tell in regards to what the government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. What is the point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member is indicating 
that we don’t give him opportunity to speak. Clearly, it’s 
private members’ day. If he wants to speak the clock till 5 
o’clock and come back tonight and speak from 7 till 10, nobody 
can deny him that right. So if he wants to speak, he has every 
opportunity to do so. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The point of order is not well taken. 
It’s a dispute between two members. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Anyway, I will tell you that there is definitely 
a good, good story to tell in regards to our minister and the 
Progressive Conservative government. 
 
I want to indicate to you first of all, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member from Prince Albert, in starting in his address, has not 
even got his story straight. In fact, he hasn’t even got his 
member from Saskatoon University straight. He refers to him as 
the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. I want to correct this to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to indicate that the member from Saskatoon University 
had been speaking, and I would like to indicate to him that the 
member from Saskatoon University was not at all accurate, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to indicate to you that when the member from 
Saskatoon University had indicated that he was getting at least 
80 to 120 calls a day in his riding, I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that over a period of a year, that would be 43,000 calls 
to his constituency office. 
 
I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that it does not surprise me that 
the member opposite speaks this way, because basically we 
know that when he’s quoting from his  

statistics they are NDP statistics and they are not accurate 
statistics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that when 
you’re looking at 43,000 calls to his office and the numbers, 
even on the NDP statistics, the numbers that that would 
generate, it does not even come up to the numbers that he’s 
talking about. So it’s just that that I’d like to point that out to 
the people in our province here. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that when we’re talking about the 
member from Saskatoon University indicating that he, with 
these referrals, that with writing letters to the Minister of Social 
Services’ office and he is not getting any replies, I want to put a 
challenge to the member from Saskatoon University. I want to 
challenge him to table the letters in this House, on the floor of 
this legislature, to table those letters that he’s not getting 
answers to. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that he is not truthful when he’s 
indicating that. I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member from Saskatoon University would get any of those 
answers. Any client-related letter that is sent to the Minister of 
Social Services’ office would have a reply, Mr. Speaker, and I 
challenge him to put any of those letters on this table in this 
Assembly if that statement is not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, this government has worked 
hard. It has worked hard to develop new programs, new 
incentives for people to be able to have jobs in this province. 
 
I want to also indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that it has never 
been . . . And I’ve done so in other of my presentations in this 
forum, that I’ve indicated that on several occasions that this 
province has never had over a million people in the province of 
Saskatchewan in its entire history except under our 
administration, the Progressive Conservative government. 
 
I want to say to your, sir, that these people are not . . . the 
newcomers that have come into Saskatchewan are not on 
welfare, that they are working. Our work-force has never been 
larger in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say, I want to say, because it is a short period here, 
that when it comes to the direction of this administration and 
the incentive programs that we’ve set forth, I want to indicate to 
you that in housing, particularly housing, is just been a 
remarkable industry in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve 
had new assistance for first-time new home buyers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I to just want to indicate to you that there’s been hundreds 
of thousands of dollars that have been invested into housing in 
this province through just those particular types of programs. 
And I would just name you in my riding alone, in my riding 
alone, Mr. Speaker, there was $336,000 just in the build-a-home 
program, for instance, you know, and that’s just my riding of 
the Cut Knife-Lloydminster constituency. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2059 
 

I want to indicate to you that on a new-home buyer’s program 
there was a 3, almost a $400,000 input into my riding alone. 
These kinds of housing programs are for families. They’re there 
to help the families, young and older. And I want to indicate to 
the member from Saskatoon University that when he does make 
statements in regards to the housing and things like this, that 
this information is available. It shows the hundreds of 
thousands and millions of dollars that are spent in the housing 
programs in this province from year to year to year. 
 
And I say to you, sir, when you speak in this forum, in this 
legislature, speak with facts, speak with these facts that are 
information that are publicly able to be . . . are publicly 
documented. We deal with them from day to day. And, sir, 
when you’re using these kinds of information, use the factual 
information, not the facts from an NDP rhetoric type of thing, 
fabricated facts . . . or statistics, I should say. 
 
When our government had implemented the welfare reform 
program, sir, I want to indicate to you that that has put many 
people that were in the welfare role back into the work-force. 
It’s given them opportunities that they thought they might not 
of ever have had. And I think that’s important, and I think you 
ought to give the government credit for that by putting that kind 
of an incentive and that kind of a feeling back into those people 
that have taken advantage of that program. I believe it’s in the 
neighbourhood of thousands of people already now back into 
the work-force because of that kind of programming. And I 
don’t think you should stand in this Assembly and condemn any 
government for doing those kinds of things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it was 
the NDP that lost government in 1982 because they turned their 
backs on the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I want to 
say to you that they voted for this government because they 
knew that there had to have been a change in this province; they 
knew that there had to be some other answer to the direction 
that this province was being taken into. 
 
And all the words and debate and verbatim that has taken place 
in this forum here today has shown and told us one thing, Mr. 
Speaker, has told us and indicated to us that the NDP would go 
back to the same old rhetoric prior to 1982. I want to say that 
the member is wrong by staying on that train of thought, 
because he knew he was wrong last time, and he knows he’s 
going to be wrong in the future if he stays on that sort of a 
track. 
 
I say to you, sir, the member from Saskatoon University, that if 
you’re going to speak in this forum, you’d better hand out a lot 
more of a program incentive to the public and the people of this 
province before they’d ever vote for you, sir, and to get you 
back in the government, because there is nothing there. They 
don’t want to return to the old rhetoric that they had to put up 
with prior to 1982. 
 
Sir, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for 
allowing me to speak, and I move to adjourn debate. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would seek leave of the Assembly to move into Committee of 
Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Being near 5 o’clock, the committee is 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


