


















































March 14, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 14, 1989 
 

93 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
this House, a founding member of the Women’s Alliance Party 
of Iceland, Magdalina Schlram. Ms. Schlram is a well-known 
journalist, Mr. Speaker, civic politician and feminist from 
Reykjavik, who has undertaken a number of speaking 
engagements in our province, and I’m very pleased to have the 
honour of introducing Ms. Schlram. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with my colleague in welcoming our guest from Iceland. 
Mr. Speaker, Iceland has always been very dear to my heart as 
my father’s mother and father both came from Iceland. My 
grandfather, Bjarni Tomasson, was born in Hunovatn, Iceland, 
and my grandmother, Steinum Jonson, was born in Akureyri, 
Iceland. As you can see, our name has been Anglicized, and I 
may change it again, change it back. 
 
My father was always very proud of Iceland’s accomplishments 
and of Icelandic people and their history, and up until his death 
in 1983 he was active in the Icelandic community and spoke the 
language fluently. 
 
On behalf of myself and all the members, we welcome you to 
Saskatchewan and Canada, and we sincerely hope your visit 
will be rewarding and enjoyable. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I, too, would like to introduce to hon. 
members this afternoon some guests from far-away places and 
not so far. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery we have with us Dora 
and Ernie Rice from White Rock, B.C., Muriel Clay from 
Surrey, B.C., and, from down under, as it were, Donald and 
Margaret Sinclair from Bright, Australia. Also accompanying 
them today is Marilyn Rice. 
 
They were in Regina this past week attending a wedding on the 
weekend, and now they are touring the city before returning 
home. I might add that I attended that wedding and it was a 
good wedding, indeed. 
 
Please welcome the guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Employment of Former MLAs and Others 
 
Mr. Anguish: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Acting 
Premier this afternoon. And people are becoming increasingly 
concerned about the government’s record of  

corruption and waste, mismanagement and patronage, and 
what’s most bothersome is your policy of hire a hack a week so 
the employment rates won’t peak. And could the Premier or the 
Acting Premier confirm that Myles Morin, an ex-PC MLA, is 
the new Superintendent of Pensions in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if that is in fact the case, 
I’m not aware of it, Mr. Speaker. I will undertake to take notice 
of that and bring that answer back tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, as a supplementary, we would 
like also for the hon. member to bring back on notice, if he 
could tell us how much money Mr. Morin will receive from his 
new appointment, and will this amount be in addition to the 
amount he currently receives from Pemberton, Houston, 
Willoughby in the province of Saskatchewan. And finally, if he 
could tell us why this wasn’t an open competition held for the 
Superintendent of Pensions, to at least give some sort of face of 
cleansing to this blatant legacy of patronage in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I only respond the same 
way, by saying I’m not aware that this in fact has happened. I 
will undertake to take notice of this and I will bring it back. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that last week we 
took some questions from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, but in his absence, to the acting Premier — the acting 
deputy, I suppose. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can confirm 
for this House that one Larry Birkbeck — you will know him as 
the former PC MLA for Moosomin — is now employed with 
the provincial Emergency Measures Organization as a 
federal-provincial liaison officer. And can you tell this House 
just what open competition was used to fill this position, and 
also can you tell us how Mr. Birkbeck’s extensive background 
as a dairy farmer qualifies him for this position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order! Order, order. Please be seated. 
Order. I’m having great difficulty hearing the Minister of 
Justice, and I’m sure most members in the House are, so would 
you please allow the minister to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let me 
respond to the question in the following way: the question was, 
does Mr. Larry Birkbeck work for the government of 
Saskatchewan? The answer is yes. And coming from the 
member from Regina Victoria, I would pose the question back 
to him. Did he work for the previous NDP government, and the 
answer’s also yes, Mr. Speaker. I say that’s hypocrisy in a 
question proposed  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

94 
 

by the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplementary for the minister, and I wonder if he would tell 
this Assembly what level of salary and benefits the people of 
Saskatchewan are paying Mr. Birkbeck? And can you indicate 
why the taxpayers should be so gladdened to see him at the 
public trough and at this latest elevation from the private to the 
public sector? Can you tell us that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Question period cannot 
continue if members will be interrupted when they’re asking the 
question, or when they’re trying to answer it. Therefore I ask 
the hon. members for their co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
question, if this becomes the wish of everyone in the House, 
they can say that Mr. Birkbeck is working for the government. 
Mr. Birkbeck is working for the government. If we want to go 
through a list of people that worked for the previous 
administration, I can go through the list, Mr. Speaker, as I have 
it here. I don’t think that serves any great purpose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck works for the Government of Saskatchewan. He 
has worked for the Government of Saskatchewan for some 
time. He’s in the emergency measures area, and quite frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Birkbeck is doing a very good job in that 
field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Acting Premier, and it also deals with your 
government’s hiring practices. Can you confirm that one Jack 
Cennon is now on staff in the Prince Albert Premier’s office? 
Can you tell us: (a) what his duties are; (b) what his 
qualifications are; and what his salary and benefits are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware . . . I am 
not aware that Mr. Jack Cennon is working for the Government 
of Saskatchewan. I will undertake to find out if that’s true. I do 
not . . . I am not aware of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you. Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. High 
paying patronage jobs go on and on, Mr. Speaker, at public 
expense. Mr. Cennon, a defeated Tory candidate in the 1988 
federal election, joins Gord Dobrowolsky, another defeated 
Tory candidate in the 1984 election, as staff in the Premier’s 
office. Do you have any more defeated candidates, Mr. Acting 
Premier, from that area you intend to move into that office? 
And will we be stuck with another renovation bill of $86,000 to 
renovate the office and make more room for patronage hacks? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Gord Dobrowolsky is in 
fact working. He worked in the Premier’s office for some time; 
he now works in the Premier’s office in Prince Albert. I wonder 
if the hon. member would suggest that instead of us hiring Gord 
Dobrowolsky to work in the Premier’s office we should hire 
somebody like Don Cody. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also to 
the acting Premier today, Mr. Speaker, and I draw his attention 
to return no. 2 which was filed in this House . . . tabled in this 
House on Friday. And yet another example, Mr. Acting 
Premier, of that phenomenon, down goes a Tory, up pops a job. 
 
As I look at the return, Mr. Acting Premier, I see listed as a 
consultant for the Department of Trade and Investment for the 
period of September ’87 to May ’88, one Stanley Korchinski. 
Now Stanley received $45,000 to act as federal-provincial 
liaison for eight months. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Acting Premier, is this: this 
Stanley Korchinski, is this the same Stanley Korchinski, former 
member of parliament for Mackenzie? And I ask you as well, 
Mr. Acting Premier, other than his political connections, what 
were his qualifications that merited this job, Mr. Acting 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, one Stanley Korchinski, 
former MP for some 27 years in the province of Saskatchewan, 
was in fact put on contract by the department of economic 
development and trade. I was then responsible for it. His job 
was basically to determine intelligence with regard to 
parliament and report back to us on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would suggest to the members opposite, should the time 
ever come when they are government, and should the time ever 
come when someone like Les Benjamin retires from politics, I 
would suggest that the members opposite would probably hire 
Les Benjamin, just as we hired Stan Korchinski, experienced 
members of parliament, to give them information as to what’s 
going on down there. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
time will come when the people of Saskatchewan will find out 
how this side will conduct itself as the Government of 
Saskatchewan and that time will come soon. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d simply like to ask the hon. 
member to indicate whether he’s asking a supplementary or a 
new question. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I said before, supplementary, and I 
still say that, and I say to the minister as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of Saskatchewan will discover soon enough how the 
people on this side will conduct themselves for the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

95 
 

Mr. Hagel: — The same return, Mr. Minister, same return. One 
name, Ken Cheveldayoff, $6,800 for industrial and economic 
policy consulting. Now this Mr. Ken Cheveldayoff, I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, is this the same Ken Cheveldayoff who was the 
head of the PC Party youth wing? And again I ask you: other 
than his political connections, what were his qualifications that 
qualified him for this job at the cost to the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with regard to 
Kenny Cheveldayoff, he is a very accomplished student at the 
University of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And a Tory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well maybe he’s Tory. Well what’s 
wrong with that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I said, Mr. Speaker, that I wasn’t going 
to go through this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated, Mr. Speaker, I preferred not 
to go through the list, but I’m going to go through the list for a 
short period of time here, Mr. Speaker, to draw the analogy and 
show the hypocrisy. This is at the time of the NDP government 
between 1971 and 1982, and I’ll just go through a list of some 
people that were . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same 
minister and it also refers to the practising or hiring of the 
government opposite. Mr. Speaker, we note that there are no 
jobs for our young people who have to leave the province, but 
we have lots of jobs for retired Tory MPs. And I want to ask the 
minister: is it true, Mr. Minister, that you have found a job for 
John Gormley in the privatization department in your 
government? 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t it true that one of the objectives of your 
privatization department is that the private sector is better than 
the public sector? Don’t you think that it would have been 
better to allow Mr. Gormley to practise that philosophy in the 
private sector rather than hiring him in the privatization 
department of your government. Don’t you think that you 
should at least do that much, is allow him to practise his 
philosophy rather than being at the public trough? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think that in order to 
respond to that question, I’m going to try to . . . permit me to 
take a little time to respond to this particular question. John 
Gormley . . . of course we look at John Gormley in this 
government the same way that the previous government looked 
at Doug Archer, looked at Pattie Atkinson, looked at Chris 
Bannerman, looked at John  

Burton, looked at Frank Fox, looked at Don Cody, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Once again we are unable 
to hear the minister at all. And I think that all members wish to 
hear his answer and I will give him a few seconds now to wrap 
it up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I wonder if they didn’t hear, Mr. 
Speaker, if I could be permitted to go back over that list. They 
also included Don Faris, Margaret . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I believe the minister has 
made his point. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a supplementary 
question. Mr. Minister, I didn’t know that all of those people 
were defeated MPs as Mr. Gormley was. Mr. Gormley, who has 
been rejected by the people, and as somebody else indicated 
before, you people found a job for him. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you mind telling this House, would you 
mind telling this House, what Mr. Gormley’s qualifications 
were for the job, how much he is being paid for the job, and 
whether or not there was open competition for that job? Would 
you answer those three questions? How much is he being paid? 
What are his qualifications? And was there open competition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, again permit me some 
time to respond to that because also we used the same rules that 
were used by the previous government to employ one Glenn 
Hagel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order, order. I do 
believe that the minister has made his point, and I don’t think 
it’s a forum where we wish to read whatever number of names 
he has. However, if he has something to add to it, I’ll allow him 
to add to that now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I was going to get into the Koskie 
family. Would you consider adding that to it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Acting 
Premier, and it’s related to yet more political appointments of 
defeated PC hacks. Mr. Minister, your government’s job 
creation record is the worst in the country for ordinary people in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — But it is by far the best job creation program 
in the country for defeated and rejected blue Tories. Your 
economic program has become a career enhancement program 
for defeated Conservative candidates. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, pertains to one Myrna Petersen, yet 
another defeated candidate in the Regina Elphinstone 
by-election of May, 1988, who you appointed last year to the 
Rent Appeal Commission of  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

96 
 

Saskatchewan. Could you tell the people of Saskatchewan what 
qualifications she brings to this very high paid job other than 
being a defeated PC candidate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I simply make the point 
the following way. I look across the floor and ask myself, how 
many of the members sitting in their seats today, many of them 
posing the questions, in their previous life before this one in 
fact were political appointees to a government 1971 to 1984. 
Now people that were in fact hired by a government in a 
political capacity, Mr. Speaker, I think they’re hardly the people 
to call the kettle black. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, again to the 
minister. He’s obviously very sensitive about this topic because 
of the number of people they’ve hired. Mr. Speaker, Myrna 
Petersen was totally rejected by the people of Elphinstone last 
May. She had the weakest performance of any PC candidate in 
Saskatchewan. In fact, she received a mere 12 per cent of the 
vote, and in fact 88 per cent of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe the hon. 
member is now getting into debate more than getting to his 
question. However, I recognize the member Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, after this performance, you 
reward her with taxpayers’ money. Then you appoint the 
Saskatoon Eastview’s PC campaign manager, Don Morgan, as 
director of legal aid. Why would you reward, Mr. Minister, 
these two political hacks after such poor performances, and 
more importantly, what did these two people do for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan to make us want to pick up the 
expensive tabs for the rewards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I simply answer the 
question this way. You know, question period is the burning 
issue of the day, and here we have members across the House, 
and I would say almost half of them in their previous life — 
more than half of them in their previous life were doing a job 
that they now complain about that somebody from our party is 
doing when they were in government. Now I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, how credible is that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is hypocrisy at its greatest. Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite worked for a plan in a political capacity with 
the government. The reality is, people do work in a political 
capacity. They should recognize it. They blame us for it; they 
have done it themselves in spades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, by way of background, the difference is, is that these 
members went on to success politically; yours went on to 
success in the government, having been defeated. That’s the 
difference. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order! I’d just like to 
once more remind the hon. member that we should allow the 
questioner the privilege of asking his question without hollering 
him down. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address my 
question to the Minister of Justice. Today’s list, that we have 
produced here, indicates that there are a large number of 
defeated MPs, MLAs, and candidates who are living high on 
the hog at public expense. 
 
But that’s not all. I want to go through the list that hasn’t been 
asked today, Mr. Speaker. The list includes Paul Schoenhals, 
chairman of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan); 
Gordon Dirks, who consulted for the Department of Education; 
Tim Embury, who also held a consulting contract; Sid Dutchak 
was president of SHC (Saskatchewan Housing Corporation); 
good old Louis Domotor, who works for the property 
management; Paul Rousseau, who has a comfortable job as 
agent-general in London; Gord Currie . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I realize 
that the member could probably read names . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — However, question period is not a forum 
where we simply read names, lists of names which may or may 
not be relevant, but an opportunity to ask your question. I would 
ask the member to do that now. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After that 
encouragement, I do want to ask the question. If you want to 
pursue your privatization mania that you people are bent on, 
why don’t you try privatizing this group of defeated MLAs, 
Tory candidates, and turn that money over to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan for the drought payment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member indicated 
— and I don’t know whether he meant to or not — but he 
indicated that one Gordon Currie, a defeated candidate. Gordon 
Currie was not a defeated candidate. My guess that he stood for 
election almost any place in the province he would not be 
defeated. 
 
The hon. member also indicates that all of their people went on 
to greater things after politics. Well let’s go through the list. We 
got this Bill Knight, William Knight, former NDP MP. He want 
on to become the principal secretary to the then premier Allan 
Blakeney. He went on then, Mr. Speaker, to spearhead the 
campaign in 1982. Tremendous success. He went from there, 
Mr. Speaker, to head up Mr. Broadbent’s campaign in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Order. I 
realize that members on both sides can ask these types of 
questions and answer them all afternoon. I don’t think it’s really 
enhancing question period that much, and therefore I ask 
members on both sides to get to the questions and to the 
answers. 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

97 
 

Suggested Taxes on Financial Institutions 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to suggest to 
members opposite that you are sapping the strength of the 
Conservative Party. I have no idea why anyone would want to 
win an election on your behalf when you go on to a cushy 
$100,000 a year job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ve watched the Minister of Finance with 
mounting frustration watching these proceedings, and I’m going 
to give him an opportunity to enter the debate after a bit. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Finance. It has to do with a 
question which appears to have gone over the head of the 
Premier last Friday. Now I want to say an idea doesn’t have to 
gain altitude very fast to accomplish that feat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What went over the head of the Premier 
was a question having to do with Michael Wilson’s stated 
intention to impose a tax on financial institutions. As any 
number of studies have pointed out, that will be a direct 
addition to interest rates of about a quarter of a per cent. Indeed, 
the question is inspired by an article in the Globe and Mail, 
which suggests it will cost this country 45,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question has to do with the fact that you were 
in Ottawa recently, meeting with the Minister of Finance. Did 
you point out to the Minister of Finance how ill-conceived such 
an idea was, how difficult it would be for farmers and business 
people in this province to absorb an even more punishing 
interest rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can’t say I’ve ever had the hon. member’s 
problem of mounting frustration, but I will endeavour to answer 
the hon. member who just asked the question, who, Mr. 
Speaker, the hon. member being one of the defeated NDP 
candidates who subsequently got a government job at very high 
cost to the taxpayer . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The minister . . . 
Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the former 
defeated NDP and executive assistant, I would like to respond 
and advise, Mr. Speaker, that the discussions about the 
implications of a national sales tax have been ongoing for some 
time. We’ve discussed it in the last couple of sessions of the 
legislature. 
 
What I’ve indicated in the past, that the government’s position 
is that we want to see the proposals for a national sales tax 
before we take any position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked a speculative question as 
to the form of the national sales tax, and it has been made clear 
in public that we do not have nor does any province have the 
final definitive statement or the proposals from the national 
government. 
 
Secondly, I will indicate when it comes to the value  

added tax or a national sales tax being imposed on financial 
institutions, it is quite fair to say that in every country, I 
understand, that has imposed a value added tax, financial 
institutions have been exempt. I have no reason to believe that 
they wouldn’t be exempt under this, but again until such time as 
we get the final proposals, I’m just unable to comment. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Yesterday I went over some of the 
accomplishments of this government in health care, and before 
continuing, I’d like to briefly review some of those 
accomplishments. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, this government has increased 
spending on health care by some 68 per cent. It has built new 
hospitals, new nursing homes, new alcohol and drug abuse 
treatment centres, more rehabilitation facilities — more, Mr. 
Speaker, of almost everything. 
 
I’d like to comment for just a moment on the new alcohol and 
drug abuse treatment centre called Whitespruce, which is the 
first of its kind in Canada, and one of only two or three 
adolescent treatment centres for drug and alcohol abuse in 
North America. 
 
Mr. Gordon Currie, who was the former member from Regina 
Wascana, is running that operation, and in the course of slightly 
over a year has turned it into a fast moving facility which is 
housing somewhere in the neighbourhood of 20, 25 young 
people from throughout Saskatchewan needing alcohol and 
drug treatment. So the Whitespruce alcohol and drug adolescent 
treatment centre is one of a kind in Canada. We can be very 
proud of that accomplishment. 
 
We have added 2,000 new nursing home beds, which in context 
of the NDP moratorium, I guess, amounts to an infinite 
increase. It was a sad day in the late 1970s when the NDP 
decided to put a moratorium on nursing homes; when they 
decided that the elderly people of this province no longer 
needed to be in nursing homes; that beds weren’t necessary for 
the elderly people of this province, and put a moratorium on 
them. But when this government came into power in 1982, they 
said, enough of that; we’ve got to get some beds for the elderly 
people of the province. 
 
Is it enough? Probably not. We need more and we will have 
more, Mr. Speaker. But 2,000 new nursing home beds for the 
elderly people of this province, I think is a fine start, and there 
will be more. 
 
We have obtained CAT scanners, expanded open heart surgery, 
put in place a province-wide chiropody program, and built new 
cancer clinics. This Progressive  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

98 
 

Conservative government, Mr. Speaker; this government had 
the courage to end extra billing by doctors, of patients. And on 
that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment on the outrageous and 
frankly insulting remarks of the opposition. 
 
They’re trying to frighten people into believing that this 
government supports deterrent fees. Indeed, the Leader of the 
Opposition informed this House that his whole campaign would 
be based on deterrent fees and the destruction of medicare. Well 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP, in legalizing extra billing, 
the NDP were the ones who brought in deterrent fees. They like 
to talk up a storm and shout from the roof-tops, but they 
allowed patients to be extra billed for necessary medical 
expenses. This government put a stop to that. This government 
said no to the NDP practice of extra billing. The NDP, they are 
the government of extra billing, they are the government of 
deterrent fees, Mr. Speaker. Where was the outrage of the 
Leader of the Opposition when he was allowing patients to be 
charged directly for their care? 
 
The hypocrisy of it, Mr. Speaker, is simply unacceptable. And 
if you go down the record, you see it repeated over and over 
and over again — sheer, bold hypocrisy. On the treatment of 
farm families — hypocrisy; on public participation — 
hypocrisy; on uranium mining — hypocrisy; on public accounts 
— hypocrisy. 
 
My friend from Rosthern said it very well when he said the 
NDP is a party of blackmail and fear. But I think it is also 
necessary to say that they are, the clearest terms possible, the 
party of hypocrisy, and did we ever need a more clear 
demonstration of that than we saw in question period this 
afternoon. This is the party who wrote the book on patronage to 
their people. 
 
And you know we’ve had something like nine months now 
since the last session ended, and over this nine months we’ve 
had some serious issues have come forward to the people of this 
country, health care being one. Certainly free trade is one, 
public participation, day care. All of those are big and central 
issues of the day. Environment’s a central issue. And what are 
those people from across the way after nine months . . . they 
should fire their researchers and start all over again because 
they haven’t come up with one decent question in the days 
we’ve been sitting here. 
 
Surely whether or not Paul Schoenhals or Larry Birkbeck or 
some of these other people who were defeated candidates in the 
last election are the pressing issue of the day is mind-boggling, 
Mr. Speaker, just mind-boggling. They are so bankrupt of ideas 
that they have to resort to that kind of feeble questioning during 
. . . taking up the time of the people of the House. And I know 
that people watching on television must have been just aghast. 
And if you go back through the book, you will see that there 
hasn’t been one intelligent, one good question asked since this 
House sat last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has an admirable record and an 
ambitious plan. It is a record that I have recounted to you in 
some detail in terms of health care. And, Mr. Speaker, I think a 
look at the plan shows you the strong  

commitment of this government to continuing that strong 
record. 
 
The community care program is another health care first for the 
people of Saskatchewan, a proven plan that brings people 
together in the kind of co-operation that my colleague from 
Wilkie spoke of so eloquently yesterday: communities 
co-operating and building their future in health care and across 
the board, Mr. Speaker. And that is a good thing, a thing this 
government can be proud of. 
 
Let me give you another example of the co-operative principle 
at work in the health care field, Mr. Speaker. The new plastic 
health card is a good example. I know that you know who 
designed and implemented that card, Mr. Speaker, but I would 
like to inform the opposition. It was a co-operative — a 
co-operative that designed the new plastic health card. Mr. 
Speaker, Co-operators Data Services Limited did the work on 
the new plastic health card. 
 
And I can tell you that there’s some shock among members of 
the co-ops in this province that they would be accused by 
members of the NDP of trying to destroy medicare by working 
with the government to bring this world-class, first-of-its-kind 
technology to our province. It must be a shocking experience 
for the members of the co-ops in this province to feel that the 
people opposite are denigrating them for being involved in this 
kind of an operation. 
 
This co-operative not only put the new system in place, Mr. 
Speaker, but they will be operating it on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan on a permanent basis. They will maintain the 
computer system and make the system work. They will market 
that system into other provinces and the United States. 
 
And the NDP say that co-ops are destroying medicare because 
they’re working with the government, when indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, because they are co-operating . . . Co-operation works, 
Mr. Speaker. It works in health care and in all areas of building 
our province. 
 
The community care program announced in the throne speech is 
a major contribution to that great tradition. I watched last night 
on the news, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
making a presentation to the health care task force that parallels 
in a direct way the commitment of the throne speech to enhance 
the role of rural nurses in front line positions. 
 
Give the nurses the power and the skills to do more, and they 
will take on that challenge in a positive and co-operative way. 
The nurses of Saskatchewan want that opportunity, they want 
that responsibility, they want that challenge, and this 
government will give them that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased that the government has announced its intention to do 
precisely that. 
 
There are many other areas of excellence from the past seven 
years, and there’s much more in the current throne speech on 
the subject of health care. But I’d like to talk for a few minutes 
about a subject that I spent 25 years of my life reporting, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is the area of  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

99 
 

environment. The kinds of things the opposition would like to 
pretend are their concerns today, I was doing stories on with 
film and videotape some 25 years ago for the CBC. Sports may 
have been my beat, but the outdoors, recreation, wildlife 
habitat, the environment in general was my main interest and 
our family’s interest. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I observed and reported on 
the record of the previous government, the NDP, on 
environmental issues. And without being too specific, I will say 
they could have done a great deal more concerning wildlife 
habitat, water drainage, protection of endangered species, 
wetlands, and critical habitat. 
 
And of course any credibility that the NDP government had 
concerning environmental issues was quickly destroyed when, 
on orders from above — from orders from the top — they 
paved over a PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) spill. Now today 
everyone is well aware of the deadly effects of PCBs, but the 
NDP tried to cover it up in their late ’70s PCB spill, to their 
everlasting shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Whereas on the contrary, Mr. Speaker, the record of the current 
government is positive and forward thinking. The North 
American water-fowl program is a classical example, as is the 
critical Wildlife Habitat (Protection) Act, which protects 
millions of acres of habitat for wildlife throughout the province. 
This Act was long overdue. Now we have it, and I compliment 
the minister and the cabinet for this action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear a great deal of misinformation from the 
NDP about the Shand power project. But the Shand is 
recognized around the world, not just at SaskPower, not just in 
our Environment department, but around the world, Mr. 
Speaker, as being at the forefront of environmental protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Shand will implement an environmental 
process never before used, and that process is called zero 
discharge. Mr. Speaker, it’s called zero discharge, and what it 
means is that not one drop of effluent, not one drop of waste 
water will be put back into the environment. Nothing will be 
discharged, and hence it is called zero discharge. That’s never 
been done before, Mr. Speaker. Another Saskatchewan first that 
is leading the way for the world. 
 
The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, indicates this government will 
continue to lead on concerns in the environment. And it is 
especially pleasing, Mr. Speaker, to see that environmentally 
unsafe products will be taxed to pay the cost of protecting the 
environment. 
 
What is so impressive about this is that the business community 
has come out in full support of the measure. The business 
community that the opposition would have us believe is out not 
only to destroy the government, that community has said, we 
want to co-operate to protect the environment. And I say, good 
for them, Mr. Speaker; bravo to the business community and to 
this government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that others want to participate in this 
debate, and I can see the NDP are eager to get up and tell us if 
they have agreed on any policy positions on  

any subject at all, and I wish to hear from the next speaker just 
what it is that that speaker propose the government should do. 
But please don’t tell me you believe in low unemployment, a 
clean environment, and a perfect health care system, because 
we all believe in those things. You tell the people of 
Saskatchewan how you plan to accomplish those goals, and 
maybe your speech will be worth listening to. 
 
With that advice to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, let me 
say that I fully support the Speech from the Throne and the best 
leader in Canada, and I’ll be voting yes to the motion of my 
friend from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 
to enter in the debate on the Speech from the Throne. I want to 
say as well that in listening to the Speech from the Throne I 
thought it was well delivered by Her Honour. 
 
It was truly lacking in substance — rehashed material, ideas — 
but, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what we can expect from a 
government that has been and continues to be bankrupt of ideas. 
I say to you that it was bankrupt of ideas because what it dealt 
with almost in every case were bills that were left on the order 
paper at the time of the prorogation at 10 o’clock in the 
morning. 
 
Oh, there was some other things. There was farm equity, which 
has been rejected soundly by credit unions in the province, by 
farm groups, by the Sask. Wheat Pool. That is going to be 
forced down the throats of the farmers. But other than that, 
there was very, very, little. 
 
There was talk of taxing hazardous material — not banning it as 
the Government of Ontario proposes to do, but putting a tax on 
it — so that it is legal and profitable to produce hazardous 
wastes in this province, as long as you pay the taxes. 
 
I want to say to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
congratulations on your victory. We look forward to working 
with you in the Assembly between now and the next election. I 
think the expectations that you created during the by 
_election are very, very high. I’ve been in Gravelbourg a couple 
of times since the by-election, and they’re wondering when the 
new hospital will be built, and I’m sure that it will be built 
before the next election as you promised to do during the 
campaign. And not so much yourself personally, but the 
Premier of the province, the member for Estevan who was in 
Gravelbourg a great deal, met with the hospital board, and 
promised them that if a Conservative member were elected, that 
in fact a new hospital would be constructed in the very near 
future. 
 
I say, as well, you raised expectations in terms of the drought 
payment. You went along with the promise made at the federal 
election that $45 per acre would be paid to the farmers in your 
area when the drought payment would come forward, and at 
that time you said, early in  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

100 
 

1989. Well it is now the middle of March of 1989, no payment 
has been made yet, but a promise made to pay between $12 and 
zero. Now that is hardly a fulfilment of the promise that you 
made during the by-election along with your federal 
counterparts. 
 
I noticed with interest last night a report from a small town in 
south-east Saskatchewan where the member for that area, 
federal PC member, was taken to task by farmers in that 
particular area about the lack of a drought payment. And to that 
end I have called on the member for Shaunavon, the PC 
member from Shaunavon and the MP for that area to hold a 
public meeting in Shaunavon to explain to the farmers how it is 
that during an election campaign there’s a promise made of $45 
an acre. And the member for Shaunavon will know that the 
majority of his constituency, even though he promised $45, is 
not going to get one cent in the initial stages of this program. So 
I think it’s appropriate that all members would be going to their 
constituency as soon as possible, renting town halls and holding 
meetings where you explain and account for your actions at the 
time of the federal election and the by-election, and the result 
that we see at the present time. 
 
I want to say a few words about the constituency I represent, 
Elphinstone, and I want to say that it is indeed a pleasure to 
represent the constituency of Elphinstone. It’s quite different 
than a rural constituency. Obviously I enjoyed very much my 
two terms I spent as the member for Shaunavon, but there are 
certain advantages to living in the city where the legislature sits. 
You can be home at supper time, and there are some great 
advantages. 
 
I would like to say though that there are many, many problems 
in the constituency of Elphinstone, only a few blocks away 
from this building. My colleague from Moose Jaw South 
yesterday outlined the fact that not very far from here many 
people go to bed hungry, and how hard that is for some of us to 
understand and believe. 
 
Now the people who are going to bed hungry are mostly 
children. Statistics show that we have the second highest rate of 
poverty in Canada, here in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
suppose in my constituency you would have the highest rate of 
hunger and poverty of any constituency in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s not to say that many people don’t have good jobs and 
live a fulfilling life, but there is a large number of people, a 
large number of people who simply don’t have work. The 
unemployment rate of people below the age of 25 across the 
province is 17 per cent, and I’d be willing to wager a bet that in 
my constituency the percentage of unemployment of young 
people would be closer to 25 or 30 per cent. 
 
And what happens to those people? Well, inevitably, 
sociologists and psychologists will tell you that people who are 
unemployed — particularly young people — for long periods of 
time have difficulty staying out of conflict with the law and 
may from time to time turn to the use of unlegalized or illegal 
drugs. 
 
Now I want to say to you that what your solution is is not to 
find jobs for the people but to find jobs for Tory hacks and to 
build new drug treatment centres. That’s a good  

idea, to build them, but why don’t you deal with the 
fundamental problem that you people have created, which is 
record high unemployment among young people right across 
this province. 
 
I say to you that in my constituency, if you want to know about 
hunger, all you have to do is come with me any time and we’ll 
knock on doors in my constituency and you’ll see the havoc that 
your policies and what they have done to the people of this 
province. Basically what’s happening is the middle class is 
being decimated, and we’re ending up with a small group of 
wealthy, elite, rich folk, most of them friends of the 
Conservative Party and a very large, much larger group of poor 
people who are unable to pay taxes, unable to take part in the 
things that are good about our society, and which they were 
able to do only a few short years ago. 
 
All you have to do is come with me on most weekdays when 
Theresa Stevenson offers food to hungry children when they 
come to the centre in the constituency, North Central 
Community Centre (Society), on a number of weekdays each 
week. They come from the school because there’s no food at 
home and they come there to have a hot lunch. 
 
Now that’s a new proposal from the Conservative government 
to deal with the problem of hunger. Rather than give jobs and 
provide jobs for families in my constituency, we now have food 
banks set up only a few blocks away and a lunch program being 
served by Theresa Stevenson, offered to hungry children, 
because the biggest issue in the classroom in my constituency is 
not the lack of school books, which is important, because they 
do lack books; it’s not the teacher-pupil ratio, which members 
from Saskatoon will talk about, and that is a legitimate concern 
— the biggest issue in my constituency is children coming to 
school in the morning not having been fed. That’s the biggest 
single issue, and teachers in that area will tell you that. 
 
Now this is Tory economic development in action in the 
Elphinstone riding. And at a meeting the other night we held 
there, a number of people came forward to a forum we held on 
hunger — 12 or 13 groups, the member from Regina Centre 
was there — and they provided some ideas that we will be 
bringing forward as positive alternatives and positive solutions 
to the situation that exists there. 
 
I want to now turn for a few moments to the rural part of the 
province and the issue of agriculture. Being a farmer, still 
maintaining a farming operation in the Shaunavon district, I 
have opportunity on many occasions to go down to the farm and 
meet with the business people in Shaunavon, out of necessity 
and also because it’s an enjoyable thing to do, go back and 
renew acquaintances and buy fertilizer and parts for the 
cultivator and all those kinds of things that farmers have to do, 
but I’ll tell you that the problem with small town Saskatchewan 
can’t be exaggerated too much. There are literally hundreds of 
small businesses going broke, many of them machinery 
manufacturers. If you go to Shaunavon, you’ll find that almost 
100 homes are for sale in that small town. It’s not a very big 
town — about 2,200 people — but there are approximately 100 
houses for sale in that town at the present time. 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

101 
 

And Shaunavon has advantages. It’s not without somewhat of a 
diversified economy. It has oil in the area. It has great reserves 
of coal in the area, but I haven’t heard one word from the 
government or the member for that area, the PC member, about 
industrial development that would bring that coal onstream in 
terms of a power project, or use it in terms of developing jobs; 
has not argued once about the boondoggle down in Estevan and 
the power plant being built over there; not one word defending 
the constituency of Shaunavon in terms of job development. 
 
But I want to say to you that the bigger disaster that I see in 
rural Saskatchewan comes from the older people who talk about 
what things used to be like, and they can hardly believe how 
things have changed in rural Saskatchewan. They can hardly 
believe it. 
 
My dad, who’s 72 years old and had no involvement in politics 
before I joined the party — in fact, I think my family may have 
even been from a different background from time to time, but 
they were not political people. But my dad, who’s 72 years old, 
remembers the last Conservative government only vaguely. He 
was about 18 years old when the last Conservative government 
was turfed out back in 1934 or ’35, and he tells about how the 
communities built this province and how he can’t understand 
how this government has set about ripping it apart; how they’ve 
attacked SaskPower, the power corporation that the people of 
this province built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that SaskPower wasn’t a 
power corporation that was shoved down the throats of the farm 
people. It worked the other way around. Farmers got together 
and lobbied the government to set up a Crown corporation that 
would deliver power on a broad base to the people of this 
province — and the same is true of SaskTel — and they did, 
and many of them volunteered in setting up the power poles and 
getting the power corporation running. They can’t believe that 
you people are ripping it down and selling it off to your friends. 
 
Medicare is another example. He says what’s happening to the 
medicare system? Medicare wasn’t designed by one 
government and shoved onto the people of this province in 
1962. It started far, far back before that, in 1946, in Health 
Region No. 1 in Swift Current. 
 
And it was started there by people in municipalities who got 
together to hire a doctor because they couldn’t afford to pay 
one, and they shared the expense, back in 1946. It was people 
working together to develop a province the way they wanted it. 
It was different than other parts of Canada, that’s true. But I’ll 
tell you, it was much better than what existed in other parts of 
Canada or, for that matter, anywhere else in North America. 
And the people in that area developed the health care system 
and then asked that the government implement it across the 
province in 1962. And then the people in other parts of Canada 
demanded that the federal government — Liberal government, I 
believe it was — implement across Canada. 
 
Now the line that the Conservatives, or John Diefenbaker,  

put medicare in place is just so much malarkey, Mr. Speaker. It 
simply isn’t true — another line that is used by the 
Conservatives to try to cover up their footsteps and their record. 
But I say to you, when you go to places like Shaunavon, they 
are amazed at the population drain and the number of farmers 
who are being forced off the land. 
 
Now when did this theory of getting rid of farmers start in this 
political party’s mind — the Conservative Party? Is it recent? Is 
it the drought? Is that where the concept, the seed began, that 
the Premier of the province would believe that we should get rid 
of farmers? Well I want to quote to you from 1977, when the 
Premier, Dr. Devine, was then at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and I want to say to you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to remind the hon. member that 
we don’t use members’ names in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to quote from a time before the 
member for Estevan was Premier of this province; in fact he 
was a professor at the university in Saskatoon. And the Business 
Review of the winter of 1977 lays out, in short terms, what was 
going on in that member’s head about farming in 
Saskatchewan. And in the Business Review under marketing 
boards, economic, or social policy, and I want to quote from 
that article that he wrote. In that article he said: 
 

Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 
per cent of the farmers who tend to be good business men 
as well as producers, society may not wish to support 
higher food prices or producer security so that the 
non-productive 80 per cent of the farm population can live 
in the country at a profit. 
 

That’s what he said in 1977. That’s when the farm economy 
was booming. That wasn’t when there was a drought or a 
depression that has been caused and created at least in part by 
you people on that side of the House. This was a belief he had 
when the farm economy was booming in 1977. There weren’t 
any better years in the history of this province than 1977. I was 
there; I remember it. 
 
And they continued to get better up until 1981. Even with high 
interest rates, in 1981, our last full year of government, that was 
the year of the highest net income on the farm in the history of 
Saskatchewan, even with high interest. Check the statistics. 
 
(1500) 
 
An Hon. Member: — 1984. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, that’s not accurate. If you check the 
record, the statistics will show that 1981 was the highest net 
income in the history of this province. That was even after 
taking into consideration the high interest rates. And there’s a 
reason for that. 
 
But I want to get back to this philosophy of the now Premier. 
This is a plan that he’s had in the back of his head for a long, 
long time to get rid of farmers, to get rid of them. What’s 
written here, he wrote it. I didn’t write this.  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

102 
 

I’ll table it and you can have a look at it and ask him whether he 
still agrees with it. 
 
But to look at the thousands of farmers who are leaving the 
farm at the present time, I believe that was one of his intents of 
getting involved in politics — to rearrange the structure of this 
province. And that’s why the population is draining out of the 
province at a record number. That’s why the population isn’t 
growing like it was back in 1976 when we had record growth in 
terms of population increase in this province, record growth in 
terms of population growth in 1976. 
 
But I want to say to you that the philosophy of getting rid of 
farmers is not one that has just been dropped into the 
Conservative caucus. It was being thought out by the now 
Premier while he was a member of the staff at the University of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, and this confirms it. There’s no 
doubt about it. So I say to you, when we talk about the numbers 
of farmers leaving the land, this is not only as a result of 
drought, but as a master plan that Grant Devine has been 
thinking about for a long time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I remind the hon. member once 
more to refrain from using the name of other members in this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that 
getting around to the issue of forcing farmers off the land — 
and I’ve got a great deal to say about privatization and other 
issues — but I want to spend the balance of the time I have here 
talking about an issue that I would rather not talk about. But I 
tell you, yesterday, in listening to the member from Rosthern — 
I can’t help but get into this debate on an issue, I say again I 
would rather not talk about, and I find it regrettable that I have 
to speak to. 
 
But today I want to deal with the spectacle to which this 
Assembly had to look at yesterday, the member from Rosthern 
and the speech that he gave. I have to say as much in sadness as 
in anger that I have to go through the next 15, 20 minutes of 
what I’m going to say. 
 
I say here we are elected members. We’re sent here to represent 
the people who elect us, and I want to say that what I saw and 
heard yesterday from the member from Rosthern was far 
beneath what I have ever seen in this Assembly in the years I’ve 
been here, and that’s ten years. And I’ve seen many speeches; 
I’ve seen nights that were raucous; I’ve seen question periods 
where members have got kicked out, but I have never seen or 
witnessed the personal attack that I saw yesterday by the 
member from Rosthern. 
 
I say the attack was bad enough, but the more important thing 
is, Mr. Speaker, that there were no facts involved in what the 
member was saying. It was gutter politics, Mr. Speaker, and 
gutter politics should have no place in this legislature or in 
politics in this province. 
 
Unfortunately, the member from Rosthern is not alone in using 
this tactic. Gutter politics has become the modus operandi of 
the entire PC government. I say they’re a desperate government. 
They are afraid of the Leader of the Opposition, my colleague, 
because they can see  

power slipping away. They can see how popular and respected a 
leader the member from Riversdale is, and they are panicking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So I say, Mr. Speaker, in recent months 
we have seen members opposite stoop to new lows in their 
personal attack. But yesterday set an all-time new low. 
 
In this Assembly the member for Rosthern referred to a family 
in the public gallery and said: 
 

I would like to introduce to you a family . . . that the 
Leader of the Opposition foreclosed on . . . Mr. Gaudet 
was forced off his farm . . . by the member for Riversdale. 
 

That is a direct quote from Hansard. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
an absolute falsehood. Not one ounce of truth to it. The only 
reason I don’t put it in stronger language here, Mr. Speaker, is 
because it’s not allowed. Anywhere else I would and will put it 
in stronger language. 
 
Just how false was shown only a few minutes later when the 
member from Rosthern was finished speaking in this House, 
when the Gaudet family spoke to journalists. The Gaudets 
confirmed that the member from Riversdale had never been 
involved in their legal dispute with their bank. The Gaudets 
confirmed that they had in fact not lost their farm but had given 
some of the land up to the bank and reached an out-of-court 
settlement. 
 
I knew that would be the case because the facts are these: the 
Leader of the Opposition practised law from 1985 to ’87 as part 
of a 16-member law firm in Saskatoon. The Leader of the 
Opposition never at any time acted on behalf of any financial 
institution or against any farmer. 
 
In fact, the Leader of the Opposition provided legal advice to 
the Crown Land Tenants Association, a group of farmers who 
the PC government was trying to drive off their land. 
 
Regardless of, the Leader of the Opposition has not been 
involved in the law firm since 1987, nearly two years ago. 
Those are the facts. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the allegations are the worst kind of gutter 
politics and are simply not true. But that hasn’t stopped the 
Premier and his members from continuing to repeat these 
falsehoods. The Premier especially seems to take great pleasure 
in repeating these false statements. 
 
Today I intend to call him and his government on these tactics. 
I’m sure that the people of Saskatchewan would assume that if 
the Premier really believes what he has said about this issue, he 
would have checked with his own house before launching this 
personal attack, that he would have looked around his own 
caucus. He would have sat down and asked every lawyer in his 
caucus if he had ever acted on behalf of a financial institution in 
a foreclosure action against the farmer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the documents that I am about to table in this  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

103 
 

Assembly give the Premier two choices for a defence: either he 
is in incredibly incompetent and has failed to check his own 
lawyer MLAs about their activities in this field, or he is the 
biggest hypocrite in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Because if the Premier had asked his 
MLAs about their activities, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Melville would have told him, yes, even during the time I was a 
member of the legislature for the PC Party, I acted directly on 
behalf of a financial institution against a farm family or farm 
families. I not only knew my firm was doing this, but I was 
personally involved; in fact, my firm handled more foreclosures 
that any other law firm in Melville put together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I lay on the Table a copy of an affidavit filed at 
the Melville Judicial Centre on August 8, 1983. It is an affidavit 
filed with respect to the Queen’s Bench case No. 108 of 1983. 
 
In this affidavit, the member for Melville, on behalf of a 
vacationing law partner and a financial institution they 
represent, makes application for a hearing to apply for a leave to 
commence foreclosure against a Melville district farmer. 
According to the court records, the foreclosure action was only 
discontinued in 1984 after the farmer had agreed to settle with 
the financial institution. That’s one example. 
 
Here’s another — and again I lay the documents on the Table, 
Mr. Speaker, for the province to see — this document deals 
with Queen’s Bench court case No. 58 of 1982. It shows where 
the member from Melville, acting on behalf of the Bank of 
Montreal, has applied to force a foreclosure sale of a farm in the 
Melville area. Another bank, the Royal, had actually launched 
foreclosure action. The member from Melville, representing the 
Bank of Montreal as one of the farm’s creditors, applied to 
force a judicial sale in order to get his bank’s share of the 
money. 
 
Here we have a farmer about to lose his operation and the banks 
are picking at the bones. I lay these documents on the table, Mr. 
Speaker, to prove the clear hypocrisy of the members opposite. 
Here we have a sitting member of the government party whose 
firm was not only foreclosing on farmers on behalf of banks, 
but who handled the files personally. 
 
I ask the member from Melville, did you not tell the Premier 
this before he launched his province-wide attack on this issue? 
Did you hide it from the Premier hoping he and the people of 
Saskatchewan wouldn’t find out, or did the Premier know all 
along and still decide to master-mind these personal attacks? 
Which is it, Mr. Member? 
 
And I put the same question to the Premier. His credibility is on 
the line on this one. I ask the Premier, do you plan to deal with 
the minister, and what kind of activity do you allow in your 
government? The point is this. If you really believe half of what 
you have said in your personal attack, then you have no choice 
but to deal with it. 
 

I want to say, and I want to move on to what we see as the real 
issue in this debate about farm foreclosures, the true public 
policy debate as it should be, and that is the issue of who is 
really driving farm families off the land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Last year the Farm Land Security Board 
received 1,245 notices of foreclosures from all creditors 
combined. Some are from banks, some are from credit unions, 
but many are from the Government of Saskatchewan, 
specifically from lawyers acting on behalf of the Premier of the 
province. 
 
This means the Premier of the province has a stable of lawyers 
he has hired to deal with farmers in the legal sense. Not one 
farmer . . . or like the two the member from Melville has dealt 
with, but literally hundreds and thousands of farmers that the 
Premier is acting on directly. Oh yes, he’s removed himself one 
step. He doesn’t sign the papers because he can’t — he’s not a 
lawyer — but he hires lawyers to do it for him, then roams 
around the province accusing everyone else of being 
responsible for driving people off the farm. 
 
Well the Premier is guilty in this case of being directly 
involved, because he could stop them at any time as it applies to 
his role as the Premier of Saskatchewan and with loans 
outstanding to the Government of Saskatchewan. He is in total 
control of the situation. All he he’d have to do is phone his 
lawyers and have them stop proceedings. But he is having them 
act against farmers, not in small numbers, but to the tune of 
thousands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is trying to hide these figures and 
it refuses to release them to the public. I asked the Minister of 
Agriculture, how many farmers have your lawyers started 
actions against in the last year? How many farmers have your 
lawyers launched other legal proceedings against in the last 
year? I ask the Premier to come clean. 
 
Perhaps we can get some sense of how many farmers the 
Premier is trying to drive off the land by looking at the actions 
of his federal counterparts at the Farm Credit Corporation. The 
FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) is currently processing 
foreclosure actions against 286 farm families. 
 
You’ve heard the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture talk 
about how Brian Mulroney and his FCC are driving . . . or have 
you heard how they’re driving farmers off the land? Not at all. 
Not one word of defence for farm families being driven off the 
land by the federal government. Not one word. Have you heard 
the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture talk about how his 
lawyers at the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
are driving Saskatchewan farmers and families off the land? Of 
course not. 
 
That’s the real public policy issue at the core of this debate, Mr. 
Speaker, and I believe the sleazy, false attacks we saw in this 
Assembly yesterday are part of an elaborate smoke-screen by 
the Premier to try to take the public 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

104 
 

 attention away from the fact that he, as the Minister of 
Agriculture, is the number one farm forecloser in Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that my intervention 
today . . . and I said at the outset we would have preferred not to 
go through this act today. This has been well-known knowledge 
for a long time. This is a defence mechanism against the sleaze 
that is going on by the Premier of this province against an 
individual. But I say to you, like many times in politics, when 
you stoop, it comes back to haunt you. And I say today that 
farm foreclosures, I guarantee you, will become an issue in this 
province as a result of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an honour 
for me to rise before the Assembly and speak in response to Her 
Honour, the Lieutenant Governor’s first Speech from the 
Throne. I found a sense of vision in Her Honour’s speech, and 
I’m proud that I will be active in fulfilling that vision for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to compliment our new member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on the winning of the by-election in 
December. I certainly spent a lot of time down there working on 
his behalf. I talked to a lot of people and from all political 
affiliations, and certainly it was enlightening for me to go down 
into a different part of Saskatchewan to what I’m used to, to 
work in a by-election where it’s ranching and grain farming, 
which is a little bit of different agriculture than I’m used to. 
 
I talked to many Liberals and NDP and Conservatives, and I 
found a lot of support for what we are doing in agriculture. 
There was only one real definite dissenting voice that I ran into 
down in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and the gentleman said to me, 
I don’t want to vote for this member that could represent us 
very well, but he’s the best horse veterinarian we’ve ever had 
here and I don’t want to lose him. So this was his reasoning for 
not voting for the member that now sits here in the legislature. 
I’m sure that that member will represent that man very well as 
he does . . . as he worked very hard for him in his trade as a 
veterinarian. And it’s really too bad that you can’t have both, 
you know, good veterinary medicine and good members of the 
legislature, but I’m sure that this member will do the best he can 
to fulfil both of those roles. I know that some members that sit 
across here try and fill two roles as members of the legislature 
and take teaching positions, so I’m sure that members on this 
side of the House can handle their jobs as veterinarians and 
members of the legislature. 
 
It’s a great honour for me, Mr. Speaker, to represent the people 
of Shellbrook-Torch River in this Assembly. It is because of the 
people of that constituency and their confidence in me that I’m 
here today. The people of Shellbrook-Torch River elected me, 
and I’m looking out for their best interests. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased that the people of that constituency are seeing progress, 
progress  

that can be attributed directly to our government’s commitment 
to them. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at health care. That 
was always a big issue in my seat prior to the ’82 election 
where Mr. Bowerman, who was one of the heavyweights, I 
guess you could say, in the NDP cabinet, he chose to build 
grandiose liquor stores in the town of Shellbrook rather than 
nursing homes. That was one of the issues that was certainly 
brought to me in the 1982 campaign, and it was certainly an 
issue that I had to deal with in my first term of office. 
 
You’ll find in your first term of office that it takes some time to 
find your way around this institution, to understand how each 
department works. And I finally, being a slow learner maybe a 
bit, but I finally did understand how the system did work a bit. 
 
Anyway, I got a commitment from our Minister of Health in my 
first term of office that certainly we were going to build a 
nursing home in the town of Canwood, which certainly had no 
consideration from the former government and their 
moratorium. 
 
So everybody says that after a member gets re-elected for the 
second term he probably forgets some of the commitments he 
made. That wasn’t the case in my position, or in my spot 
because right after the 1986 election we went to work again in 
getting this nursing home built, and it’s there today. 
 
And everybody in this legislature certainly knows Mr. John 
Gormley, who was at that time the federal member for The 
Battlefords. He was at the opening of the nursing home, or the 
ribbon cutting of the nursing home. And I always try and be 
innovative and think of new things that a member can do for his 
constituency. 
 
So six weeks before the ribbon cutting, I phoned John Gormley 
and invited him to come. So John Gormley was a very 
hard-working member federally, and I had a lot of faith in him 
and I still do. So I phoned a couple of young fellows in 
Canwood and I said, why don’t you put together a presentation 
to make to this federal member when he is here at the ribbon 
cutting for this . . . or sod turning for this nursing home. I said, 
we all know how badly we need heavy steel from Shellbrook to 
Debden to make the connection with Meadow Lake. And we 
had the whole new community hall that was built since 1982 in 
Canwood, full of people that day. And these two young people, 
both farmers — one had a university education — got up and 
made a tremendous presentation to the crowd and to Mr. 
Gormley and myself. They had copies of it that were all sent to 
the federal Minister of Transport, and copies that were sent to 
our provincial Minister of Transport and the provincial 
members from Meadow Lake and Turtleford who were 
certainly involved. 
 
And I’m proud to say that prior to the 1988 election, that that 
heavy steel was laid from Shellbrook to Debden, and that’s the 
kind of communication we need with our federal members. It’s 
going to be a little more difficult working with someone in there 
now, but this . . . Mr. Gormley was very good at returning my 
phone calls, always back to me from Ottawa, keeping me up to 
date  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

105 
 

on what was happening, and as was mentioned today in 
question period, I’m very proud that he’s working on our team, 
and I’ll hang my head nowhere for that. 
 
I just have to say one or two more things about health. I’m not 
really following the text that was given to me here, I kind of 
wander a bit once in a while, but I remember prior to the 1982 
election when the NDP kind of forgot about the seniors of this 
province. They certainly forgot about their needs in nursing 
homes, their moratorium . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s why we put in home care. 
 
Mr. Muller: — I’m not quite sure, but the member from 
Saskatoon South who’s now speaking from his seat, may have 
been the minister of Health at that time when they put the 
moratorium on nursing homes. And I know that the people of 
Canwood probably remember him and their representative they 
had at that time, that wouldn’t take a look even at what they 
wanted to do in Canwood. I know that the people of 
Shellbrook-Torch River and Canwood don’t forget the 
moratorium that was on the building of nursing homes. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Anyway, I’m going to move off of health care 
now, Mr. Speaker. I know that there’s many more positive 
things that we on this side of the House have done, but I’m sure 
there’s other members here who can relate to that probably 
better than myself. I just tried to relate to what happened to me 
specifically. 
 
The other important thing that we have done . . . I have to 
mention one more thing that we’ve done in health care, and I’m 
speaking specifically about the Everyone Wins promotional 
program. The member from Moose Jaw doesn’t like my speech 
because it hits a little too close to the heart of what they’re 
trying to promote now. 
 
This is an important program, Mr. Speaker, its main purpose 
being to motivate individuals and communities in Saskatchewan 
towards healthier life-styles, and to improve overall health of 
our citizens in the province. Our government is promoting 
preventative health care through this program — preventative 
health care for all of Saskatchewan. But . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. We can’t have two 
hon. members giving a speech at the same time. Right now we 
have the hon. member from Shellbrook-Torch River, so I ask 
you to allow him to continue his speech. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
just here today to talk about health care. I’m very excited about 
what’s happening in my constituency and the constituency of 
Shellbrook-Torch River. I shouldn’t say my constituency; it 
may be someone else’s next time, someone may beat me, but 
. . . somebody may beat me for the nomination. Somebody may 
beat me for the nomination. 
 
But I think some of the members from Prince Albert certainly 
need an education on what’s happening up in Prince Albert and 
north of Prince Albert, and even a bit  

west. Hopefully, by the time my colleagues are done, they will 
have received a well-rounded education on a variety of subjects. 
 
But I’m here today to educate them on a very important subject. 
That subject, Mr. Speaker, is public participation. I want the 
member from Prince Albert to pay particular attention to this 
lesson specifically in light of his recent article in the Prince 
Albert Herald. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to an article that appeared January 
16, 1989, in the Prince Albert Herald. In that article, the 
member from Prince Albert condemned, and I quote, "large, 
out-of-province corporations." He condemned by reference, 
Weyerhaeuser, and by condemning Weyerhaeuser he 
condemned our public participation initiatives. Well I say, how 
dare he, Mr. Speaker. How dare the member from Prince Albert 
condemn a corporation that has done so much for his 
constituency and mine. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser has not only created jobs for the 
people in Saskatchewan, it’s also implemented training 
programs for existing employees of that industry. Weyerhaeuser 
has put money into Prince Albert and area in the form of 
donations. They’ve donated money to the city. They donated 
money to the preschool program, to the nursing home in Big 
River . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s another nursing 
home. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve donated money to the Prince Albert 
Raiders in the form of a scholarship fund. Also some of the 
things that aren’t mentioned in my text here, I’d like to go over. 
There’s a little beach up at Emma Lake, Niece’s Beach. 
Weyerhaeuser’s gone in there, improved that beach, donated the 
money. 
 
And in 1987 we had a fire, a fire of a boy’s school up along the 
Molanosa road — I don’t imagine any members over there, 
even the ones from P.A., know where that is — but this boy’s 
school was burnt. Right as soon as they could possibly get the 
trailers up there, Weyerhaeuser was interested enough in getting 
accommodations for those boys so that they could continue on 
with what they were doing. Now I think those kind of 
corporations care; they get right involved with the community. 
Weyerhaeuser is really caring. 
 
The other thing — and I’ll never forget this because I was kind 
of involved in it; I was the legislative secretary to the Minister 
of Saskatchewan Forest Products at the time in the transition 
from PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) to Weyerhaeuser, 
and there was some concerns by local communities about 
cutting rights and how Weyerhaeuser was going to manage the 
forest. And I remember very well going with a couple of the 
officials from Weyerhaeuser and meeting with the Lakeland 
rural municipality which is in the Weyerhaeuser cutting area. 
 
And they had a legitimate concern because there’s a lot of lakes 
there — there’s Emma and Christopher and McPhee and Anglin 
Lake — and it’s a very beautiful spot in the world, because I 
even have a cabin there, so I know quite well that it’s a very 
beautiful spot in the world. And the  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

106 
 

Lakeland R.M. council was kind of worried about how close 
they were going to cut to the lakes and the rivers, and it was a 
legitimate concern by the local council and the people from 
Regina and Prince Albert and Saskatoon and Regina that have 
cabins there. 
 
They didn’t really know to deal with this new corporation. 
They’d always had a very good relationship with Parsons & 
Whittemore and sometimes rocky with PAPCO, but not all that 
bad. But anyhow we went and met with them. 
 
After the meeting — Weyerhaeuser had never really made any 
commitment at the meeting other than to go back to Prince 
Albert and take a hard look at what these people’s concerns 
meant to the company and to the area. And this was still in the 
transition period when Weyerhaeuser was trying to get a feel for 
the whole community and how they were going to deal with it if 
they took it over, when and if they took it over. As soon as they 
took over the Prince Albert pulp mill, when the keys were 
turned over to them, they issued a news release dedicating 
another 5,000 acres of timber in the Lakeland R.M. surrounding 
the lakes, extending the borders that would not be touched. 
 
So Weyerhaeuser showed to that local community that they 
were willing to sit down and work with them and show them 
that they were willing to dedicate that timber to the beauty of 
the area. And it certainly would have been more economical for 
them to cut that timber because it’s very close to Prince Albert, 
but they decided that they would designate that timber to the 
resort area so people could enjoy the forest. 
 
And the people were very happy because the cutting zones that 
PAPCO had, ran a lot closer to the lakes and the rivers and the 
roads. So Weyerhaeuser extended that by 5,000 acres. And if 
anyone here knows the make-up of the Lakeland R.M., it isn’t a 
large R.M.; it isn’t an agricultural R.M., it’s a resort R.M. It 
runs along the west . . . or the east side of the Prince Albert 
National Park from Emma and Christopher Lake up to McPhee 
Lake, with Anglin Lake about in the middle. 
 
So it’s not a large rural municipality but a very resort-oriented 
one, and the trees to them meant a lot. And I thought that that 
was certainly one of the things that Weyerhaeuser showed, that 
they have good faith in the community in which they want to 
live and work. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I shouldn’t be so hard on the 
member from Prince Albert. Perhaps I should direct some of my 
statements to another one of the members of the opposition, for 
example, the member from Riversdale who stated in Hansard 
of 1986, and I quote, "Saskatchewan doesn’t need 
Weyerhaeuser." Well, unquote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale who, in the 
Leader-Post on February 29, 1968, stated that the reason the 
government should own pulp mills is that they are in fact risky 
and so the taxpayer should shoulder the difficult times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, don’t the people of the province shoulder  

enough without the member from Riversdale loading them 
down with a government-owned pulp mill? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Muller: — If anybody really wants me to get into the 
detail of how the government of the day loaded them with the 
debt of PAPCO, I mean, they at that time didn’t have the money 
to go out and buy out Parsons & Whittemore, or the shares that 
Parsons & Whittemore had — I think the government had about 
30 per cent. They didn’t have the money to go out and buy it so 
they went to the Bank of Montreal and the Imperial Bank of 
Commerce and they borrowed the money, and they borrowed it 
at 17 per cent interest. They borrowed the money at 17 per cent 
interest. 
 
The thing that we found when we came into power was that 
they never made a payment on the principal or the interest, so 
the debt was getting larger and larger. The reason the pulp mill 
was losing money wasn’t because the people at the mill weren’t 
doing a good job, wasn’t because the mill wasn’t a good mill; 
they overloaded it with debt. What they tried to say . . . and I 
wish I could get my banker to understand this, but he won’t. He 
won’t do it with my farm anyway. He won’t let me finance my 
farm the same way as the NDP government financed the pulp 
mill. 
 
You see, they said in 1981 there was a $24 million profit in the 
pulp mill. But there was a 35-point-some million dollar interest 
debt that they never paid. So there’s almost a $12 million loss 
— not quite, 11-point-some — and my banker won’t allow me 
to finance my farm that way. But the government of the day, 
which is the NDP, tried to say there’s a $24 million profit where 
there was actually a 35-point-something million dollar interest 
rate. So that’s almost a $12 million loss. I could farm very 
comfortably if I could bank that way. 
 
Well anyway, just to clarify why the mill was losing money 
when it was government-owned, I think we’ve done that. But 
now let’s look at the Weyerhaeuser record. Since the sale of the 
company, it’s had sales of 298 million to the end of 1987, and 
earned for Weyerhaeuser Canada 15 million. And, Mr. Speaker, 
under the terms of the agreement the mill also earned for the 
people of Saskatchewan about 65 million. Sixty-five million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As part of the deal, Weyerhaeuser invested $248 million in the 
new paper mill, making it the second largest in Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, during that construction a total of 700 new jobs were 
created — 700 new jobs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — For Prince Albert and district. 
 
Mr. Muller: — More for Shellbrook-Torch River, I believe. 
But yes, for the Prince Albert and area. Prince Albert certainly 
got some of the spin-off from that. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, 175 permanent positions were 
added. How dare the Leader of the Opposition and the member 
from Prince Albert say that Saskatchewan doesn’t need 
Weyerhaeuser. Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what they don’t need. 
We don’t need people like the member from Riversdale and the 
member from Prince  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

107 
 

Albert. We don’t need their negative attitudes present in our 
legislature. 
 
They would rather see no new jobs, no new investment in 
Prince Albert. The member from Prince Albert, the whole crew 
over there with their tax on the pulp and paper mill are in effect 
slapping the working people of Prince Albert and area in the 
face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that Weyerhaeuser is 
creating new economic growth in the Prince Albert area. Mr. 
Speaker, the sale of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser is an excellent 
example of this PC government’s plan to diversify the 
economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Since the sale of PAPCO, the people of 
Saskatchewan earned over $63 million — $63 million. Earned 
63 million compared to a loss of 26 million in the 20 months 
preceding the sale. 
 
And I ask the member from Prince Albert and his leader, the 
member from Riversdale, how can you condemn what 
Weyerhaeuser has done for this province’s economy? Our 
government isn’t here to be in the pulp business. And because 
we no longer are, the people of this province have gained by it 
— gained by $63 million, Mr. Speaker. Public participation 
means diversification. 
 
Another example comes to mind. The new paper sheeter in 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, the new paper sheeter sells into the 
U.S. market a product never before produced in this province. 
 
I want to stop there and elaborate a little bit on what this paper 
sheeter means to Prince Albert. When Weyerhaeuser was 
producing rolls of paper, which the paper mill started to 
produce last summer, the new paper mill — they had to ship 
this paper down into the United States, have it cut into sheets, 
and then they paid duty on it coming back into Canada. Now 
they’re going to make the sheets, finish the product. There will 
be Xerox-quality paper produced right in the constituency of 
Shellbrook-Torch River, just north of Prince Albert. 
 
And this is very, very important. The new building that is going 
to house this sheeter is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A what? 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Muller: — The members can laugh. If they don’t know 
what a paper sheeter is, they can laugh. That’s fine. 
 
The new building is the length of two football fields. That is a 
big sheeter. This is going to create 34 permanent jobs, 34 
additional permanent jobs after the construction of the building. 
The construction of the building and the investment is $20.8 
million, and it’s going to start in the spring of 1989 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Saskatoon 
Westmount knows how easily I am to upset, so he’s speaking 
from his seat. I’m sure that he’ll have an opportunity in this 
legislature to rise and speak in favour of Weyerhaeuser now that 
he knows the details. 

They’re selling this paper now beyond our borders — selling 
beyond our borders a product never before produced in 
Saskatchewan. And this is important. This is what we have to 
do in Saskatchewan, is diversify our economy so that we finish 
our products here. 
 
I know you people over there wouldn’t understand that. You’ve 
never wanted to see anything bloom and grow. You’ve always 
wanted to suppress. And this is where we differ. You people 
wanted to buy out industries that the jobs were already here. 
You’ve never wanted to create an industry that would produce 
more jobs. All you ever did was buy out industries that were 
here — nationalize them. You didn’t create any more jobs by 
doing that. All you did was create a debt on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have to go back before PAPCO was sold to Weyerhaeuser or 
before the pulp mill was sold to PAPCO. I have to go back 
when Parsons & Whittemore owned the pulp mill, or 70 per 
cent of it. The people of Prince Albert were really excited about 
the way that company treated them in Prince Albert and area. 
 
At that time, I was quite involved with 4-H and a leader of a 
4-H club for 12 years, so I know very well the history of what 
happened with the involvement of Parsons & Whittemore in 
community projects, and how they supported things like 4-H, 
and supported those kinds of things that we all believe in. I 
remember being at many fat stock shows and sales, when 
Parsons & Whittemore had someone there buying calves out of 
that sale. Children were so proud that the pulp mill was there 
purchasing their calves. 
 
But a funny thing happened after the transfer of the pulp mill to 
PAPCO, and I was still a 4-H club leader at that time, and still 
very heavily involved, and before I was elected to this place. 
After the government owned the pulp mill they diminished their 
involvement in the community, especially the surrounding 
communities. There was no buyer there buying our 4-H calves. 
There was not near as much involvement in the community, of 
course. I guess there couldn’t be because they were losing 
money; the government couldn’t support the communities 
surrounding the surrounding areas, and the functions and clubs 
within the city. But anyway, I noticed that. 
 
And now that Weyerhaeuser has taken over from PAPCO, 
they’re getting involved in all communities surrounding Prince 
Albert, and certainly involved in the city of P.A. 
 
I have to go back to what the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland said last night, was that when and if — and Heaven 
forbid — that they ever form government, that they would tear 
up the deal with Weyerhaeuser. Well let me say this, that the 
people in Prince Albert won’t be too excited about anybody 
tearing up the deal with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a pipe dream. 
 
Mr. Muller: — The member from Athabasca says it’s a pipe 
dream, so I guess he agrees with me that no, it is a pipe dream 
that they’d tear up the agreement. 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

108 
 

But it’s really an exciting constituency to represent. The 
Shellbrook-Torch River constituency is probably one of the 
most exciting places to be in this time. Mr. Speaker, the Prince 
Albert area is indeed attracting many companies from beyond 
our borders, in fact, from different countries all over the world. 
 
I’m referring to what I like to call the great diamond hunt. 
Companies from different countries are seriously looking to 
Saskatchewan as a prime site to produce diamonds. Mr. 
Speaker, nearly a million acres of land surrounding Prince 
Albert has been staked by companies and individuals hunting 
for diamonds. And there are other applications pending. 
 
Our PC government is encouraging these types of industries 
that are bringing money into the Prince Albert and Shellbrook 
areas. My constituency reaps the benefits of projects such as 
this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Cumberland says, a South African company. I wonder if he 
would have the expertise to search for diamonds. I wonder if 
he’d even know what they look like. 
 
But it isn’t only companies from Africa that are searching for 
these diamonds. There’s Claude Resources. There’s many 
private individuals, many private individuals that have property 
staked. 
 
It’s really exciting, especially to me. I have land within 10 miles 
of where they’re drilling for diamonds. In fact, I have a half 
section you could probably say you could hard-rock mine on it. 
The minerals are in the Crown. The minerals are in the Crown. I 
don’t have any stakes on that property as far as any of the 
minerals are concerned. The Crown has always refused, the 
Crown has always refused to come and pick up their minerals, 
and I’ve got some laying loose on top. But these aren’t 
diamonds. I don’t think they recognize these as diamonds. 
 
Anyway, like I said, it is probably one of the most interesting 
areas in the province to be right now, except maybe some of the 
northern areas where there’s gold mining. But my constituency 
of Shellbrook-Torch River is benefitting from the great 
diamond hunt, but is also benefitting from another government 
project, and that’s the new Prince Albert interchange. I mean, 
there’s lots of activity north of the creek. 
 
The Prince Albert interchange was officially opened in October 
of 1988, Mr. Speaker. The interchange at the intersection of 
Highway 2 and 3 in Prince Albert provides a more efficient 
flow of traffic for those travelling along these two routes. And 
the one thing that is really great about this, the flow of traffic 
north to all our tourist-related areas is certainly better with this 
new interchange. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the approximate cost of the interchange was $5 
million. This represents the PC government’s commitment to 
riding an improved highway system for Saskatchewan. The east 
and west traffic also. I’ll just stop there. The east and west 
traffic is a tremendous, it’s a tremendous change. Instead of 
having to go through part of the city and travel north to go to 
Nipawin, or coming from Nipawin you’d have to travel north 
and back  

through, now it’s a straight run right over the top of the 
interchange, east and west . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear 
the member from Prince Albert chirping from his seat, and he 
has never really had a positive thought; he never wants to see 
any improvement in the highway system or in the pulp mill or 
paper mill; he’s against Weyerhaeuser — always has been. 
 
And I was so happy, I was so happy today that I would be able 
to speak in prime time on television so the people in Prince 
Albert would be able to see and get some of the facts on what’s 
happening with the pulp and paper project, the new sheeter, and 
also the new chemical plant in Prince Albert. 
 
And the members opposite laugh. Mr. Speaker, these kinds of 
projects benefit all of Saskatchewan and people beyond 
Saskatchewan. It benefits tourists, tourists coming into 
Saskatchewan to enjoy our beautiful lakes and lush scenery. 
 
I would like to say today, Mr. Speaker, that I will continue to 
work hard to obtain more for them, for the people of 
Shellbrook-Torch River in the future. The throne speech is 
accommodating the people of Saskatchewan and will allow me 
to work towards the future. Mr. Speaker, the throne speech 
works for the people of Saskatchewan, and I will be supporting 
the Speech from the Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this was my very first throne speech as a new MLA, 
and given the major challenges facing the province of 
Saskatchewan today — issues in health care; issues in 
agriculture, education, youth unemployment, out-migration in 
this province; issues of hungry children and hungry families and 
seniors — I was expecting this throne speech with some real 
substance, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I was kind of excited about the 
day. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I must have been to a different play than the 
member from Shellbrook-Torch River. Certainly his speech was 
obviously written before the throne speech. It’s the same old 
Tory line, and I hope the member does not have any intention of 
sending his speech to his constituents. I think it would be a 
disaster for him politically. 
 
Before I proceed with the throne speech, I have to make a 
couple of comments about a statement that the member made, 
and that statement relates to the fact that the previous 
government left a big debt to this province. Well, this is really 
quite humorous, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t so sad. And this must 
be challenged. 
 
The previous administration had balanced budgets every year 
that it was in power; left this government $139 million as a 
slush fund. Now we have a $12 billion accumulated deficit, and 
I would suggest that the rest of his speech has no more 
credibility, based on that kind of misleading statement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, what a disappointment for 
thousands of Saskatchewan families that Speech from the  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

109 
 

Throne was the same nonsense that we heard in 1982 — boy, 
are we going to do wonderful things for you. To you would 
have been a more apt description, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, it is a distinct pleasure to be 
taking part in this throne speech today, and I might add, as my 
colleagues have done, it’s long overdue. 
 
Just about 12 months ago the people of Saskatoon Eastview 
honoured me by electing me to represent their interests, needs 
and dreams in this Assembly. It goes without saying that I was 
overjoyed with the overwhelming vote of confidence the people 
of Eastview placed in myself and in my party on that day. 
 
Over the past year I have worked hard to fulfil the trust that has 
been placed in me, and I will continue to do that to the best of 
my ability. Mr. Speaker, the only other member . . . only one 
other member has served in this House a shorter period of time 
than I, and I refer of course, as my colleagues have, to the new 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Well I’m sorry to see 
him here, and not his opponent from the New Democratic Party. 
I do offer him my congratulations on his victory and wish him 
luck. He’s certainly going to need it. I think he’s just beginning 
to realize what he’s gotten himself into. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the past 12 months have been both busy and 
exciting. They have been months of satisfaction, of hope, and I 
might add, Mr. Speaker, of some tremendous disappointments. 
In my capacity as a member of this House I know that I share 
with each of my colleagues a tremendous satisfaction in serving 
the needs and concerns of my constituents. At the same time, 
this role fills me with tremendous despair and disappointment, 
as the dreams and concerns of the people of Saskatchewan are 
shattered by the callous and unfeeling actions of the Devine 
government. 
 
What are some of these actions, Mr. Speaker? Well, as some of 
my colleagues have mentioned, the cancellation of the 
prescription drug program. Leaders in health care; health care 
being a priority. Doesn’t sound like it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The cancellation of the school-based children’s dental program; 
sell-out and give-aways of our natural resources, and the future 
of our children; excessively high taxes and more tax increases 
this year to cover up the waste, the mismanagement, and the 
ineptitude of this Devine government; failure to provide 
drought assistance to our farmers; going back on promises. 
Another string of broken promises by this government; the 
willingness of the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier to 
stand by and watch the Canadian Wheat Board be dismantled. 
Who is standing up for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, come on, you don’t even know what 
you’re talking about. 
 

Mr. Pringle: — Oh, touched a nerve did we? Who’s standing 
up for Saskatchewan? It certainly isn’t the Premier. He sings the 
Hallelujah Chorus to the Prime Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past year, I have talked to and visited 
with and met with hundreds of people from one end of 
Saskatchewan to the other — yes, in rural Saskatchewan — and 
the litany is the same, Mr. Speaker. Young people, older people, 
low-income and high-income farmers or workers, small 
businesses, retailers, clerks — they all say the same thing, that 
this government has got to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Without exception almost, they are 
embarrassed and upset with the waste and patronage of this 
government. As someone said, my colleague from Moose Jaw, 
yesterday, down goes a Tory candidate and up pops a high 
paying job. In question period today we focused on the string of 
high paying jobs for defeated Tory candidates while our young 
people are forced to leave the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are upset with a deficit that’s totally out of 
control. They are indignant with the indifference shown towards 
the education and employment needs of our young people. They 
are disturbed over the blatant disregard for the needs of 
small-business people. They are disillusioned with the failure of 
the Devine government to come to the defence of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. They are furious with the cut-backs in our health 
care system. And the list goes on and on. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, I derive hope from the situation because 
it tells me that not long from now the people of Saskatchewan 
will say, through the ballot box, enough is enough. They will 
say through the ballot box, Mr. Speaker, that it is time to take 
control of this shameless situation and vote the rascals out. And 
rightly so. They will say, Mr. Speaker, through the ballot box 
on the new gerrymandered constituency boundaries, that it is 
time to give the future back to the people of Saskatchewan. And 
rightly so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a day that I, my colleagues, and the people of 
this province look forward to. 
 
Before proceeding to a little more of the throne speech, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to join my colleague from Regina 
Elphinstone and express my sadness and disappointment 
yesterday with the member from Rosthern, a member that I had 
some respect for, for the vicious and false attack on the Leader 
of Her Majesty’s Official Opposition. It’s a sad day indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, when we abuse the privilege and immunity we have in 
this Assembly. 
 
And I hope the member from Rosthern will do the honourable 
thing and apologize to the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 
a member who has served here with integrity, with conviction, 
and with competence over so many years. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people simply will not accept such dishonest 
goon tactics, and I’m very surprised and disappointed in the 
member from  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

110 
 

Rosthern. 
 
As I said earlier, that the past 12 months have been a time of 
some disappointments for me as a new MLA, a time of 
disappointment to me, to the people of Saskatoon Eastview, and 
certainly to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, it has been nine months since the legislature met last 
to deal with the important and pressing needs of the province — 
nine months in hiding by the Devine Tories. 
 
The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have shown both in words 
and deeds that they consider this body and the democratic 
process to be both irrelevant and an obstacle to cast aside at 
whim. Look at the record, Mr. Speaker — failure to respond to 
any written question on the order paper since 1986, the year of 
the election . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We got them yesterday. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Got them yesterday. Unwarranted delay into 
the introduction of the budget in the 1987 session, a budget 
introduced only after the threat of court action by members 
from this side of the House forced the Minister of Finance to 
fulfil his obligations and responsibilities to the people of 
Saskatchewan — that same Minister of Finance who was out by 
$800 million in his financial forecast; that same minister who 
will say in two weeks, Mr. Speaker, trust me. Well the people 
of the province do not trust the Minister of Finance, and they do 
not trust the Premier. 
 
A few more examples: persistent attempts by this government 
to gag the Public Accounts Committee, and the failure to 
produce Public Accounts in accordance with past procedures 
and practices in this House, and perhaps most importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, the gerrymandering of electoral boundaries in such a 
blatant way. This government will do anything for partisan 
politics. And of course, the unwarranted attacks, the ruthless 
attacks on the integrity and the ability of long-serving servants 
of this House. This government kills the messenger, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Estevan, the Premier, may be 
proud of his dreams to follow the lead of Mikhail Gorbachev, 
but I say, and members on this side of the House say, that we 
would prefer the leadership of the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — We on this side of the House prefer leadership 
that will return to the people of this province control over their 
democratic institutions. We on this side of the House prefer 
leadership that will show respect for the democratic rights of 
the people of Saskatchewan. We on this side prefer leadership 
that will fulfil the trust of the people of this province and ensure 
that the well being of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Saskatchewan will be the first priority of government. 
 
Not long ago, Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale asked me to undertake special critic duties in the 
area of democratic reforms. It is an area of reform that is long 
overdue. Our democratic institutions were  

designed to serve the people, and serve the people they must. In 
recent years, however, these very institutions have been badly 
misused by this Devine government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the members 
not to use other members’ names in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m a little bit 
uncertain about the rules because that comment was used all 
day yesterday and I’ve been using it three or four times in my 
speech so far, so if you could clarify the rules for me please. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I have clarified this rule many times 
and I will do it again: that no member on either side of the 
House during their speeches are allowed to use other members’ 
names. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in recent years these 
democratic institutions have been badly abused by this PC 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker; consequently, the public is 
not only poorly served, but has become increasingly cynical 
about this process. No longer are governments of the day, this 
government of this day, and legislative bodies, looked upon to 
provide leadership. No longer do people place their trust in 
these institutions with confidence that the needs and the dreams 
of the people will be properly dealt with. Instead, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our democratic institutions are viewed as adversaries 
of the people. How ironic — adversaries of the people they are 
designed to serve. 
 
This PC government has breached every time-honoured 
tradition and convention in this legislature, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Over the months ahead I will be making a number of 
proposals designed to strengthen the purpose and the role of our 
democratic institutions, and I look forward to receiving the 
co-operation of government members in the House to ensure 
that the people of Saskatchewan will once again be well served. 
 
Well let’s look at taxation and the deficit for a moment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, tongue in cheek, 
someone once said: a fine is a tax for doing wrong, and a tax is 
a fine for doing all right. I wonder, however, what that person 
would have said if they lived in Saskatchewan today. Perhaps it 
would go something like this: a fine is a tax for doing wrong, 
and a tax is a fine for government ineptitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Clearly, in this province you don’t have to be 
doing all right to be crippled by taxes; all you have to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is live here. 
 
What happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the promise of the PC 
government to eliminate the provincial sales tax? What 
happened to the promise of the PC government to reduce the 
provincial income tax by 10 per cent? What happened to the 
promise of the PC government to eliminate the provincial gas 
tax? What happened to the statement by the Premier that this 
province was so rich in natural resources that any government 
could mismanage the economy and still balance the budget? 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

111 
 

An Hon. Member: — Kept half that promise. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Kept half the promise. That’s right. This is 
clearly a government of broken promises, and you can’t trust 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the past seven years — just think 
about it — in the past seven years this PC government, the 
business people, the managers, have taken our trust, our taxes, 
and our natural resources, and built up a deficit of $4 billion and 
accumulated overall provincial debt of $12 billion overall. 
 
In Saskatoon Eastview, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people can hardly 
believe this. Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this government there is 
ineptitude and there is mismanagement. The record of the PC 
government is simple ineptitude. Personal income tax is the 
highest anywhere in Canada. Property taxes have increased up 
to 44 per cent for farmers — these are the supporters of small 
family farms — 44 per cent tax increases, and up to 50 per cent 
for home owners. Renters are paying 40, 50 per cent of their 
income on shelter in Saskatchewan today. Small businesses are 
in near revolt over the tax burden that they must carry, thanks to 
this government. The flat tax, which seems to go up every time 
there’s a new budget, has placed an intolerable burden on all 
taxpayers. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance 
tells us that the nightmare is not yet over, with more tax 
increases on the way. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all taxpayers of Saskatchewan understand 
the need for a tax system. They understand that from time to 
time some tax increases may be necessary to deliver new 
services, or anticipated tax reductions may be delayed because 
of short-term recessionary cycles in the economy. From 1982 to 
1984 though, the PC government told us, told the people of 
Saskatchewan, that we were opting out of the recession. Well 
the people of Saskatchewan knew otherwise. They were out of 
touch then, and they’re out of touch now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What people in Saskatchewan cannot accept are tax increases 
and an unfair, inequitable tax system that is used solely to cover 
up ineptness, or to use the words of the media: "The 
unmitigated disaster of fiscal mismanagement practices by this 
Devine government." It’s a direct quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve asked members not to use 
other members’ names. Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t think it’s a divine government 
either. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member from 
Regina Centre to please not comment when the Speaker is on 
his feet. 
 
I have asked the member for Saskatoon Eastview not to use 
other members’ names in his speech. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I respect your ruling to 
me. I’m quite upset though that yesterday the Leader of  

the Opposition’s first name and last name was used and was 
allowed. So I’m disappointed with the inconsistency of the 
rules, with respect, sir. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, during this debate and the upcoming 
budget debate, my colleague the member for Regina Centre, 
and others from this side of the House, will have more to say 
about the very serious budgetary situation faced by this 
province; consequently, I will not dwell on it here. 
Nevertheless, the situation this province has been placed in by 
the actions of this PC government has far-reaching implications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past seven years this government has 
failed to govern wisely, they’ve failed to govern responsibly, 
and they’ve failed to govern prudently. It boggles the mind to 
think that in this short period of time this Tory government 
could increase personal income taxes, could increase overall 
government revenues from personal income taxes, and at the 
same time cut services to people under the guise of government 
restraint, and in doing so incur a huge deficit of $4 billion. This 
debt load, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is now so burdensome that the 
government is frantically searching for a way to sell off the 
assets of the people of Saskatchewan. It is no different, Mr. 
Speaker, than selling off your house to pay the family grocery 
bill. 
 
Isn’t it a shame, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that future generations 
cannot be here to see all the wonderful things that this 
government is doing with their money . . . is doing to their 
future. Or more appropriately again, to their future. 
 
This government is committing each one of our children and 
our grandchildren and your grandchildren to a debt load and a 
future that will severely restrict the ability of each one of them 
to grow, to mature, and to develop their own creative 
individualities. 
 
The actions of this government are preventing ourselves and our 
children from living in a province, from living in a society 
where the people can use the economic and political levers 
necessary to ensure that all people will receive equal treatment 
and benefit from all that our province has to offer them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this government attempts to proceed 
down the road of so-called privatization, I want to remind them 
that the process is like a tube of toothpaste — easy to take out, 
but hard to put back. Privatization of the utility Crowns and 
Sask potash corporation must, and will, be stopped, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Over the past few years this government and others have stated 
that privatization and cut-backs in services to people are a good 
thing — a good thing because everyone else does it. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is no different than trying to keep up with the 
Joneses. If the Joneses sell their new Buick for a 10-year-old 
Pontiac with a rusted-out body, then we should too. That, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the policy of this government. 
 
Consequently, in this province we witness lotteries to buy 
hospital equipment because everybody else does it. They say 
there is no money for our universities because no one  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

112 
 

else has any. They say that there is no money to provide 
services for hungry children because no one else does it. 
Starving children, Mr. Speaker, starving families in 
Saskatchewan will be one of the legacies of this PC 
government. This government refuses to provide drought relief 
assistance for farmers because no one else has. They have lots 
of money for corporate give-aways to help others to buy up our 
future, because that’s what others do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the people of Saskatchewan had 
followed that logic in the past, medicare would have remained a 
pipe-dream, and so would have public automobile insurance. 
The people of this province would never have formed credit 
unions and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. The people of this 
province know that this logic and the policies of this Tory 
government is not good enough — they never were and they 
never will be. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know that it is incumbent upon 
each man, woman and child in this province to work together, 
to work co-operatively to plan for the future and to implement 
the dreams that we have for our families and for our society. 
They know that what others do is not necessarily good and 
proper for the society they cherish and wish to live in, and it is 
painfully obvious to them that this PC government is unable to 
provide the leadership, the confidence and the trust that is 
necessary to accomplish this goal. 
 
We don’t want to model Saskatchewan after Margaret Thatcher 
and Ronald Reagan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are record 
levels of hunger and poverty in those countries as well. Let’s 
take a more positive future, not go back in time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to turn to an issue of major concern 
to all people of this province, and that is an issue of the quality 
of family life, another favourite catch-phrase of this 
government, certainly reflected in the throne speech. 
 
In the past we have heard a great deal about the rhetoric from 
members opposite about families and family life. And I am sure 
that all of us are not only familiar with this rhetoric but 
recognize how empty the rhetoric has been — rhetoric about 
families, yet economic and social policies which place more 
stress on them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest that families have two 
levels of importance to all of us. First is the importance of our 
families to each of us as individuals. Our families provide 
support when needed; they nurture us physically and spiritually. 
Our families provide both a source of love and affection as well 
as an outlet for our needs to express the same. For most, our 
families provide a focal point for everything that we do. 
Unfortunately for many, they are not so fortunate, and that is 
regrettable. 
 
On the second level is the role that our families play as the 
primary unit of structure and interaction in our society. It is at 
this level, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that government has an 
important role to play if it’s serious and sincere and honest. It is 
at this level that government can function to enhance or to 
contribute to the deterioration of family life, as this PC 
government has done. 
 

What are the important functions that government nurtures and 
supports, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The list, in my view, is simple 
and it’s short. They function as supporting health care services, 
economic security, educational services, community services, 
employment opportunities, justice, fairness and equality and 
equity for all people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, together the maximization of the potential 
of each of these areas of family life adds up to the quality of life 
enjoyed by our families and by our entire society. Just as our 
families are based upon the concepts of co-operation and 
equality, so too is our society, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately, this doesn’t describe the actions or the agenda of 
this government. There is no question, in my view, in the view 
of the colleagues on this side of the House, that this PC 
government has betrayed the families of this province by 
attacking them and those areas that are vital to the maintenance 
and encouragement of the family unit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is far more than a 
geographical area bounded by invisible lines to the east, the 
west, the north, and the south. Saskatchewan is more than that. 
Saskatchewan is a community of people who understand that 
the future is dependent upon their ability as a community to 
work together. I don’t know why Tories can’t understand that 
— as a community of people dependent on their ability to use 
all the tools and resources available to them to accomplish their 
commonly held dreams and aspirations, for this generation and 
for those that follow. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this means that there 
must be a strong, well-balanced approach to the future, not a 
hollow throne speech of fluff and feathers, not a $9 million 
self-indulging birthday party, as mentioned in the throne 
speech. In Saskatchewan, this means capturing the potential of 
the future provided to all of us — to the private sector, the 
co-operative sector, and yes, the public sector. In Saskatchewan, 
this means allowing the mixed economy to mature, to grow, and 
to flourish. You don’t phase out the department of co-ops; you 
don’t kill the small-business sector. All sectors have to flourish 
in a mixed economy approach. That’s the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from our history in this province we know full 
well that this formula works for us, because it enables the 
people of Saskatchewan to build a society that provides a high 
quality of life, to build a society that provides opportunities, 
security, equality and hope for people today and people 
tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the importance of history is not to enable 
us to relive the past, as members opposite are trying to do as 
they attempt to bring back 18th and 19th century economic and 
social policies. On the contrary, the importance of history is that 
it provides us with the pride and the heritage necessary to plan 
for the future, and this means in part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
it is not sufficient to believe that the economic and social 
agenda of the United States is good enough for us. It means that 
the future is dependent upon the ability of the people of  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

113 
 

Saskatchewan to direct and manage their economy and their 
lives. That we cannot do this is an insult to seniors who live in 
Saskatoon Eastview who helped to build this great province. 
This is why, Mr. Speaker, it is so discouraging to read, month 
after month, the net outflow of residents from this province, 
many of them under the age of 34. 
 
(1630) 
 
Let’s look at the net outflow over the last couple of years: 1987 
— 10,200 people, net outflow from this province; 1988, we lost 
13,300 people from this province. In January of 1989, 1,600 
people left this province — net outflow. Again, many of those 
young people, 70-some per cent of them were under the age of 
34; the town of Rosthern, the town of Wilkie, wiped off the 
map just like that. In another few days the stats will be out for 
February, and there’s no question the results are going to be the 
same — 14 to 1,600 people will have left again. 
 
There’s only one reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why 1,600 
people per month are walking away from Saskatchewan: there 
are simply no jobs here. This is particularly true of the hundreds 
of young people, our future, who are leaving each month. 
 
This throne speech is full of hypocrisy. It talks about youth and 
their future, but talk doesn’t mean anything, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Young people can’t work because there are no jobs. 
They can’t go to universities because there are no spaces. 
Voting with their feet, these people are passing on to the PC 
government the greatest condemnation a government can ever 
receive from the people it serves. They are passing judgement 
on a government whose policies have allowed unemployed to 
increase and the labour force to decrease — a government 
whose record includes record numbers of farm and business 
failures across the province; a government that refuses to 
increase the minimum wage to enable people to live adequately 
and decently; a government that has placed the future of our 
farm families in jeopardy; a government unwilling to 
adequately fund our educational institutions; a government 
unwilling to develop a child care system for single parents in 
Saskatchewan; a government that believes that funding for 
health care and education can be increased by promoting 
gambling. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are these the actions of a 
government that is concerned about the people, about the youth, 
and about the families of this province? This throne speech, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was a bunch of nonsense. Is it any wonder that 
people are voting with their feet and simply leaving? 
 
Mr. Speaker, not long ago I conducted a survey of 
small-business people in Saskatoon Eastview. These are 
businesses averaging three or four full-time employees, two or 
three temporary employees, and two or three part-time 
employees. And small business represent, as we know, a major 
source of employment growth in our province, or did in the 
past. They still do but they’re hurting. 
 
I want to share with you just a few of the results of that  

survey. Eighty-five per cent said that business was fair to poor 
— these are their words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Overall gross 
sales decreased on an average of 9 per cent between 1987 and 
1988. Sixty per cent said that the minimum wage was too low. I 
want to stress that because even though 85 per cent said their 
business was from fair to poor, they recognize that the 
minimum wage in this province is too low. Eighty per cent said 
their taxes were too high. These businesses, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are hurting, and to compound their difficulties they 
believe that this government has abrogated its responsibility on 
the question of store hours, giving in to the demands of large 
businesses, sacrificing the needs and wishes of the 
small-business owner and employee. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I consult with other people in my 
constituency and elsewhere across the province, I hear similar 
things. When I talk to educators, I hear of the lack of funds for 
post secondary institutions; I hear of insufficient resources for 
students with special needs; I hear of pupil-teacher ratios that 
are too high; I hear of confrontation by an arrogant Minister of 
Education, as we heard today from the member from Regina 
Elphinstone; we hear of hungry children going to school. 
 
When I talk to workers, I hear their concerns and needs for job 
security and the lack of future employment opportunities, the 
lack of predictability. I hear of the reductions to services in 
many of our communities. I hear the worry over the 
introduction of a two-tiered minimum wage and the proposed 
regressive labour legislation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’ll be dandy for the young people. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Yes, that’ll be great for young people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I hear the anger over taxes and cut-backs that 
affect the welfare and the health of their families. 
 
When I talk to farmers — yes it may surprise you I talk to 
farmers; I have farm roots. I recently had a meeting with a 
number of farmers, active farmers, who live in the riding of 
Saskatoon Eastview. I hear their concerns as they relate to the 
lack of services to our rural communities. I hear of their anger 
and frustrations over this government’s unwillingness to defend 
the Canadian Wheat Board and the orderly marketing system. 
 
This government is a friend of the small farmer. Who’s standing 
up for the small farmer? It certainly isn’t the Premier of this 
province. 
 
I hear of their very real concerns over the debt load they must 
carry and their opposition to the proposed equity financing 
program of this government. I hear of their concerns and fears 
as it relates to the preservation of the family farm, and their 
families are real and vital units of our provincial society. 
 
When I talk to parents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear of their 
concerns and anger over the emasculation of health care 
services, the effects on their children, their parents and 
themselves. I hear the concerns for their educational system. I 
hear their needs and dreams for an adequate child care system. I 
hear their anger over the taxes and the plans of this government 
to sell off our future heritage —  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

114 
 

to give away our future heritage. 
 
When I talk to young students, they want to know why they 
must leave their families in this province to go to school and 
find employment elsewhere. They want to know why this 
government has so severely cut back on student summer 
employment programs — programs which for thousands of 
Saskatchewan students provide the only means they have of 
being able to complete their education, not even mentioned in 
the throne speech. Can you believe that? A summer program 
which provided 9,700 jobs in 1986 and 10,000 in 1987, 4,000 in 
1988, and less than that in 1989. This is a government 
concerned about youth, families, and education? Who are you 
trying to kid? 
 
When I talk to single parents, unemployed and individuals who 
are required to receive social assistance, largely due to the 
failed economic policies of this government, they want to know 
why they must be relegated to second-class citizenship. They 
want to know why they must suffer the attacks on their personal 
integrity and dignity and the dignity of their children by this PC 
government. They want to know why they must suffer ridicule 
and cut-backs in services. They want to know why this 
government has failed to ensure that employment and economic 
opportunities available in our society are not accessible to them 
and their children. 
 
Seniors have concerns as well. There are a large, large number 
of seniors in my riding. They are concerned about home care 
cuts. They are concerned about the prescription drug cuts. 
They’re concerned about the cuts to all the programs that affect 
them and their children and grandchildren. And I wanted to read 
a very brief letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a constituent who — 
and I have several of these — but one I picked out that was 
written on March 6 from a senior citizen in Saskatoon Eastview, 
or from a couple actually, and I quote: 
 

 If we we’re going to detail our present day worries, it 
would fill a book, or volumes. Our main concern is the 
despair and the plunge toward privatization by this 
government. Free trade is a give-away. 
 
 What concerns us deeply is the destruction of our social 
framework built up over many years by people like us. 
Money and greed are the mainstay of our present-day 
governing bodies which is an insult to the past and present 
generation of Canadians, leaving the future generations 
little to look forward to unless they belong to the minority 
rich. 
 
 We hope you can help to do something to change the 
direction and bring hope to the average person in despair. 
We wish you all the best in the future. 
 

Well, Mr. Premier, your policies are hurtful, and you’re out of 
touch with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the throne speech, what did we hear about indigenous 
peoples? Eighty-five and ninety per cent unemployment in 
northern Saskatchewan. How is this government supporting 
indigenous families by cutting programs and services, by 
making racist comments that are all too  

familiar to this Premier and cabinet ministers? The same is true 
the way they will offend minority groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sad part is that I could go on and on and on. 
When you add it all up, there is only one conclusion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this PC government has taken every step 
possible — despite its rhetoric — has taken every step possible 
to attack Saskatchewan families in this province. Make no 
mistake about that, this PC government is incompetent, it’s 
deceitful, and it is corrupt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — In this session, this PC government will be 
exposed for what it really is. It’s dishonest, it’s destructive, it’s 
anti-youth, it’s anti-family, and it’s undemocratic. And we will 
be exposing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s one way to measure the insensitivity of a 
government to the needs of the people, it is clearly in the way in 
which people are treated, particularly the health and welfare of 
our children. We know that over 25 per cent, as was pointed out 
earlier today, that over 25 per cent of the children in 
Saskatchewan are living in poverty today, and nothing this 
government has done has alleviated this problem. They won’t 
even acknowledge that it’s a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the record for a minute. In health, 
they eliminated the school children’s based dental program, 
they made it more difficult for parents to provide required 
medication to their children, and they have underfunded our 
hospitals. Plastic cards do little to help a sick child when 
prescriptions are required, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Income support — what has this government done? They have 
placed a freeze on the family income plan. They have refused to 
increase the minimum wage. Families are cracking under the 
stress. All you have to do is talk to any counselling agencies — 
there’s a two- or three- or four-month waiting list because 
there’s been cut-backs to those agencies. 
 
How about food and nutrition? This government has 
encouraged the reliance on food banks, the fastest growing 
industry in this province. This government has refused to 
provide even short-term, interim assistance by way of 
school-based meal programs. 
 
The only conclusion one can draw is that this government is 
obviously content to see children starve. I can’t believe that. I 
can’t believe that the member from Rosthern would accept that. 
I just can’t believe it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s an old cliché to say that our children 
are our greatest and most precious resource, and yet the truth of 
that statement is very profound. The situation faced by our 
young people today represents the greatest challenge facing our 
government and our families. And if we are truly concerned, if 
this government is truly concerned with families and children 
and family life, this must be regarded as a top priority of this 
government. Was it mentioned in the throne speech? No, it 
wasn’t. 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

115 
 

(1645) 
 
Unfortunately this PC government is more interested in cutting 
quick deals to sell off the future and heritage of our children. 
And again, nowhere is this more clear than in the throne speech. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear a great deal from 
this PC government about an agenda for change — a change 
that reconstructs a society and an economy that was rejected by 
the people of this province decades ago; a style of change, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker that is simply not acceptable. It is not 
acceptable to the people and the families of Saskatchewan. It is 
not good enough to, as this government attempts to do, to go 
back in time. 
 
Change? And we agree that change is required on this side of 
the House, but it must always move to the future. Change must 
move forward. It must meet the needs of today and capture the 
potential of tomorrow. To meet the needs, to approach the 
future, it is necessary to harness all the social and economic 
forces at our disposal. That is the approach that members on 
this side of the House believe in, because we believe in the 
future. 
 
We don’t need a cheer-leader for Brian Mulroney. We believe 
in a Premier that stands up for Saskatchewan’s interests. We 
believe in a future that provides justice, fairness and equality. 
We believe in a future that provides all of us with the 
opportunity to make a living — surely that’s not asking too 
much — and the opportunity to raise our children in dignity. 
 
We believe in a future that provides for the security of families. 
We believe in a future built upon a strong, well-functioning, 
mixed economy. That’s what we believe on this side of the 
House, where decisions are based on sound environmental 
policies . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — On human need. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — . . . and on human need. We believe in a future 
that is built upon the people of this province having a large 
measure of control over their economy and the ability to 
provide effective direction in a society. 
 
Above all, Mr. Speaker, we believe in a future that all the 
people of Saskatchewan can look forward to — that all of the 
people can look forward to — not just defeated Tory MLAs and 
MPs; that all of the people of Saskatchewan can look forward to 
with hope and confidence. That kind of future was not 
described in the throne speech. 
 
While we look forward to the future, Mr. Speaker, today I share 
with the people of Saskatchewan, my colleagues and I share 
with the people of Saskatchewan, a profound lack of confidence 
in the ability of this PC government to provide for our 
commonly held needs and concerns of today and tomorrow. 
 
Therefore, I simply cannot support a throne speech which is 
living in the past and I again condemn this PC government for 
its deceit, for its dishonesty, and for . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I find that  

comment, in the context it was used, unparliamentary. I would 
ask the member to retract . . . Order. Order. I would ask the 
member to retract the statement and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
respect, sir, I am unable to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 
ask the member again to apologize to the House for 
unparliamentary language. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, again, with respect, I 
simply cannot withdraw that statement . I just so fundamentally 
believe that, I cannot . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. For the third time, for the third 
time . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. There’s no point of 
order to a Speaker’s ruling. 
 
I have ruled that the language that was used was 
unparliamentary. I’ve asked the member to apologize to the 
House. He has refused to do that. I’m giving him one more 
chance to apologize to the House for the use of unparliamentary 
language. 
 
There is no point of order. I would ask the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview once more, the last time, to apologize to 
the House for the use of unparliamentary language. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am unaware of 
what the point of order is before the House, whether . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There is no point of order before the 
House. There is no point of order to a ruling from the Chair. 
I’ve asked the member for the last time to apologize for 
unparliamentary language. The member . . . I will recognize the 
member for Saskatoon Eastview to apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was in the process 
of asking you what you’re asking the member to withdraw. I 
didn’t hear the member’s comment. I was listening to his 
speech. I didn’t hear that point. I’m asking you: what is the 
unparliamentary term you’re asking the member to withdraw? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There’s no point of order to a ruling 
from Chair. I have ruled that the language was unparliamentary. 
I would ask the member to retract his last statement. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, would you be clear with 
me please on what you would like me to retract? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I asked the member to retract his last 
statement and apologize to the House. 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

116 
 

Order. I can read the infraction. Page 104, paragraph 319(3): 
 

(3) In the House of Commons a Member will not be 
permitted by the Speaker to indulge in any reflections 
on the House itself as a political institution; or to 
impute to any Member or Members unworthy motives 
for their actions in a particular case; or to use any 
profane or indecent language; or to question the 
acknowledged and undoubted powers of the 
House . . . 

I would ask the member again, for the last time, to retract his 
statement and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I have been 
unparliamentary in my comments, I apologize. Nevertheless, it 
certainly doesn’t . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It cannot be a qualified apology. It 
has to be an unequivocal apology to the House. The debate 
continues. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I withdraw my . . . I 
apologize to the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion I will simply 
say — I was on my last sentence — I will simply say that the 
Premier of this province, that the government of this province 
will be held accountable by the people of Saskatchewan for the 
most disastrous and callous betrayal of any government in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Being near 5 o’clock, this 
House is recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


