


















































April 4, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 4, 1989 
 

495 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Acting Clerk: -- The following petition is hereby 
presented and laid on the Table by Mr. Baker, of the Sisters of 
Charity, Grey Nuns of Alberta, the city of Edmonton in the 
province of Alberta. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Environmental Concerns With NewGrade Upgrader 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is directed to the Minister of the Environment. It 
concerns some rather serious events that have been taking place 
connected with the upgrader in Regina. Mr. Minister, you’re 
well aware that for the second time in a month there has been an 
incident at the upgrader which may have threatened the health 
and well-being of citizens in Regina. There was a fire at that 
upgrader this past weekend which may have resulted in a 
serious explosion or further gas leaks from the upgrader. And 
since then people have found fall-out on cars and homes, and 
many of them are concerned about the inhalation of substances 
in the air which may be harmful to them. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Minister, that even you would agree that these 
concerns are of such an important nature that they need to be 
addressed by you immediately. And so my question to you is 
this: in light of these most recent incidents, what steps are you 
taking to assure the Regina citizens that their health and their 
well-being is being protected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I’d like to thank the hon. member for his 
question, and indeed there is concern about the fire that 
occurred at the upgrader. I don’t think that anyone ever wants a 
fire to happen, and the upgrader people were as concerned, I 
guess, as you and I about that particular part of it. 
 
As far as the spill of material that has drifted on to the 
automobiles, no one is aware at this point of whether that came 
from the upgrader -- I think not, likely. Our people have worked 
yesterday; have taken samples of the product. That product is 
being tested and we expect results some time today, but we 
don’t have them at this point in the day. 
 
I can advise the hon. member that it would appear that if the 
spill came from anywhere there, that it was not the upgrader, 
but rather the refinery, from the coking equipment that they use 
in the old refinery. And if that’s the case, then I indeed intend to 
lay a charge, and I’ve asked my staff to proceed to lay a charge 
as soon as we have enough detail. That process is in place and 
will happen very quickly. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question. It sounds 
like deja vu from listening to what the minister is saying here 
today. Mr. Minister, there was a major leak at the upgrader a 
month ago. You went in front of television cameras at that time 
and you talked about how tough you were going to be because 
of the incident that caused some rather serious danger to school 
children in the school in north-east Regina. Then the next day, 
Mr. Minister, you changed your mind and you sent a different 
message and you said that you’re going to be tolerant with 
polluters. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time that you sent a clear message to the 
public on where you really stand on the environmental 
protection. And in light of your negligence, Mr. Minister, I ask 
you that . . . also in light of the series of incidences that have 
taken place recently at the upgrader, don’t you agree with me 
that it’s time for a full and public inquiry into the environmental 
safety aspects of the upgrader operations here in Regina. Don’t 
you agree with that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- I can advise this Assembly that the hon. 
member is putting words in my mouth and that at no time did I 
make the statement that I was going to be easy on polluters. 
That has never been the case. But what I did say was that we 
were going to follow through, find out what it took to correct 
the problem that had occurred at that upgrader, have it 
corrected, and if that was not done, then we would proceed with 
charges. 
 
I can advise the hon. member today that the upgrader people 
brought in their engineers. They have put in a mechanism to 
stop that raw product going into the boiler to cause the fire that 
occurred the last time that the hydrogen sulphide was spilled. 
They advise us now that that problem is corrected. If that’s the 
case, then I think the company has done the proper thing and a 
charge is not necessary. 
 
I can also advise you that I have instructed my staff to lay that 
charge, and it will proceed, the charge will proceed because 
we’re very sure of where the product came from. We just need 
the final identification. That should be final today some time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- New question, Mr. Minister. The 
company may be doing the proper thing, Mr. Minister, but I 
suggest that you have not been. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to quote to you, Mr. Minister, from 
this statement prepared by the proponents of the upgrader, and 
it’s called “The Environmental Impact Statement Relating to 
the Proposed Heavy Oil Upgrader Project,” which was prepared 
and which your department never made an assessment of before 
you gave 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

496 
 

your permit. And the code I want to read to you, Mr. Minister, 
is this: 
 

The Co-operative Refineries Ltd. refinery will continue 
to monitor hydrogen sulphide and sulphur dioxide at both 
stations on a continuous basis. The major sulphur 
emission stacks will incorporate continuous monitors for 
sulphur dioxide. As part of its operating permit, 
NewGrade will report to the provincial government on a 
regular basis the results of this monitoring and will 
regularly submit statements regarding the efficiency of 
the sulphur plant. 
 

This is in volume 2, Mr. Minister, of this environmental impact 
statement which you never, and your department never made an 
assessment of. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, since your permit requires regular 
monitoring of hydrogen sulphide and hydrogen dioxide, a 
public disclosure of the results, I assure you, Mr. Minister, and 
I’m sure you will agree, would show the citizens of Regina 
whether there is or whether there is not something to be afraid 
of here. And so my question then is: will you table those reports 
of the monitoring that you’re supposed to have been getting 
since the beginning of this upgrader, so that you can ease the 
minds of the folks, and so that they don’t have to go to bed at 
night with a worry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House that the 
monitoring equipment was put in place and that it has been 
reporting . . . it reports automatically to the department. And I 
believe that all of the reports that those monitors have shown up 
to this point have not shown a serious problem with hydrogen 
sulphide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem that occurred when the spill occurred 
back in the winter in February was that the wind was very 
strong and the weather was cold. And that particular time . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- At that time, the wind blew the product 
away from the monitoring area so the monitors did not pick it 
up. And that is a fault that we are looking at and wondering 
where you would put monitors. You can’t have them in 
everybody’s back yard in this city, but we are looking at further 
monitoring in order to be able to detect that kind of problem 
when it occurs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to this 
minister. Mr. Minister, if you have been getting those reports -- 
and I will take you at your word that you’ve been getting those 
reports -- and if those reports give the assurances that there has 
been no safety hazard involved here to the public that may get 
affected, I ask you: why in the world would you, unless you’re 
hiding something, why would you not table those reports and 
make them public, so that the people can be assured that in fact 
there is no hazard involved in this situation? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of that last 
portion of his question and consult with my staff to see whether 
or not these reports are available for public. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I am shocked and surprised 
that, in spite of what has been happening, the minister wouldn’t 
be able to answer that question today and he’s got to go back to 
his department to find out that information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the minister, and it’s my 
final question. Mr. Minister, in this executive summary of the 
environmental impact statement, on page 7 it was stated that 
although there would be a sixfold increase in the sulphur 
content, the emissions of sulphur dioxide would decrease 
substantially from what they used to be. That’s what it says on 
page 7. Today the citizens of Regina don’t believe that. Things 
are happening out there that have never happened before and 
which they have never experienced before. 
 
Now as I said earlier, your government accepted this study 
without doing any assessment of your own on it in 1985. So I 
ask you, Mr. Minister: how closely have you checked these 
assurances made by the proponents since then, and how willing 
are you to stand behind those assurances today in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, the information that the 
member is referring to would be very technical kind of study. 
My department staff are doing that kind of study, but that type 
of information doesn’t flow to my desk on a daily basis. I will 
take notice of the question and bring back an answer for the 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also to 
the Minister of the Environment. Mr. Minister, I represent the 
people of that part of the city of Regina and, quite frankly, I’m 
very worried about their safety and their well-being. 
 
Can you table in this House the studies your government has 
conducted on the health concerns of long-term exposure to 
hydrogen sulphide emissions, and can you tell us what steps 
you took to advise the people of that area about those concerns 
before the plant was built? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, I can advise the hon. member 
that I was not the minister at the time that he refers to. I have 
not had those studies at my fingertips. I’ll take notice of that 
question as well and bring back an answer. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you’re 
the Minister of the Environment now; you have to accept the 
responsibility for what is going on in the environment. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

497 
 

Mr. Minister, that area of Regina contains a lot of school 
children who have the right to grow up in a healthy 
environment. There are a lot of seniors there also whose health 
is a fragile thing, and there’s a lot of families that don’t deserve 
to have their health threatened for no good reason. When you 
see what hydrogen sulphide emissions mixing with water 
vapour and becoming sulphuric acid can do to paint on cars and 
buildings, it scares me to think what it can do to the lungs of the 
people. 
 
Are you being so callous about the safety and well-being of our 
people that you’re willing to simply ignore this situation, to say, 
well I wasn’t the minister then. Is that the best I can tell my 
constituents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad that the member 
had his question written so he could read it in detail like that. 
 
I can advise the House that my staff have done a very good job 
of following up on the problems that have occurred at the 
upgrader and at the refinery. That refinery has been on the edge 
of this city for many years. The product that appears to have 
drifted from that area to the cars in the district were not from 
the upgrader itself, but rather from the refinery. That’s as near 
as we can trace it. That will . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. The minister is answering 
the question and he’s doing it in a responsible way, and we 
should allow him to carry on. 
 

Risks Subsequent to Fire at Upgrader 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the 
minister responsible for splitting hairs, the Minister of the 
Environment and Public Safety. Mr. Minister, I want to know 
whether your department has undertaken any studies on the risk 
of explosion as a result of the fire at the upgrader this past 
week, and have you done any studies on how such an explosion 
might impact the city of Regina and surrounding area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, no, my department has not 
done studies. The engineering firm that designed the upgrader 
did that kind of study. I don’t believe that that is part of the 
responsibility of the department to do the studies for the 
upgrader and for the whole operation of it. But we do check the 
upgrader to see that things are operating properly. We will 
continue to do that, and we’ll monitor on a regular basis and see 
that the rules of this province are enforced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I have a new question for the minister, 
Mr. Speaker. Or perhaps I should be putting it to someone else, 
because I thought I was putting a question to the minister 
responsible for Public Safety, sir, and that’s you. And if you’re 
not concerned about the public safety of the citizens of Regina, 
who should be? 

Let me ask you another question: can you tell this House what 
contingency plans have been developed by your Emergency 
Measures Organization for the possible evacuation for part of 
the city of Regina in the case of an explosion, fire, or any major 
gas leak from that refinery? Can you answer that question for 
the people of Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, the Emergency Measures 
Organization that works under my department has in place 
evacuation plans for the city of Regina and for different 
portions of the city of Regina. I believe that the plans that are in 
place will work very effectively if they are needed. Up to this 
point they have not been needed. 
 

Plight of Small Hotels 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- My question is to the acting minister 
responsible for the Liquor Control Board. And last week the 
minister told us that his discriminatory pricing of canned beer 
was done to help small-town hotels survive. But you may have 
noticed in last night’s Leader-Post, it was indicated that some 
23 hotels went broke last year. Mr. Minister, they need help 
from you and your government, and I’d like to know what 
you’re prepared to do to help them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The government has had numerous meetings 
with the Hotels Association of Saskatchewan. They have 
expressed their views that notwithstanding the NDP’s 
opposition to the canned beer pricing initiative, that they are 
very supportive of it. 
 
Certainly there are difficulties in the hotel industry, particularly 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that is why there are 
several initiatives in the recently introduced budget to try and 
maintain the viability of rural communities. And I’m quite 
prepared to list the initiatives set out in the budget if the hon. 
member hasn’t read the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me enlighten the minister in 
terms of what the hoteliers in rural Saskatchewan have been 
offered so far by the minister in charge of the Liquor Control 
Board. 
 
And my question, Mr. Minister, the hoteliers are told that they 
should be expanding their facilities to include foods services, 
but they can’t afford the capital costs. In fact many of those 
hoteliers can’t afford to insure the buildings that they house 
their hotels in, buy liability insurance, or any kind of insurance 
at all. 
 
And one thing that your government could do is address the 
problem of rising interest rates. But instead, what you’re 
proposing to do is to sell off SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), the vehicle that you could use to make insurance 
rates affordable. 
 
My question is this, Mr. Minister: why don’t you stop your 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

498 
 

privatization ideology? Give those small business operators a 
break; give them a hand with their insurance rates. Why don’t 
you become a part of the solution instead of a part of the 
problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me remind the hon. member, because I 
know he was not around at the time, that it was his 
administration, Mr. Speaker, that had to bail out SGI by some 
$80 million; that had to put a surcharge -- I believe 
approximately 2 cents a litre on every single gallon of gas to 
keep SGI afloat; thirdly, put SGI investing, Mr. Speaker, in 
Ireland and in ships in the North Atlantic, Mr. Speaker, that 
caused serious losses for SGI, Mr. Speaker. That was the New 
Democratic Party’s use of SGI. 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, I did announce in the 
budget several initiatives to try and help rural Saskatchewan, 
which will have a direct impact on the hotel industry. I am 
prepared to list them, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member took it 
into the ideological argument of SGI, failing to bring to the 
public’s attention the mismanagement and the high cost of 
operation of the SGI under the New Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- New question, Mr. Speaker, new question 
to the same minister. I want to say that you’ve just reassured all 
of the hoteliers in rural Saskatchewan, believe me, because 
these hoteliers know that you have taken $200 million, Mr. 
Minister, out of the Crown corporations in this budget to try and 
keep control of your deficit. 
 
The question was, Mr. Minister, was can you offer some help 
via SGI for insurance rates; and I have another question for you 
since you didn’t see fit to answer that one. 
 
You know darn well the bankers don’t want to give loans to the 
hotels because of the condition and the economic condition that 
your government has placed them in. Will you offer these 
people today some assurance of some loan guarantees that I 
didn’t see in your budget, by the way, Mr. Minister? Will you 
today stand up here and offer the same kind of loan guarantees 
to the rural hotels that you offered Weyerhaeuser in Prince 
Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I will give the hoteliers of this province and 
the people of this province that SGI will not invest in Ireland, 
will not be insuring ships on the north Atlantic, will not be 
reinsuring around the world at several millions of dollars of 
losses to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
The announcements, Mr. Speaker, as to the details of the 
programs, particularly those applying to small business, Mr. 
Speaker, will be announced by the appropriate minister at the 
appropriate time. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe, I don’t believe 
and I don’t think most responsible people believe 

that SGI should become a subsidizing insurer for every . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- My final question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, again they’re reassured, and I can tell you that they’ll 
enjoy reading your response in Hansard. 
 
You know full well that your canned beer policy is chasing 
breweries out of this province. You’re chasing the rural 
hoteliers out of this province by your lack of action, and in the 
meantime you’re chasing everybody else out of the province. In 
February, we lose over 6,000 people. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there anyone in this province, with the 
exception of Dome Petroleum and Pocklington and your 
big-business friends, that you will protect? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me tell the people of Prince Albert, in 
the hon. member’s home constituency, that it is this government 
that’s protecting an additional nearly 250 jobs in Weyerhaeuser, 
Mr. Speaker, over the objections of that hon. member and over 
the objections of his leader. 
 
And it is this government, Mr. Speaker, that’s announced 
expansions in the forest industry, a new seedling program, Mr. 
Speaker, to restore our forests that those people over there 
refused to do, Mr. Speaker, in his home town, in his riding. We 
are trying to protect the jobs, Mr. Speaker, over his objections 
and over his resistance of our efforts to protect jobs in his town, 
Mr. Speaker. We will continue to do that. We will continue to 
try and diversify, bring in the new industries, bring in the jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 4,000 more in manufacturing 
last year is proof that that is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cut in Heritage Grant to Seniors 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Human Resources. Mr. Minister, in your budget, 
you have cut the heritage grant to senior citizens by some $2 
million. And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what’s going on 
here? Are you planning to pay fewer citizens, senior citizens 
less money . . . to fewer seniors, or are you going to pay less . . . 
the same number of seniors less money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we have not cut the 
senior’s heritage grant. That’s an example of the fear mongering 
the members opposite indulge in every day of the week. 
 
What we have done is we have a heritage grant for seniors that 
is exactly the same as it was last year, and we have budgeted 
how many seniors we think will qualify under the same rules as 
last year. And if there are fewer seniors qualifying, it is only 
because there are more seniors with more money and larger 
incomes, and if you have an income over 30,000 you don’t 
qualify. So if seniors are wealthier than they were last year, it’s 
hardly the 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

499 
 

government’s fault. I take credit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- New question. Mr. Minister, you obviously can’t 
administer your program . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order. We’re having 
difficulty hearing the member from Saskatoon Centre, and I’m 
sure she deserves the opportunity to put her question. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, this is a new question. You 
obviously can’t administer your program properly. The seniors 
in this province are increasing in number; they are not 
decreasing. The average income for the seniors, according to 
Statistics Canada, is well below the level for the grant. The 
problem is that the heritage grant has not been explained well to 
the seniors, and if you had made it an automatic grant . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order. I’m having a great 
deal of difficulty hearing the question, as I’m sure many other 
members are. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, why are you punishing our seniors 
this way? Why not make the grant automatic and ensure that 
our seniors who qualify get it, and without having to go through 
the hassle of paying and paying and paying for their taxes and 
not getting the money to pay it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the criticism rings just a 
little hollow. It rings just a little hollow. I will take part of that 
question under advisement, and I will spend more money 
advertising this good program at the request of the opposition. 
That I can agree to. So she has my agreement to that. 
 
But I will not pay money to senior citizens who don’t qualify 
because their income is over $30,000. We will pay all of the 
low-income seniors who qualify, and those who don’t qualify, 
we won’t pay. And we will advertise that more so that even the 
member opposite will understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Clean Air Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Clean Air Act. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed it’s my 
pleasure to enter into this budget debate. The 1989-90 budget 
tabled by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, in my opinion 
is a very complete, a very interesting, and a very exciting 
document. And this budget, Mr. Speaker, like the budget of last 
year, is a budget that I believe fairly recognizes the financial 
situation of the province. 
 
In summation, Mr. Speaker, I would say that this is very much a 
common sense budget. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that this 
budget recognizes provincial, national, and international 
financial conditions. This budget addresses areas, Mr. Speaker, 
where increased funding and support are required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I speak of those areas, I’m speaking of 
health care, I’m speaking of education, I’m speaking of the 
family, I’m speaking of the family farm, and I’m speaking of 
the environment, as well as highways and transportation. Mr. 
Speaker, this government recognizes areas that require 
increased emphasis, and I believe that this budget responds to 
those needs. 
 
Last year I spoke in my speech of difficult choices that a 
government has to make. I believe that this year, in light of the 
drought of last year, the difficult choices this year were as 
difficult as last. But this budget does continue our government’s 
commitment to allocate financial and human resources where 
they will best meet the challenges and the opportunities ahead. 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, demonstrates leadership, direction, 
and management that is all required for us to grow in today’s 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tackling the issues of the day while addressing 
budget deficits is the aim and the commitment of this 
government. I believe that this budget addresses those issues, as 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to see a single budget 
tackle so many different issues across the piece. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak a little more directly 
and explain in some detail how this budget benefits the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan and their highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 1989-90 budget for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation is an exciting budget, and in fact 
this year’s budget totals $245 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
think you and I and all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
and indeed the people of Saskatchewan, recognize that $245 
million is a lot of money. What we are talking, Mr. Speaker, is 
nearly a quarter of a billion dollars invested in the highways and 
transportation system of this province. Mr. Speaker, contrary to 
what members opposite, members of the NDP, may say or may 
try and persuade people of, the fact of the matter remains, 
nearly a quarter of a billion dollars spent directly into our 
highway system. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

500 
 

I am proud, Mr. Speaker, of that commitment. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Minister of Finance’s budget address, the 
department’s capital budget has been significantly, substantially 
increased, an extra 9 per cent; or on the capital budget what 
we’re talking is an additional $10 million over last year. This 
increase, Mr. Speaker, will be used, will be used to improve our 
rural highways throughout this province of Saskatchewan, and 
indeed it will also include an accelerated program on the 
southbound lanes on Highway No. 11 between Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I make that announcement 
today with a great deal of pride. Most people in this province of 
Saskatchewan at one time or another, in fact many times 
throughout a year, would travel on No. 11 Highway between 
Regina and Saskatoon. That is a four lane highway, Mr. 
Speaker, that we in the province have every right to be proud 
of. And, Mr. Speaker, when you see the amount of moneys 
allocated, the number of contracts let on Highway No. 11 this 
year, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan will say, yes 
indeed, this government is spending their moneys respecting 
highways and transportation in a prudent manner. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that even the opposition, even the opposition, as 
critical and as negative as they always are, may in fact agree 
with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the increase in capital funding will allow the 
department to improve approximately 1,100 kilometres of 
provincial highway in this year’s program. This includes 831 
kilometres of paving -- an increase of 17 per cent over last year. 
The budget, as well, includes 316 kilometres of grading which 
also represents a significant increase over last year. 
 
I have every trust, every confidence and every faith, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan road building industry is ready 
and able to meet the challenges of this increased capital 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just make a few passing 
comments directly to the members’ opposition, the members in 
opposition, the members of the NDP Party, and specifically to 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana who yesterday in this very 
legislature made some very disparaging remarks, some very 
disparaging remarks respecting the abilities and capabilities of 
Saskatchewan road builders. 
 
I want to talk for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to outline to this 
Saskatchewan legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan 
just what the road building industry is about. Mr. Speaker, we 
have many, many Saskatchewan contractors throughout this 
great province who are free enterprisers, who have made 
multimillion dollar investments into capital land and equipment. 
I’m talking, Mr. Speaker, of crawlers, and ‘dozers, and graders, 
and backhoes and scrapers -- a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. And 
these road builders are private business people, large 
investments, willing, ready, able and capable to go in and bid 
competitively to build Saskatchewan highways. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that these road builders are as 

capable as any across North America. 
 
For the member opposite, from Saskatoon Nutana, to speak 
without any justification and say that this government no longer 
builds highways, and the private contractors are not capable of 
building highways, is indeed an insult not only to the 
contractors themselves but to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any reasonable, common thinking, common sense 
type of person would know full well that the true competitive 
environment in Saskatchewan with our capable road builders 
delivers us a good product. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we as a 
department, we as politicians, have a right and a responsibility 
to the people of Saskatchewan to look over these projects, to 
demand certain specifications, to hold back moneys if work is 
not done properly, and I believe that the people in the 
Department of Highways, and I believe myself as minister in 
charge, do a reasonably good job of ensuring a good product. 
 
But I say once again, the members of the NDP Party should 
come to this legislature with a little more reasonableness than to 
blast away at the private contractors. It was an insult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to go on to talk a little bit about 
the fact that this year we are in the second year of an enhanced 
highway rehabilitation program. That was a program announced 
last year -- a three-year, $30 million enhanced rehabilitation 
program. And, Mr. Speaker, this is the second year of it. That 
rehabilitation program will exceed $46 million. It will improve 
more than 550 kilometres of paved highway in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is programs like this one that demonstrate a 
commitment by this government to improve and preserve the 
nearly 25,000 kilometres of provincial highways in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, indeed we have more miles or 
more kilometres of highway here in this province of ours per 
capita than probably any jurisdiction in North America. It is a 
massive system, Mr. Speaker, combined with, combined with 
the fact that we do not have ideal climatic conditions. We have 
a cold climate, Mr. Speaker, that makes it a little more difficult 
to manage that system. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you consider an extra $10 million this 
year, when you consider last year the announcement of an 
additional $30 million resurfacing or rehabilitation program, I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that those figures speak for themselves. I 
am not about, Mr. Speaker, to advance the argument that all 
highways in Saskatchewan are in good condition. Indeed, we 
have some trouble spots. But I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
amount of money we’re spending this year, nearly a quarter of a 
billion dollars, is very reasonable and will go a long ways to 
improving our highway system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, not only has the 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

501 
 

Highways capital program benefitted from this budget but 
indeed the budget for the maintenance of our highways and our 
airports has also been increased. This year’s maintenance 
budget, Mr. Speaker, is nearly $90 million. And I speak again, 
Mr. Speaker, with a fair degree of pride, on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan, that nearly $90 million will be spent on the 
routine maintenance procedures to keep our highways in good 
condition. Our government indeed, Mr. Speaker, is committed 
to maintaining our highway system to provide a reasonable 
level of service to all road users in spite of the difficult 
economic times in which we are. 
 
A well maintained highway system, Mr. Speaker, naturally has 
many benefits, not only to the automobile users but I’m 
speaking of the travelling public, to the truckers who are 
delivering goods out all across this province of ours. I’m 
speaking about the promotion of travel and tourism which in 
itself is a very major part of an economy today. So, Mr. 
Speaker, this commitment will reflect well to all of these 
different user groups, and I believe that most people in 
Saskatchewan would welcome this news that I have today. 
 
When I talk about maintenance operations, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
talking about procedures that are carried out both by the private 
sector and by the public sector. 
 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reaffirm a few of 
my comments from last year. You will know, Mr. Speaker, that 
in the Department of Highways and Transportation we have 
nearly 2,000 men and women who are responsible for 
maintaining our extensive highway system and coping with the 
varied climatic conditions that we have throughout the year. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to pay tribute to these men and 
women in the Department of Highways and Transportation 
who, in my opinion, and in many people’s opinion, do a 
first-class job for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- These are dedicated men and women 
who do indeed take pride in their work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in turn, we have to look at the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. And, Mr. Speaker, it is my humble opinion that the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, as a whole, receive excellent value for 
their dollar, both in the highway maintenance operations, 
conducted primarily by people in the public sector, and in the 
construction end of it, primarily done by private contractors. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is a fair and a reasonable mix. 
You have, for the most part, private contractors in a keen, 
competitive industry or environment, bidding on jobs in that 
process, and they have a very difficult time, Mr. Speaker. The 
tendering process is extremely competitive these days, but those 
men and women in the private contracting areas are ready to 
meet that challenge. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we have departmental forces, 
civil servants, members of the public sector, who do a very 
good job of many of the routine maintenance operations, many 
of the administrative operations that 

have to take place to ensure a safe and a well-maintained 
highway system. I believe we have a good mix, Mr. Speaker, 
and I challenge the members of the opposition on their point 
that private contractors should not be in the game. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, quality construction and cost-effective 
maintenance procedures together lead to a safer driving 
environment, and during 1988 Saskatchewan recorded the 
lowest number of traffic-related fatalities since 1963. Mr. 
Speaker, this represents a 15.3 per cent decrease from the 236 
fatalities reported in 1987. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that these 
numbers show a growing awareness of traffic safety on our 
streets and on our roads. 
 
Some of the other safety highlights recorded in 1988 include a 
decline of almost 32 per cent in the number of alcohol-related 
fatalities. Pedestrian and motorcycle fatalities decreased by 44 
and 67 per cent respectively. Mr. Speaker, these significant 
fatality reductions must, in part, be attributed to this 
government’s ongoing and new safety initiatives. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan must also be commended for their 
responsible attitude towards highway safety. These initiatives 
include seat-belt use, Lights On For Life, alcohol 
countermeasures, safety improvements on our roadways, driver 
education, and publicity programs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, time and time again the members of the 
NDP Party whine and complain and are negative day after day. 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask respectively of the members of the 
NDP Party if they would not publicly stand up and commend 
these initiatives. Mr. Speaker, this government has done an 
excellent job. An excellent job. And when you look at the 
statistics, they prove it. Look at the statistics relative to 
alcohol-related fatalities. A decline of 32 per cent. Now, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, we have the NDP 
members in opposition talking time and time again that the 
government is doing too much advertising, spending too many 
dollars on advertising. Well indeed, beyond a question of a 
doubt we do spend a lot of money on advertising, but I will tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, it is not the type of advertising done by the 
NDP Party back in the days prior to 1982. I remember the 
family of Crown corporations, rolling on my television set day 
after day after day, and frankly, Mr. Speaker, I got a little bit 
sick and tired of it. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, the people in the 
Melfort constituency got a little sick and tired of it too. And that 
is why they elected me to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
And when I came here, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I 
wanted to see was some real advertising that impacted the real 
families of Saskatchewan. And when you talk about 
alcohol-related deaths and accidents on the streets and the roads 
of this province, Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about real advertising 
with a punch that relates directly to the real families of 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

502 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- And a decrease of 32 per cent in 
alcohol-related fatalities is significant. 
 
As well as the other programs, we have Lights On For Life. 
Seat belt usages is doing very well these days, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
talking about many safety improvements, many, many safety 
improvements on our highways in this province of 
Saskatchewan. I include many flashing lights at intersections. I 
have had many of the MLAs on the government side of the 
House that have come to me as Minister of Highways and say, 
you know, the people in my town, the people in my town have 
noticed a safety problem, a potential safety problem where we 
should have a little flashing light. 
 
And my MLA colleagues here from all across rural 
Saskatchewan have come to me and they said, you know, the 
folks in my town think there’s a problem there. The NDP 
wouldn’t give them a flashing light, and I’d say, well let me 
take a look at it and we’ll see if it’s warranted. Well you bet 
your life, in the vast majority of cases those flashing lights were 
warranted, and we put many, many hundreds of those small but 
significant safety improvements up all across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 1989-90 highway budget contains two major 
safety motivated publicity programs. And I want to talk about 
one of these that relate directly to the employees in the 
Department of Highways and to the travelling public, in fact. I 
am talking about the orange zone advertising that you may well 
see on your television set. Well that program will definitely 
continue. 
 
The program is designed to assist in highway worker safety. 
Through television, billboards and print ads, motorists will be 
reminded that it is the law to slow down to 60 kilometres per 
hour when you are passing highway workers. This campaign 
has been successful in the past and, Mr. Speaker, we do plan to 
continue it. And we plan to continue it despite the NDP 
opposition to such type of advertising. 
 
We will also be adding this year, Mr. Speaker, some more 
advertising. It will be respecting The All Terrain Vehicles 
(safety) Act. These ads are the result of an Act that was brought 
in last year to promote the safe usage of all-terrain vehicles. Mr. 
Speaker, the department’s ads are aimed at parents and young 
teenagers, and they will encourage these people to attend 
all-terrain vehicle safety courses and to follow laws related to 
all-terrain vehicles. And, Mr. Speaker, I whole-heartedly 
support such measures. 
 
I do know, Mr. Speaker, that the MLAs on the government side 
of the House, the MLAs for the Progressive Conservative Party 
have spent hundreds, literally hundreds of hours in designing 
new legislation for all-terrain vehicles. I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that there have been significant numbers of deaths not only in 
Saskatchewan but across this entire country when it comes to 
all-terrain vehicles. And it is a very sad day, Mr. Speaker, when 
someone very young in life is taken away in an accident related 
to all-terrain vehicles. 

The members on the Progressive Conservative side of the 
House have been very concerned about this. Legislation was 
introduced and was passed last year in the Saskatchewan 
legislature, and this year, Mr. Speaker, an extensive advertising 
campaign will begin, to ensure that as many people as possible 
know about the laws, and as many people as possible respect 
the dangers associated with improper use of all-terrain vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier in my remarks I touched on what this new 
budget means for Saskatchewan’s highways, and I’d now like 
to take the opportunity to go into a little bit more detail about 
these projects. And indeed I have a long and a comprehensive 
list of projects that will be undertaken in this province this year. 
And at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will table 
the project array listing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 1989-90 program is comprised of 79 surfacing 
jobs, 38 grading jobs, and 21 bridge projects. These 138 
projects, Mr. Speaker, will greatly enhance the quality of 
Saskatchewan’s highways and will create approximately 6,700 
jobs for the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do know that members of the NDP Party have 
said, well what is in the budget for job creation? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, one such example, one such example that sometimes, 
in some circles, that goes unnoticed, is the annual job creation 
projects within the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we are talking 6,700 jobs in the road 
building industry, I believe that that is significant. I believe that 
an increase of $10 million this year in the Highway budget is 
significant when it comes to our highways, but is also 
significant when it comes to the real true jobs of the working 
men and women in Saskatchewan, and it is with pleasure that I 
relate that statistic to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- This year, Mr. Speaker, the department 
is again concentrating on the resurfacing of Saskatchewan’s 
highways. There are 47 resurfacing projects, totalling 550 
kilometres of highway improvements. This work, Mr. Speaker, 
without question, is necessary to protect that fundamental 
investment in our $5 billion highway system. 
 
Specifically, five contracts will be tendered for work on 
Highway No. 11 between Regina and Saskatoon, two for 
grading and paving and three for resurfacing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without question, when you take a look at these 
numbers of contracts that are announced today in this project 
listing for Highway No. 11 between Regina and Saskatoon, this 
is a significant announcement, Mr. Speaker. This is an 
announcement that I give with a great deal of pride, and I 
believe that the travelling motorists in the province of 
Saskatchewan will greet this as very welcome news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, combined with last year’s work, scheduled work 
for this year, and some future construction, the old southbound 
lanes on Highway No. 11 should be 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

503 
 

completed by the fall of 1990. And what I’m saying to you, Mr. 
Speaker, is that some people may ask, well is there a plan? Do 
you do some long range planning? When will you get to my 
section of highway? Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I, together with my 
colleagues from all over rural Saskatchewan, and indeed some 
from Regina and Saskatoon, spend a great deal of time in 
looking at the overall picture in Saskatchewan, in looking at 
where highways should be built, which highways need 
resurfacing, which highways need total reconstruction, which 
highways are leading to many of the industrial projects that we 
have ongoing in Saskatchewan, which highways should be 
emphasized when it comes to tourist related facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these are all indicative of a government that 
has a very strong emphasis on building and diversifying the 
economy, attracting tourists to this economy, and the best 
example that I can think of is my colleague from Cut Knife and 
Lloydminster. Up in the Lloydminster area, Mr. Speaker, you 
will well know that a major announcement was made some time 
ago with respect to an oil upgrader. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the 
oil patch and around oil upgraders there are very, very heavy 
traffic patterns, heavy vehicles, large weights, and, Mr. Speaker, 
more emphasis must be placed on areas like that where we are 
building and diversifying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, indeed, in fact, when you add up all of the 
diversification projects in Saskatchewan, which means real true 
jobs and real prosperity and real hope for this province, they all 
have an impact on our highway system, and, Mr. Speaker, that 
is exactly why we are increasing the highway budget as we 
have this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program this year includes a major safety 
project that I do want to announce here today, and that is the 
alignment at the intersection of Highways No. 39 and 13 at 
Weyburn. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I recall not too many months ago being 
down in the city of Weyburn for a cabinet meeting where 
members from the Progressive Conservative Party travelled as a 
cabinet to meet and greet the folks of Weyburn and area. And, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major issues that was brought up at our 
meeting in Weyburn was the junction of Highway No. 39 and 
13. 
 
The member for Weyburn, in fact, who has been in the 
legislature here since 1982, has been a very strong proponent 
and a very strong push behind making some changes to this 
intersection. Mr. Speaker, I want to say to my colleague, the 
Minister of Education, the member for Weyburn, and to the 
people of Weyburn and area, that there will be improvements at 
the junction of Highway No. 39 and 13. Mr. Speaker, this new 
alignment I believe will very greatly improve visibility and in 
fact will reduce the potential for accidents at that busy 
intersection. 
 
I want to talk, Mr. Speaker, a little bit about Highway 16, the 
Yellowhead, running from Lloydminster to the Manitoba 
border. And Highway 16, the Yellowhead, is scheduled for 10 
improvement projects. The new underpass near Borden will be 
completed this year, and work will be commenced on a new 
underpass at Lloydminster. 

Also in the Lloydminster area there are several other highway 
improvement projects to accommodate the increased traffic 
volume generated naturally by the new upgrader that I referred 
earlier to. 
 
In addition to Highway 11 and 16, this year’s project listing 
contains seven resurfacing and two paving jobs on the 
Trans-Canada Highway system. 
 
Improvement to the Red Coat Trail is also included in this 
program, Mr. Speaker. And I am very pleased to announce that 
there will be a project on the Red Coat Trail on Highway No. 
13, and I take a great deal of advice from the members of the 
Red Coat Trail Association who, on an annual basis, come and 
visit with me as minister. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the MLA for Shaunavon in fact is a former 
member of this association. He represents his area and the Red 
Coat Trail Association very well. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
there is another MLA, and in fact where this highway will be 
rebuilt, who is a very important part of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and I am very pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, 
that on Highway No. 13, just east of Assiniboia, there will be a 
reconstruction program on the Red Coat Trail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s project listing also reflects the free 
trade agreement in fact that is going to increase the north-south 
traffic across this province. And as a result of this increase in 
traffic, I am pleased to announce today, Mr. Speaker, that a 
long-awaited and well-deserved project on Highway No. 8 
north of the junction of No. 18 Highway will be undertaken. 
 
(1500) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do know that for the many people in 
south-west Saskatchewan or south-east Saskatchewan who have 
lobbied me and have lobbied their MLA, the Deputy Premier, to 
put a project on No. 8 on the program for this year, I do know 
that that announcement will be met with a great deal of 
enthusiasm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about northern 
Saskatchewan, and northern Saskatchewan indeed as well 
benefits from the department’s capital program. Work is 
scheduled for 10 projects, including three on Highway No. 2 
between Lac La Ronge and Waskesiu, as well as oiling on 
Highway No. 106 in the vicinity of Big Sandy Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department’s budget also includes three 
projects for paving Saskatchewan’s newest highway, Highway 
No. 41 and 41A. Two resurfacing contracts are also included 
for the older sections between Wakaw and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s program covers all areas of the 
province and strives to meet the needs of the highway users. 
And I speak of not only the automobile users and the truckers, 
but the tourists and the many, many different classes of users 
who are out there on our highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Highways and Transportation 
has many areas of responsibility, and until 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

504 
 

now I’ve only really talked about the highways side. But I’d 
now like to focus a little bit on the transportation side. In 1988 
Canada experienced dramatic changes in the transportation field 
with a deregulated environment. The national safety code came 
into being, and new uniform weight and dimension regulations 
were passed. And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan plays a major 
role in these changes, and I believe is really seen as a leader 
from across Canada. 
 
Last year indeed was a year of change and a year of setting the 
stage for the future. And this year, Mr. Speaker, is the year of 
implementation -- 1989, Mr. Speaker, will be a year committed 
to safety in the trucking industry with more road inspections, 
free trip inspections, and regulated hours of service. These are 
all very important phases of the national safety code, Mr. 
Speaker, and I believe that these are all fair and reasonable and 
much needed initiatives that have taken place by this 
government. 
 
With the emphasis on resurfacing our high volume highways, 
Saskatchewan truckers, along with all other motorists, will 
appreciate a 9 per cent increase in the department’s capital 
budget. The Department of Highways and Transportation 
capital budget, Mr. Speaker, is now more than $121 million -- 
or, it is exactly $121 million. This funding, without question, 
will improve significantly our system. 
 
The $121 million is part of this government’s new $1.1 billion 
capital construction program for hospitals, schools, and 
highways. Mr. Speaker, and when you talk $1.1 billion of 
capital construction, I would say to the members of the NDP 
Party, if you are looking for job creation, if you say there is not 
job creation in the budget, I would say, open your eyes; look 
and read at what is in the budget. 
 
We’re talking, together with Highways and Transportation and 
other capital projects in this budget, when we’re talking 
schools, highways, and hospitals, and nursing homes. These 
type of capital projects, Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget are 
$1.1 billion. What this means, Mr. Speaker, is growth and jobs 
and opportunity for Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance tabled his budget he 
also tabled a document titled Challenges and Opportunities. 
This is not just a title, Mr. Speaker. He meant real challenges 
and real opportunities, and that is just what this budget is all 
about. This budget contains many things that my constituents in 
the constituency of Melfort believe in. It states quality health 
care for Saskatchewan is “our number one priority.” 
 
The budget goes on to say that education is the (a) key to this 
province’s future. It then states that the family is the foundation 
upon which our society is built. It then says, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government is committed to building healthy communities 
through the development of vibrant local economies, through 
contributions to the necessary community infrastructure, and 
through enhancing the quality of urban, rural and northern life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance’s list of challenges 

and opportunities goes on to areas designed to protect our 
environment, our rural way of life, and building and 
diversifying our economy. In short, Mr. Speaker, I 
whole-heartedly endorse and support the Minister of Finance’s 
budget. It is a budget, Mr. Speaker, that I believe fairly 
addresses the needs and the concerns of the Saskatchewan 
people today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I talk of the $1.1 billion capital construction 
program in highways, and health, nursing homes, and education 
and schools. I speak, Mr. Speaker, of many of the inherent 
protections for the public of Saskatchewan contained within 
that budget. I’ll bet you, Mr. Speaker, that if you take a look 
through that budget you will find an amount allocated to the 
home mortgage protection program. And, Mr. Speaker, I have 
to get back to that in my address today because across this 
province of Saskatchewan today, indeed, interest rates are a real 
significant event in people’s lives. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you look across this country of Canada -- 
and this is contrary to what the NDP say -- but look across this 
country of Canada and will you find one province that protects 
home owners’ mortgages, their interest payments, at nine and 
three-quarters per cent? I ask that question: will you find it 
across the country of Canada? The answer is no. 
 
I ask the second relevant question, Mr. Speaker: would the 
members of the NDP Party back in 1981, when interest rates 
were 18 and 19 per cent, did they have a program to protect 
home owners at nine and three-quarters per cent? Well, 
Heavens above, Mr. Speaker, the answer was no. And I say to 
the members of the NDP Party that they are sanctimonious 
people of hypocrisy when they stand up here and say, well what 
are you doing about interest rates? If we were there, we’d be 
there to help. 
 
The real facts of the matter are, Mr. Speaker, they were not 
there to help. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, if you take a look in this 
budget might you find in there student loans for young people 
in Saskatchewan? I’ll bet you would find some money in there, 
and the real question is, Mr. Speaker, what is the interest rate 
allocated to student loans? The answer is, Mr. Speaker, under a 
Progressive Conservative administration student loans are 
protected to a rate of 6 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I ask the question, Mr. Speaker: if you 
go all across this country, will you find another province that 
protects students’ interest loans at 6 per cent? The answer is no, 
Mr. Speaker. I ask the second question: would the NDP protect 
our students at 6 per cent? Well the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll bet you if you take a look in that budget you 
will find in there, you will find in there an amount allocated to 
rebate to Saskatchewan motorists the full 10 cent a litre tax 
placed on the sale of gasoline. Mr. Speaker, I ask you: across 
this country of Canada, will you find another government that 
protects the taxpayers like we do by rebating their fuel tax to 
them. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

505 
 

And maybe for some of them it isn’t a great deal of money; 
maybe it’s 150 or $200. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there 
are a lot of families in Saskatchewan who very much support 
and agree with getting that cheque for 150 or $200 back. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that that is a fair and a reasonable program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a look in that budget that was 
announced the other day, well, you find some programs that 
will help and assist the farm families of this province. I would 
suggest that you will find many programs and many policies 
that are helping to keep our struggling farmers alive throughout 
rural Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at the entire . . . almost the 
entire government caucus, you will find men and women who 
are farmers or have farm backgrounds who have a good firm 
knowledge and understanding of what is happening in rural 
Saskatchewan today. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, I stand here 
today addressing this budget with a great deal of pride that this 
government respects, respects the full knowledge that the farm 
industry is the backbone of this province. 
 
And indeed, if you take a look at the programs initiated, many 
of them in this budget, it is substantiated by facts such as 
natural gas, Mr. Speaker, that is being spread across this 
province of ours to many small towns and villages and indeed 
rural farms. 
 
You will find, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, reference to 
individual line service. What I’m speaking of, Mr. Speaker, is 
private telephones for rural people in Saskatchewan. These 
private telephones, Mr. Speaker, do two things. They provide a 
real convenience to rural people that should be in rural 
Saskatchewan, and they also create a tremendous number of 
jobs. 
 
I do know in the Melfort constituency alone we have one or two 
contractors who were working with SaskTel, and who do a very 
good job, and it’s employing people in my constituency. Mr. 
Speaker, these are important programs for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I could talk for hours, Mr. Speaker, of the protections that this 
administration has put in place for rural people. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I think they are very well-known across rural 
Saskatchewan, and I believe the people of rural Saskatchewan, 
for the most part, accept these programs and accept the efforts 
of this administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to touch on the rural way of life. I 
want to touch on how important rural communities are And I 
was very pleased, from a personal point of view, to see a new 
culture and recreational facilities grant program introduced by 
the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that program is designed so it is a flexible program, so 
it is a program that frankly is going to favour rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not the intention of this government to create 
any disharmony. But we know that when you build a skating 
rink in this little community, that skating rink costs just as much 
to build there as it does in a bigger community, and I believe 
that people in rural Saskatchewan and people in urban 
Saskatchewan will 

accept that. I was pleased to see that job creation program, a 
program that will indeed enhance the quality of life in small 
town Saskatchewan. I was pleased to see that introduced. I 
commend the member for Turtleford, as a matter of fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also commend the minister in charge of Urban 
Affairs. There is a massive capital grant program, Mr. Speaker, 
that will go a long ways to fixing the infrastructure in rural 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that is an important part of 
today’s society. In today’s society, Mr. Speaker, of course we 
have ever increasing pressures on the social side of things like 
health care and social services and education and day care. And 
those items are indeed important to be addressed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is also incumbent upon a responsible 
administration to address the issues of infrastructure. I’m 
talking of sidewalks, I’m talking of streets, I’m talking of water, 
and I’m talking of sewer. And I look to a great deal of pride at 
the Minister of Urban Affairs with his, I believe, a $100 million 
program for infrastructure in small town, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition there is another one of my colleagues 
whom I work very closely with who has a very keen interest 
and a good understanding and knowledge of roads and rural 
Saskatchewan, and that is the Minister of Rural Development. 
And I was very pleased to see in the budget his annual 
allocation, and I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a very large amount 
of money, an amount of money that is much needed in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I do know on a personal basis many of the 
councillors and reeves from across this province, and I do know 
the respect that they have for our Minister of Rural 
Development who announced major initiatives just the other 
day. 
 
I was particularly interested, Mr. Speaker, in this budget of the 
rural municipality capital grant program, the first program of its 
kind ever introduced in the history of this province. For years 
and years, Mr. Speaker, we have had capital grant programs for 
urban centres and rural towns, but now, Mr. Speaker, we have 
allocated an additional 3 or $3.5 million for a capital program in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is 
programs such as that, programs such as the Highways and 
Transportation budget of nearly a quarter of a billion dollars, 
that is proof positive that this government is indeed serious and 
committed to the infrastructure of this province. 
 
And it’s just my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to serve as Minister of 
Highways and Transportation and to be here today to announce 
a very significant program for the people of Saskatchewan 
respecting highways all across our province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I would now like to officially table the project listing for all 
construction projects of the 1989-90 year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

506 
 

(1515) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I will be covering the budget on a 
general overview as I start. And what I will also do, Mr. 
Speaker, is to look at the budget in regards to how it affects real 
people in northern Saskatchewan and communities, and to give 
you feedback of some of those things that people in northern 
Saskatchewan communities are saying about some of the 
policies of the government. 
 
And as is usual for me, Mr. Speaker, I will also say a few words 
in Cree and outline for the people back in my constituency the 
general outline of the budget as it stands, so that they could 
better understand the budgetary impact on them and their lives. 
And in many cases, a lot of the seniors who just understand 
Cree, and so on, always find it a pleasure when we send some 
tapes back to the local level so that indeed they can understand 
the proceedings of this legislature, you know, a lot more clearly. 
 
So with that, I will start out by saying a few words then in Cree 
to provide a basis of understanding, you know, for people at the 
community level. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I guess in overview, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I was telling the 
people in the most general aspect was that while the budget 
continues in its focus of being highly positive for the big 
corporations and the friends of the Tories, the budget doesn’t 
look at the people who are trying hard to make a living, whether 
it is people who are trapping or fishing, whether it’s people who 
are trying to work in our industries, whether it’s mining or 
forestry or whatever, and also a lot of the small businesses who 
are bankrupt at an increasing high rate in this province. And a 
lot of the budget does not speak to these issues, basically 
because there are cut-backs in those specific areas. 
 
So I guess in the most general level, as an introduction, again it 
continues the six years of neglect that we have come to see as 
part of the PC strategy in economic development, and also in 
social and cultural development in this province. 
 
The first thing I would like to deal with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that whole issue of revenue. We all know that when we want to 
do business, when we want to do work with our children at the 
school level, or we look at the seniors in our hospitals, or 
whether we look at the farmers in our province, or whatever, we 
always have to look at how much money we do have and where 
do we get our money from. Where do we get our revenue from? 
How much money is there? and so on. 
 
I must report that I was extremely disappointed with the budget 
again. I thought that the government would listen to the people. 
What the people were saying in southern Saskatchewan and 
what people were saying in northern Saskatchewan was that the 
big corporations have to learn how to pay, that indeed the big 
corporations are making millions and hundreds of millions of 
dollars and they are not paying their fair share of what is 
occurring in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And as I looked at specific examples, I saw the issue in northern 
Saskatchewan where, on the one hand, I saw the uranium 
companies taking out $700 million worth of uranium in the 
North, and I looked up in the past two years that SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) which 
became then privatized to Cameco (Canadian Mining Energy 
Corporation) had made over $110 million. 
 
Many people are looking at grants in the North and trying to 
make a living in terms of recreation programs for the youth, or 
making sure that they provide enough money so that their youth 
can go to school, and so on. But what I see is the very basis of 
this government, the very basis of uncaring, the very basis 
where, while they will not look at the people in the North and 
help them out, and while they will not make a strong stand for 
the people, they will make a strong stand on behalf of the big 
corporations -- tremendous amounts of money. 
 
And as I looked this past year, they continued their policy on 
uranium. And many people have been asking them for more 
money from the big corporations, you know, to be . . . so that 
the government could stand up to the corporations, and so that 
they pay a little more, so that they can have their fair share. But 
instead of that they have continued their policy of providing the 
give-away. The give-away last year was 33 per cent of the basic 
royalty rate. It provided another 7 to $10 million for the big 
corporations just in uranium development alone. 
 
And what people were saying is this: look, they already make 
$110 million. Why don’t they just provide us another 10 million 
or another 20 million for economic development at the 
community level? But no, the government makes a tough stand 
on increasing the budget so that more people can go to jails, and 
so on. They increase their expenditure in the area of justice and 
more jails, but they will not provide money and take the money 
from the big corporations and transfer it over to the people. 
 
Instead, what we hear from the government -- and this is a 
strategy and I’ll say more about this in my specific example 
later on -- what the government will say is this: what we need to 
do is put more money in the hands of big business. And what 
that will do is it transfers into jobs for us. If you put more 
money, more jobs will be there. And they’ve been selling this 
idea all the way through the budget as I listened. I listened till 
the words privatization and diversification were coming out just 
in the same way that I’ve heard the rhetoric before for the past 
six years. 
 
We were open for business right from ’82 to the past couple of 
years when privatization came to be the “in” thing because of 
Maggie Thatcher’s advice. And we thought that we had learned 
a lesson in the 1930s in Saskatchewan history. We saw that we 
needed to work together in co-ops at helping small business and 
also in helping build Crown corporations. 
 
We saw Crown corporations as a safety valve so that when the 
big corporations disappear to Japan or disappear to China or 
disappear back to the United States, that we have a basis for 
money right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

507 
 

And when I looked at the budget, it struck me that here is a 
government hell-bent on the ideology, just a blind commitment 
to privatization and giving away all our assets and all our 
earnings to big companies. 
 
The only saving grace in that budget that I saw was $200 
million from the Crown corporations. If it wasn’t for the Crown 
corporations, a lot of our health programming -- and I recall the 
hospital in La Ronge -- a lot of these things would not be 
possible. And this was the reason why Crown corporations were 
built, is because we knew from he history of the Dirty Thirties 
when the last PC government was around and when 
privatization was the only approach that they believed in, that 
indeed the money would leave this province, and our assets, and 
we would be selling everything out. 
 
So what we see is a sell-out of our forests in the North and a 
sell-out of our mines. And we see a sell-out in southern 
Saskatchewan of more and more farms being turned over to the 
banks. 
 
And as I look at the budget, I also look at one other area. We 
talk a lot about education in our budget, and we talk a lot about 
small business. We hear time after time, every Tory person who 
speaks, that the small business is the engine of truth. And I hear 
it all the time, and I’ve been hearing it ever since I’ve come 
here to the legislature. 
 
And I looked at the basis for revenue generation again this year, 
and what I looked at was money being taken from the 
small-business sector and from the schools, who try and take 
our children over to the schools on school buses. The school 
boards and the small businesses have to pay this gas tax, and the 
gas tax is now up to 10 per cent. The children suffer, the small 
businesses suffer, because they have to pay extra so that we pay 
for the big corporate give-aways that we’ve been used to from 
this government. So we see also not only 10 per cent for 
unleaded gas but 12 per cent now for leaded gas. So the engine 
of growth in this province is being put down in this budget. 
 
And not only that, I looked at the huge give-aways for the big 
corporations, and then I looked at the small-business area on 
economic development. And what did I find? I looked at that, 
and I looked at the business development grant in this province, 
and it was cut back by 33 per cent -- 33 per cent cut-back on the 
business development grant. And here we’re supposed to be 
providing for small businesses, and yet they get cut back by 
over a million dollars at 33 per cent. 
 
I also looked at the industrial development grants, because we 
always hear about industrial development and how we’re going 
to change this and change that through the privatization 
schemes of this government. And what do I see in industrial 
development grants? Well, a 50 per cent cut-back -- a 50 per 
cent cut-back. And here it is they talk about, you know, helping 
business in this province, and there’s a $5 million cut-back in 
the industrial development grants. I find that absolutely 
amazing -- 50 per cent cut-back on industrial development 
grants and also a 33 per cent cut-back on the business 
development grants. 

So there seems to be a real lack of substance between what the 
PC government says in regards to business development and 
what they do when they start raising and overtaxing them when 
they’re trying hard to make a living. And also the very fact that, 
you know, the grants themselves are cut back by 50 per cent. 
 
The only thing that I saw in the budget that was really new from 
the Tories in the past six years, the only new thing that I saw 
was what I would call bingo economics. I looked at the budget 
in amazement, and I watched this thing and I saw that, my 
goodness, we were being hard pressed for revenue, and now 
we’re going to have to start attacking the bingo players and the 
lottery players and stuff like that. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I looked at this and I said to myself, well don’t they know 
that a lot of these people who do bingo at the local level are 
charities, and a lot of them are trying to resolve the youth 
recreation problems, you know, at that level because a lot of 
that money is utilized for that person. And now we’re taxing 
our youth recreation, and we’re taxing our people who are 
trying to run a lot of the local community programs. And I 
thought to myself, well that’s another fine way of taxing the 
poor. 
 
You know, they weren’t able to get $110 million from the 
uranium mining companies alone. They wouldn’t take the 110 
million and maybe take 20 million from it. What they will do is 
now utilize bingo economics in this province. And I find that 
absolutely amazing, you know. For us to start relying on 
gambling, you know, as a basis for economic development is a 
sad case in the history of Saskatchewan. When we have to rely 
upon our children’s future and our seniors and our sick in order 
to pay for them, well, my goodness, I find that absolutely 
amazing for Saskatchewan history. And I really find that really 
shameful, as a member says. 
 
When I look at the revenue, I also look at the fact that a lot of 
working people in this province are already paying a strong 
share of our health costs, our education costs, and so on. And 
many people don’t realize that in terms of money they provide 
. . . everybody who works provides $869 million worth of 
money to our revenue. And that’s not often said because 
everybody . . . the PCs try to think that all the revenue comes 
from the big corporations. And I looked at the corporations, and 
the revenue that comes from there is 148 million. In other 
words, people who work and people who do small-business 
development and that type of thing in regards to income tax, 
they are paying six times more than the great big corporations 
who are making a mint from our Saskatchewan resources and 
our Saskatchewan workers. 
 
So when I look at this overall aspect of the PC government, one 
conclusion that somebody can say from that is that while we 
hurt our small businesses and we hurt our farmers and that we 
hurt our workers, the end result, we can say, is that gambling is 
divine, and I’m using the word with a small “d” of course. And 
that to me is just not the way to do economic development and 
revenue. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

508 
 

The people are saying, from northern Saskatchewan and from 
southern Saskatchewan, let’s take more from the large 
corporations. Why do they have to run off to China or the 
United States or Japan or South Africa so that, you know, they 
can take the assets away from us and the businesses away from 
us? We want to be able to say that, look, let them also pay a fair 
share of the burden that we all are burdened with in this 
province of Saskatchewan. So that’s my comment in regards to 
the revenue section of the budget. 
 
And the other thing, then I looked at the expenditure aspect of 
the budget to find out what this government was trying to plan 
for the future of our children, for the future of our youth, for the 
future of our workers, for the future of our small businesses, our 
farmers, and so on. And what I found out is that I was amazed 
. . . I think this government is scared to used the word job 
creation or working people -- all of these things. And what I 
looked at is that there was no job creation program, and I find it 
absolutely amazing, especially in this historical context. 
 
What we are looking at today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this: we 
are looking at a situation where there is 43,000 people that are 
out of jobs in this province. That means less revenue for us. 
That means less business money being spent at the community 
level -- 43,000 people out of work. And when I look at it that’s 
the official stats. 
 
Many people in the past six years have quit going to the CEIC 
(Canada Employment, Immigration and Customs) offices where 
they register for employment, because they have continuously -- 
after five, six times -- have not found jobs so they never register 
in this offices. So this is the official list. It’s more like 80,000, 
200,000 people out of work. 
 
I also look at the fact of the official stats of the welfare system 
-- and the government prides itself on welfare reform. I look at 
the stats and I examined the figures in 1981 and the figures in 
1989, and what has happened is that there is 25 per cent 
increase in social welfare in this province. There’s now over 
60,000 people on welfare in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
the government tries to let on that indeed we have less welfare 
in the system, and yet there was a 25 per cent increase. That is 
amazing. 
 
And now that all of these people are not only unemployed, 
there’s many people leaving. We see a record number of people 
leaving our province. A lot of our skilled youth, a lot of our 
skilled workers, our small-business sector, our farmers are 
leaving this province basically because they haven’t got a basis 
to make a living and because there’s no jobs for them. 
 
As I look at who left in the province, I would estimate about 
25,000 people leaving last year, and I looked at the net number 
that left last year, it was about 16,000. So here you have a 
situation, even in last month alone, I looked at the figures on 
February. In one month we have over 6,000 people leaving. 
That’s tremendous drain and a shocking aspect of our 
Saskatchewan society today. And everybody’s leaving. We’re 
exporting the best of what we’ve got. That’s what’s happening 
in this province with this PC budget. 

And as I looked at the . . . and I looked at the research this year 
. . . Canadian research comparing, you know, Canadian . . . the 
different provinces, we were one of the best provinces, not only 
in regards to being looked upon positively by the business 
community, but in regards to unemployment rates and in 
regards to everything else in terms of education and in health 
and so on. 
 
And I looked at it this year, Canadian research telling me that 
one-quarter of our people are now below the poverty line. As 
the teachers are out there watching the children, one out of 
every four children is below the poverty line. And as we look at 
the people who are there in the many sectors of Saskatchewan 
society, it’s a real shame. 
 
It is absolutely disgraceful in this day and age to be able to say 
Saskatchewan was once a leader, is now in at the same level as 
Newfoundland, that we are second to the last in regards to the 
record of standing up for our children and our families. There 
seems to be no caring any more. And this is the sad tragedy of 
PC government policies, basically because they don’t want to 
spend money in the area of job creation, which allows people to 
put food on the table for their children. That, to me, is a 
disgrace in Saskatchewan history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to these areas of cut-back, I’ve 
mentioned that there was a 33 per cent cut-back on business 
development grants and also a 50 per cent cut-back in industrial 
development grants. I also saw the Tories continue with the 
policy of the old Indian economic development, $2 million 
cut-back. I thought that they might this year really change. I 
thought that they would bring back that $2 million that they cut 
back. 
 
But what happens is this: all of a sudden in the Indian economic 
development package, which was cut back the other year from 3 
million to 1 million, I saw an increase of $300,000. And I 
thought to myself, my goodness, they’re finally listening; 
they’re finally really paying attention; at least, you know, 
they’ve made a big jump of 1 million to $1.3 million. 
 
And I had a quick look . . . more careful examination because I 
always know that the Minister of Finance is always cooking 
books and is always using the game of robbing Peter to pay 
Paul. And I looked at it, and I looked at the training budget. 
Sure enough, native training programs were cut by $500,000. 
They were cut by $500,000. And here it was they put $300,000 
in Indian economic development to make it look like they were 
putting money into it. 
 
Then I looked at the other point on native business 
development. And then they put $100,000 there so they’ve 
transferred, they took 500 million . . . I mean $500,000 from the 
training programs, and a lot of people need a lot of training, and 
what they did was they transferred it over to the economic 
development program, but it was just a case of robbing Peter to 
pay Paul. 
 
And as I looked for the suggestions by people in regards to 
economic development, I saw the minister stand up just a 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

509 
 

little while ago, the Minister of Highways, and I mean we live 
on fairly dangerous roads on Highway 102 north, but absolutely 
no mention in the budget about Highway 2 north and 905. And 
this is the place where the great big roads with a lot of 
dangerous chemicals travel on a daily basis. 
 
Everybody is becoming more environmentally conscious, and 
especially in the transportation of chemical, dangerous goods, 
but they will not improve our roads so that indeed there is 
greater safety, you know, for the people who travel on our 
northern Saskatchewan roads. All he talked about was 
Waskesiu and La Ronge -- you know, the southern edge of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And the other thing that I looked at is, I was looking for . . . he 
talked about natural gas. A lot of people were saying, why don’t 
you bring natural gas, which would be a basis for job creation, 
into northern Saskatchewan? You know, going through 
Montreal Lake where the reserve would be able to get natural 
gas, Weyakwin, and also La Ronge, you know, for the tourism 
development, you know, that they always talk about and so on. 
 
But there was nothing for the natural gas, you know, for 
northern Saskatchewan. And a lot of people have been talking 
about that to make sure that we could get jobs from that. But of 
course they don’t care. All they will do is give, you know, $110 
million and not take away anything from the uranium mining 
company. 
 
I think I must have touched a nerve because a lot of them were 
chattering from their seats just a few minutes ago. Sometimes I 
feel that . . . you know, when we talk about things in a serious 
nature, sometimes you feel they are not listening. But 
sometimes they listen a bit. Sometimes they know that, you 
know, things hurt a little bit, and then you hear a little bit of a 
chatter from their seats. 
 
The other thing I find in regards to jobs is that we hear a lot of 
jobs in regards to privatization, and I see a lot of people saying, 
look, when we are sending away our forests, you will get jobs. 
And of course that’s far from the truth. We’ve gotten less jobs 
in regards to forestry contracts and jobs in the Weyerhaeuser 
give-away of before. And I thought that we would get a new 
idea, and what we got was the privatization of our mines in 
Cameco. 
 
(1545) 
 
But what happens? We said this last year, we said very clearly, 
the privatization of Cameco will lead to loss of jobs because of 
the consolidation process. And of course when we mentioned 
that to the Deputy Premier last year, he said not to worry. But 
this year, when we looked at it last week, we lost 100 jobs. 
 
When we look at northern Saskatchewan, which has 50 to 80 
per cent unemployment, we see this as a very tragic piece of 
action. I mean, it is really, really shameful when I can see a 
government just break their promises time after time. They just 
simply did not tell the truth last year. They said no jobs would 
be . . . and then we lost 35 jobs at the Star Lake mine. They said 
they would do the planning so that, you know, when there’s any 
transition, there would be no jobs, but we’re seeing that to be 
completely untrue. 

We simply cannot believe, you know, the promises that they 
make when they come to the North. And I must congratulate the 
new minister of northern Saskatchewan, and she did an 
excellent job in regards to, of course, spending our advertising 
dollars, you know, to advertise the fact that she toured the 
North. And I must congratulate her for touring the North 
because, you know, I think it’s important for her to start 
learning about the North and dealing with some of the issues. 
 
And I saw her. She seemed to be saying how great things were 
in this place of paradise in the North. But the reality is, is while 
she spends a lot of money on gloss and a lot of money on print 
and a lot of money on Saskatchewan advertising, you know, the 
problem of unemployment is still there. I certainly hope that the 
ideas that she said would be introduced into the North finally 
take place, because what I said to her through the throne speech 
is that we have heard these promises before, and I hope that this 
time you can do something about dealing with the economic 
crisis in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And there was a bit of an amusing thing that happened in 
regards to the thing, and I’d like to mention it. I mentioned it in 
the throne speech. And as I looked at the minister travelling 
through the North, she mentioned that the North was alive. And 
I thought to myself, well that’s an astounding revelation for this 
government. They finally found that the people of northern 
Saskatchewan were alive, after a period of seven years. 
 
Of course people shouldn’t really laugh, because in 1982 that 
they said in their highway maps -- and I remind the Minister of 
Highways who was here a little while ago talking about 
economic development in the mines that his highway mines 
were . . . had this comment that said that the North is populated 
with beautiful lakes and rivers, but no people. 
 
See, the PC government’s strategy was one where they felt that 
the North has only got mines where we will exploit them. It’s 
only filled with forests where the big businesses can exploit 
them, but it doesn’t have any people, and we’ll just go in there 
and exploit. And really when you look at it, some people, you 
know, from across the floor may find that amusing but, you 
know, I find that, you know, a sad aspect of Saskatchewan 
history. It’s a sad commentary. 
 
And the other thing I look at in the budget is a real sense of 
fairness and justice. Saskatchewan history has been one where 
people learned to work together. They shared . . . we shared 
land, we shared resources and all of that, and a lot of this 
feeling of compassion, you know, for other people. 
 
I noticed when I talked to a lot of the elders in the community 
level, they will say they worked, you know, with people in the 
forestry areas or the mining areas, in the farming areas to build 
farms, to build, you know, our forestry industry and our mining 
industry. And one of the things that we see is this lack of 
fairness and this lack of sharing from this government. 
 
And especially it becomes very clear in regards to Indian 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

510 
 

land entitlement. I looked at the budget to see whether or not 
there would be anything on Indian land entitlement or mention 
of finally fulfilling something in Saskatchewan’s past. 
 
And I thought that they might come out with something in this 
budget to help that process out and to finally accomplish, you 
know, a sense of justice that a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
want to see. Because a lot of people in Saskatchewan history 
know the problem of land. People during the rise of industrial 
development in Europe, many people knew that they were 
chased off their land in Europe to come to Canada. And many 
of the people who now have made a living on the farms and on 
northern communities, and so on, know the importance of land. 
 
And also the Indian people from this country have been trying 
to deal with this issue of the land question which is just not 
resolved. And we look at it. And 100 years ago when a lot of 
people moved here, people recognized that the CPR got 23 
million acres of land. The big business of the day in regards to 
western settlement -- although a lot of the western settlers found 
it very difficult because of the promises and the fact that the 
Tory government of the day did not live up to their promises, 
and that’s why there was a lot of discontent in the West about 
100 years ago. A lot of the people recognized that the PC Tory 
government of the day helped out the CPR by 23 million acres 
of land. Hudson Bay Company also was helped out to the tune 
of 7 million acres. 
 
But when we look at the Indian land claims of the day, there 
was about 1.5 million acres about 100 years ago. And I look at 
it 100 years later and I say to myself, well, the PC government 
doesn’t change policies much. It’s still back in the Dark Ages of 
fairness. 
 
And I saw that here it was right in my backyard in northern 
Saskatchewan -- Weyerhaeuser, American corporation. The 
American giant, Weyerhaeuser, getting 12.5 million acres of 
land -- 12.5 million acres of land. This is in a time when a lot of 
farmers are losing their land to the banks; at time when Indian 
people from this province are asking for a fulfilment of the legal 
obligations of the 1930 resources transfer agreement, that 
indeed that the government would live up to the law in that case 
and finally serve justice to the issue of Indian land entitlement. 
 
What the people are asking for is approximately 1.4 million 
acres of land -- 1.4 million acres of land. But what do the Tories 
do? They give 12.5 million acres of our best land to 
Weyerhaeuser. And a lot of people from Saskatchewan are 
starting to say, hey, where’s the fairness in this? Where is the 
fairness in this? Where is the justice for people who are trying 
hard to get, you know, part of the land in Saskatchewan so that 
they can have an economic base for their children and their 
families, like anybody else in Saskatchewan history. 
 
So when I looked at that, I saw a tremendous lack of fairness to 
the issue of Indian land entitlement in this province. I saw it 
also in another aspect. Many of us, when we looked at the 
budget this year, we looked at our population figures of 
Saskatchewan in 1989, and we looked at Saskatoon, the 
municipal grants, we looked at 

up-to-date population figures of 1989. But what is the 
government policy in regards to Indian land claims on Indian 
population on how much land they will get, you know, which 
the ’76 formula would provide for is 1.4 million acres? 
 
What the government says is that we’re not even going to 
follow the ’76 formula which provided for 1.4 million acres. 
What we will do is date of first survey, which at that time was 
about a hundred years ago, in many cases, and the date of first 
survey would look at the population of Indian people in the 
reserves at that time, a hundred years ago. 
 
But here the province will look at the population figures of the 
people of Saskatchewan in 1989, but they will only look at the 
population figures of Indian people at the date of first survey. 
And I really find that to be lacking in any sense of justice or 
fairness, and I think that needs to be re-examined by this 
government. 
 
And I certainly hope, as they look at the tremendous $80 
million profits that Weyerhaeuser gets from the land, you know, 
of 12.5 million acres that they gave to the American giant 
Weyerhaeuser, that they start thinking the same way in regards 
to the Indian land claims. Indian people want a land base so that 
they can do economic development in the same way which 
provides tremendous huge profits for the Weyerhaeusers of the 
world. 
 
And as I looked also at the other aspects of the budget, I can 
only say this much in summary. Sure we’ve got a lot more 
money again in this budget for privatization and for providing 
the continued good give-aways to the big corporations. But we 
haven’t learned in the past seven years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
haven’t learned because we haven’t given the money directly to 
the small business, private sector, which are the engines of . . . 
(inaudible) . . . What we have done is we have taxed them more 
through the gas tax. What we have done is not provided more 
money for Indian economic development or for many other 
economic developments. Instead we have cut them back. 
 
What the government does not learn is put the hands of the 
money into the people of this province, to the hands of the 
people who have built this province. What they are thinking 
about is the big corporations in the United States, in China, in 
Japan, in South Africa. And I feel that’s the wrong way to 
approach economic development. If they want to come here in 
Saskatchewan, let them pay a fair share. If they make $110 
million profit in the past couple of years, why don’t they turn 
$50 million to the people of Saskatchewan so that we don’t 
have long waiting lists in our health hospitals . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- . . . so that we are able to do a lot of these things 
that our children want in recreational programs and in the many 
things that we had been used to getting in the past. 
 
And I must say that what the people are telling me is that 
whether it’s the North or the South, as I travel around, 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

511 
 

people want to work. That’s what they’re telling us. People 
want education. People want training. People want to be 
involved in development right from the initial stages of 
development to the final stages of something being there. 
People want to be involved all the way through, and they want 
to be part of development. 
 
But what we’re seeing is just a huge give-away of our assets, a 
huge give-away of our jobs. We are losing and losing. And 
what people are saying is, I hope that in this budget the 
government starts listening. But what I can report is this, that 
they haven’t. All they will do is, when I mention something, 
they will do idle chatter or they will sometimes make fun out of 
certain things that are very important for people’s lives, so a 
mistake that the budget has had a sad impact on people. 
 
Sometimes it’s very hard, Mr. Speaker, to really have a feeling 
for this -- what it really means when someone is hurt by the 
system. What is the cost of the tremendous unemployment rate? 
What is the cost? And I’ve said many times in this legislature, 
for every 1 per cent unemployment rate, there is 4 per cent rise 
in suicides. For every unemployment, less money and revenue 
is generated, so that there is less money for us in health and 
education. 
 
When I looked at this, I’ve looked at it terms of not only a 
vague generalization of people. What I want to do, Mr. Speaker, 
is give you a case, a human case, which I call a human tragedy 
in Saskatchewan history. 
 
Just at the earlier part of this past month, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there was a person by the name of Joseph Morin from Sandy 
Bay in northern Saskatchewan. And Mr. Joseph Morin was like 
a lot of the young people in the community level. And Mr. 
Joseph Morin had lived with his mother, and he helped his 
mother out. He did all kinds of odd jobs. He would sometimes 
go and cut wood, maybe, for $10 a load in his ski-doo, and you 
know, help the people out at the community level just to earn a 
little bit of money so he wouldn’t have to go on welfare and 
stuff like that. And he would, many times he would go out and 
do a little bit of hunting to get food in the house, you know, for 
himself and for his mother. 
 
(1600) 
 
And what happened in this case also is he used to work for line 
cutting for northern development, and also he would go out 
forest fire fighting and so on. So he was a guy at the community 
level who lived a fairly regular type of existence. He didn’t 
know how to read or write, so he had a limited amount of 
education from the traditional sense of how we look at 
education. 
 
And one day -- this is what happened to him -- he had a ski-doo 
which he made his livelihood from. One day his ski-doo was 
stolen, and he decided he would go and get his ski-doo. And on 
his way back the RCMP stopped him and he was then taken to 
court for driving while impaired. And he was also -- although 
he made his living from this -- he was also charged with a $400 
fine. So here you have a person trying hard to make a living 
using his ski-doo. His ski-doo is stolen; he wants to go and get 
it; the RCMP stop him; he ends up with a $400 fine. 

He’s the type of person who is usually scared of the law, 
basically, because he has never broken the law in his whole life. 
He has abided by the law, and all he hears is stories about what 
happens in jails, and so on. So he thinks about it, and he 
probably talks to his mother, he probably talks to a few people, 
you know, about his predicament, and he looks around for help, 
he looks around for help. But we know that the native court 
workers’ program was cut out; we know that there is no help 
there because the government had cut that back. 
 
There is no help in the fine options program because the person 
who worked in it hadn’t been informed about this person’s 
situation. So here we had a case where there’s tremendous 
stress for a person who first meets up with the law. He doesn’t 
. . . he can hardly speak Cree -- I mean English -- and he’s 
given sentencing, and he doesn’t get any help at all. And he 
goes on like this for a little while and he puts himself in a lot of 
stress and he ends up shooting himself. He takes his own life 
basically because the system has failed him, basically because 
of the cut-backs that occurred before. Two years ago when we 
raised that issue, we said something wrong would happen with 
the cut-backs. We are seeing now things like this happening. 
 
And when we look at this case, what people are saying is: when 
are we going to stop this uncaring? When are we going to start 
listening to the people like the Joseph Morins of the world? 
Why do we have to wait till somebody has to die? Why do we 
have to wait for the Marlon Severight Pippin cases before we 
will do anything? Why do we have to wait to get publication of 
news, even this past weekend, of the Donald Marshall case 
where a person spent 11 years in prison without him ever 
having committed it. When are we going to listen to the people? 
When are we going to start doing something about it? 
 
And I looked at this budget, and I thought there might be a 
reinstatement of the native court workers’ program, but I did 
not see it. I thought I might see in this budget greater help for 
even the group home right in Sandy Bay, Oskietawin Group 
Home which helps the youth try and adjust after they run into 
problems. What I saw in that youth program in Sandy Bay was 
cut-backs; that a lot of people were not even directed and 
referred to that group home. 
 
The last time I visited it in January there was very few people 
there. I talked to the staff and they said, the social services 
people have quit referring to us. Today I phoned again. There 
was only seven that were referred there to this day. You have 
ready people working there at the community level who 
volunteered a lot of their time and finally got a little bit of 
money to get this program, but we don’t even refer them. We 
cut back and we don’t even refer things to people who are 
trying to stand up and help their youth. And this is the sad 
aspect, when I look at this budget and I say to myself, that’s the 
reality. 
 
Last year when I raised the issue of the other Morin case in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse that died basically because there was a mix-up 
in that new drug prescription plan, basically because he spoke 
Cree and did not understand the 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

512 
 

process, I raised that with the minister last year. Of course he 
denied that that was the cause. 
 
But I know, and everybody knows in the North, that in many 
cases when you get into a second language situation we have 
regular problems of interpreting regular changes in our system. 
But when you have things like . . . and people don’t have 
up-front money on a drug prescription plan, it hurt a lot of 
people. I know that many people in the North had to trade 
between drugs and food, and that’s the reality of the cut-backs. 
It’s real meanness of the government to really not have this 
caring. 
 
I hope that as I look into the future on the next budget, that 
some action will be taken to cases such as the Joseph Morin 
case, as the Pippin case, so that we don’t have to wait for other 
people to die before we act. We want to be able to say, yes, we 
have taken concrete measures to start resolving this issue; yes, 
maybe we should even have an inquiry to be able to deal 
effectively with this issue and many other issues that are going 
to be facing us because of the tremendous strains of the 
continued cut-backs of this province. 
 
And as I look to the overall issue of individuals, I must also talk 
about -- and I mentioned the Joseph Morin case and the tragedy 
that occurred there -- I will talk to you now, Mr. Speaker, about 
the history of one community in Sandy Bay and its experience 
with privatization of a private corporation. 
 
Last year we honoured the late Angus Bear with a 
Saskatchewan Award of Merit, you know, for his contribution 
to Saskatchewan history, and he died this past year. And in 
1984-85 I had spent some time to do interviewing in Sandy Bay 
about the history of Sandy Bay. And I’m telling this story as a 
concrete example, as a human example, of what a lot of 
communities have to meet up with in northern Saskatchewan, 
so that the Saskatchewan public can have a sense of what it 
means. 
 
When I looked at Sandy Bay, they used to . . . while we are 
dealing with the topic of privatization of a lot of our Crown 
corporations, you know, SGI, Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, well let me tell the people of Saskatchewan, we 
used to run northern Saskatchewan with a private company. It 
was called Churchill River Power Corporation. It was a 
subsidiary of Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting. 
 
Many people know that Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting also 
worked in Africa. And there were many parallels to the history 
of Sandy Bay and the history of what happened in South Africa, 
and a lot of people don’t understand that about our history in 
the North. When I looked at it back in 1927, when the late 
Angus Bear was taking the engineers and the mining big bosses 
to the site, they paid him $1, and so he kept on doing this work 
of transporting people back and forth. Once they found the 
Island Falls site, what they started paying him was 50 cents. As 
soon as the private company found out where the dam was, they 
didn’t pay him a dollar any more, they paid him 50 cents. 
 
A lot of those workers, though, were determined to work there, 
so they kept working there in basically the 

pick-and-shovel jobs of the day. In many cases they were paid 
less than other people for the same job. Between 1930 and ’35, 
while a few of them were paid in money, they started to be paid 
in kind. The workers from the community started to be paid, not 
in cash but in food. 
 
I asked them what they were mainly given in terms of food, and 
they said mainly meat and a bit of this and that, depending on 
what the construction camp had. And they said . . . Well what 
kind of meat, I said. Well mainly bologna. So I asked them 
about the long hours that they worked, the extra long hours, 
because they told me they didn’t get paid overtime because 
there was no overtime in those days. And they said they 
basically got more bologna. 
 
And when we looked at this company, it expanded in 1935, 
with another turbine and generator being put in. The people 
learned about organization from other workers, and they said, 
why are you putting up with this? So the people of the local 
community organized, and they started getting paid in money. 
 
And as time developed, you know, from the late ’30s to the 
’40s, we started looking at a situation where they built a new 
town site at Island Falls. And they built . . . Of the people that 
worked there including . . . It was both native and non-native 
people. They built that town site with huge houses with 
hardwood floors, electricity, and so on; and they also had a golf 
course -- they even had a golf course -- surrounding the town 
site which they used as a fire guard, so they built this golf 
course there. They also built a swimming pool and a recreation 
hall, but the sad part of it is that a lot of the people started being 
not allowed to utilize the facilities, and in many cases we saw 
the aspects of segregation and discrimination come out to the 
fore. 
 
When people use to have their work . . . They used to shop in 
the same store, but all of a sudden they were told, you can’t 
shop here any more. You can’t come inside the store; you have 
to shop through a window. So the people had to shop through a 
window. 
 
(1615) 
 
Here they were going to work on their way as they paddle 
across the river -- because they weren’t allowed to live on the 
site, you know, where they built their own tents and their own 
log houses or from debris that was flowing down, you know, 
from the river where they built their houses from -- they went to 
work on the site and on their way they would stop and shop, 
and when they came back out, they would pick up their 
groceries. They said many times they used to find groceries in 
there that they never ordered because a lot of the groceries had 
gone old and some of the people, you know, the people who 
were there had included not only the stuff that they ordered, but 
some of the old stuff, you know, that was going bad in the store. 
 
And that’s what they experienced, but the people had 
determination. They kept working, but they challenged the 
private company at that time on that policy, so the private 
company made a decision. They said, okay, we agree with you, 
so they built an Indian store. They still 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

513 
 

wouldn’t allow them to shop in the same store. They built an 
Indian store. 
 
And as time went on, people challenged that. There was many 
workers that were there that were both native and non-native. 
And as I talked to the elders who worked there for 40 years, 
who had the determination to work there for 40 years, they told 
me that they had met up with a lot of workers who were 
genuine, who respected them, who treated them as real people, 
who treated them in the same way that I’ve seen other people 
treat each other, you know, in my own experience. They treated 
them with great respect and great concern. But there was others 
who treated them with racism, who wouldn’t want them to shop 
at the same store, who wouldn’t want to do this and that. And 
the private company followed these policies. 
 
As I look back on that history, I even saw a case when I read 
the archives when I did my master’s thesis on it, they even were 
absolutely amazed at one time back in ’38 that one of the 
people who had come in to watch a movie accidentally brought 
in a native child. And they made a big deal, and they said they 
had to be taken back to the community group to discuss this 
topic of bringing a native child into that movie theatre which 
the people had built. And when we look at that history of the 
private company’s policies at that time, some people will say, 
well that was happening, you know, in many places. But I must 
say that it was worse in some places than others. 
 
In regards to the community of Sandy Bay, they’ve learned to 
work side by side, as I said, with some of the workers and with 
many of the workers and some of the supervisors who treated 
them well. They still are friends with them after all these years. 
 
As I looked at the situation of services, the mine made millions 
of dollars. That’s in mining and smelting all these years during 
the thirties, during the forties, during the fifties, and to this day. 
Million and millions and hundreds of millions of dollars were 
profited. 
 
And when I looked at the sad record in 1959, that was the only 
time that the people received hydroelectric power from that dam 
that they built. They built it in 1927 to 1930 and they never got 
their power till they presented their case in 1958 and ’59. 
 
And when they finally did get power, they got such a low scale 
of power that every time they put in a kettle, a hot plate, they 
would blow those transformers that they’d put in. So they went 
through a long community process again to finally try and get 
power, you know, 30 years later. 
 
When the thing was finally automated in ’67, all these beautiful 
homes, about 30 of them were left with hardwood floors, 
hydroelectric power development, hydro, had everything, with 
the swimming pool and the golf course and everything like that. 
And the people asked to use those houses so that they could do 
development of the day. And I must say that we weren’t able to 
get those houses. And it was just recently that -- a couple of 
years, I think, finally -- that one of the houses was brought 
across for it. 
 
And the private company wouldn’t turn those houses 

over; they just wouldn’t. They kept them there from ’67 to the 
’80s. They just let them rot and sit away there. There would not 
turn, even if people had proposed for a tourist development 
there -- they wanted to use those so they can make a living out 
of that. But no, they could not use those houses that they 
themselves had built. 
 
And it’s a sad case. The company made tremendous profits 
from it, but they wouldn’t turn it over to the people. It was only 
in the Crown corporations when Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation finally took over in a process from ’81 to ’82 that 
we finally were able to get, you know, a few of the houses 
transferred to a town after the Crown corporation turn-over 
back in ’82. 
 
And now what the people are saying, and a lot of people are 
saying this, whether in Sandy Bay or through the North, they 
said, look, we have suffered a lot in our history. We have dealt 
with racism. We have survived it. Some of us have worked in 
these places for 40 years. We have showed our determination. 
We have showed that we can work as good as anybody else in 
the world. 
 
We have shown our determination that we wanted to be trained. 
We have learned without having to be trained. We learn on the 
job. Although we were told back in the ’20s that we would have 
to work our way from the bottom, 60 years later . . . well 60 
years later we are still working our way from the bottom. We 
look at it 60 years later and people that work there, the workers 
that work there, still don’t get northern allowance. But all kinds 
of workers throughout the North get northern allowance when 
they work in the North. The workers there still don’t get 
northern allowance. They’ve been raising the issue of training 
people, but they still will not get trained. I saw only two cases 
where they said they were allowed an apprenticeship program. 
But that was only after a lot of pressure. 
 
Now the government is trying to . . . (inaudible) . . . in the 
future or maybe even put aid down there. The people are raising 
the same concerns again. They said, we want jobs in regards to 
the A-dam proposal right in Island Falls. We want training. We 
want to be involved in the development, but where is the 
government, they are saying. 
 
They said, we don’t want to be in the same situation like 
Cumberland House where they spent $1.5 million to hire a 
lawyer. We don’t want to be put in the situation like 
Cumberland House where they had put a weir and threaten a 
blockade before action was taken. We are ready to co-operate 
with the government. Although we have suffered the hardships 
of the past, we are still patient and open to co-operate with this 
government. 
 
That is the central message that people are saying. As I . . . I 
will quote the words of the late Angus Bear, as a reminder of 
what he thought when I asked him about the situation, you 
know, about the future, and what had happened to him. This is 
what he said back in ’85. He says: 
 

In my own thoughts, I have often wondered when the 
damaging effects of the dam would cease if nothing was 
done. We have not been able to make 

  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

514 
 

a decent living since the devastation. A sturgeon was made 
extinct and the fishing never really regenerated at all. 
Trapping was also never really restored at the previous 
levels. The damaging effects still confront us on a yearly 
basis. Nobody could be pleased with this. If only we could 
rectify it, but I just don’t know. 
 

And this was his statement, actually, on May 29, 1984. 
 
Angus Bear died without seeing the changes that he had wished 
and fought for. He had worked over 40 years in that Island Falls 
site. He used to walk 60 miles a day, carrying mail, working 
with dangerous PCBs, working with 2,4-D in the spraying of 
the line. Him and many workers gave away of many years to 
the company in more ways than one. Many of the people of 
Sandy Bay, and countless numbers in the past, have said this 
time and time again: what will be done to the destruction of our 
livelihood? We would like to see a major agreement, but not in 
a confrontational style. We are ready and willing to work; we 
are ready and willing to take training; we are ready and willing 
to co-operate with the government, but when is the government 
going to know that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at this budget, I see many Sandy Bays 
in northern Saskatchewan. And I’ve seen many of the people 
really try hard in regards not only to the education of their 
children but also in gaining a job. And what we see from this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is privatization and the 100 
jobs in Rabbit Lake, and we know that more are going to be 
lost. 
 
What the people are saying is that we have experience with 
privatization already. We already know what the private 
company did. They say, we hope that the people of southern 
Saskatchewan hear our story at a time when this government is 
giving away our assets; at a time when the government is 
throwing away our jobs; at a time when our government is 
giving away our forests; at a time when the government is 
giving away our mines. 
 
What people are telling me is this: we will lose all our land; we 
will lose everything. The only thing we have left is our hands 
and our minds. We want to work, but even that, the government 
is taking away. And, Mr. Speaker, as I stand here therefore in 
dealing with the budget, I’ve found it to be highly, highly 
disappointing. I thought . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You said that before. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- A member said, you have said that before. I 
would like to say that to the member again because the people 
want you to listen. They’ve been saying it for seven years, and 
you have not been listening. What they’re saying is that we 
want you to do a job creation. Get our roads rolling. Get our 
roads improved in the North. Get the gas pipeline moved into 
the North. Get the housing construction moving at the 
community level. Help us in tourism. Help us in wild rice 
development. Help us in all of these things that are very 
important for our people. 
 
Also make sure that you provide compensation for the 

destructive aspects of development in many cases that have 
come to bear on us in the past. And also we would like you, the 
PC government, to know that we also want fairness and justice. 
The land question shouldn’t only go for big business. Indian 
and Metis people want land like anybody else. And I think as 
we look into the future, not only should Japanese corporations 
or Chinese corporations or American corporations benefit, the 
people and the children of northern Saskatchewan want to 
benefit also. And that’s the message I leave with this 
government at this 1989 budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to rise in support of 
this budget address by the Minister of Finance, and I’m proud 
to stand in the Assembly today and place on record my support 
of the measures announced, particularly as they affect the 
people in the constituency of Redberry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I ran for election in 1982 for a 
very simple and a very clear reason. I ran because the people of 
my constituency needed representation, and they needed a 
government that would listen to their concerns. I remember 
many people coming to me, Mr. Speaker, suggesting that I let 
my name stand. And I can tell you that I wasn’t all fired up to 
do this at first, but I remember being at home in Leask, and in 
the fields in the spring and listening to budgets presented by the 
members opposite. They had the government, and the people 
had nothing. 
 
Day after day there was always another announcement that the 
government had bought this or the government had bought that. 
Mr. Speaker, I found it very disturbing. 
 
Then they started on our family farms. They started up buying 
the farm land, and they, the NDP, said the government knows it 
all and the government knows best. Well, Mr. Speaker, who 
said the government knows best? Who said so, except our 
members across the way? The people of Redberry never said 
that. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, I would like to request leave to . . . There 
are some visitors here. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, I would like to introduce Dennis Morin and 
Pearl Merasty from Sandy Bay, who are sitting over here at the 
gallery. Mr. Speaker, could you give them a sound welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

515 
 

(BUDGET DEBATE continued) 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- Getting back to my speech, Mr. Speaker, who 
said that the government knows best? Well my opposition 
colleagues across the way said that they know best. The people 
of Redberry sure never said that. 
 
And I’d like to tell you something about my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. Over 38 per cent of the folks who live in Redberry are 
over the age of 65. That’s almost 40 per cent that are senior 
citizens. 
 
And I remember walking around Leask and Marsden and 
district, and the Vawn-Edam area, and we had liquor board 
stores, and we had Crown corporation advertising, and we had 
land bank. But we had no nursing homes, no special care 
homes, and no innovative housing for the seniors. 
 
The NDP government of the day, well they had money to buy 
out the farms and potash mines, holes in the grounds, good part 
of the rest of our businesses, but they didn’t have a dime for our 
pioneers and our parents. The people who built the province, 
the pioneers, they were left with nowhere to go by the NDP. 
 
And then the folks came to me, Mr. Speaker, my neighbours 
and even some people that I didn’t know all that well, and they 
said, John, if you get into politics, would you go to Regina and 
try to fix some of the problems that are facing the constituency. 
And these were concerned people, Mr. Speaker. And let me tell 
you that even the fellows and the gals who are in their 40’s now 
throughout the province and in my constituency are looking 
ahead and they’re saying that they want to make sure that when 
they need taking care of that it’s going to be there for them. 
And they sent me here so I would help and, in their words, help 
fix it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what caused me to run and that’s why 
I’m here today; and I’m here for the people of my constituency 
and nothing else. And they know that I don’t have a magic 
wand or something to wave and just automatically fix it, but 
they also know me and they know the government. And I’m 
happy to say that they know that there’s going to a 
free-standing, 30-standing, level 3 and level 4 nursing home 
unit built in the town of Leask. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP shouts that the only reason we’re 
building a nursing home there is because I’m helping my 
friends. Well I don’t mean to be unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker, 
but damn right they’re my friends and that’s why I’m here -- 
and to work for the people of Leask, people of Rabbit Lake and 
Hafford and Whitkow and Blaine Lake, Borden, Denholm, 
Fielding, south of Spiritwood, Meota, Jackfish and Radisson -- 
all of the towns in the constituency. And you’re right, they are 
my friends. 
 
It makes me mad when the NDP make it sound like a dirty 
thing. They think that I should apologize because I want nursing 
homes for my towns or that the member from Assiniboia wants 
a hospital for Lafleche or other good things for his town. 
 
What’s the matter with them? Why are they here? Well I 

can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’m here for the people who elected 
me and I won’t apologize for the NDP for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- And I won’t apologize for the new level 3 and 4 
nursing home in Rabbit Lake that this government built in 1986, 
and I won’t apologize for the senior citizens’ complex that’s in 
Radisson, or apologize for the complex that’s in Mayfair. These 
are the people who sent me here to get it fixed. And little by 
little we’re getting it done, and I won’t let the snickering or the 
hollering or the slander of the NDP make me embarrassed about 
what I’m accomplishing for the people of my constituency. 
 
It hasn’t been a bed of roses in the Redberry constituency. We 
suffered from drought and economic problems that this 
province has had to deal with. But I want to tell you and I want 
to tell the members over there something about the people of 
Redberry. They don’t know the meaning of the words “give 
up.” 
 
Out there they’re movers and shakers, they’re optimists, they’re 
hard workers, and they’re confident people. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they don’t take too well to the NDP always telling them there’s 
nothing people can do. They know better. They don’t appreciate 
being told that they can’t help themselves, that they can’t make 
their own decisions, and that government knows best so vote 
NDP and we’ll help you. That’s not what the people of 
Redberry constituency are all about, and the NDP had better 
learn that. 
 
I don’t want to . . . I would like to make a few remarks on 
health care part of the budget, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 
look at the numbers. Since 1981 and ’82, the NDP’s last year in 
power, since then this government has increased the health 
budget nearly 91 per cent -- 91 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And the 
people of Redberry are a pretty smart bunch, Mr. Speaker. None 
of them had a 91 per cent increase in anything. A lot of them 
had to live with reductions because of grain wars and the 
international market problems, and also the drought and poor 
cattle prices. A lot of them had to cut back, forget about an 
increase. 
 
But they know what a 91 per cent increase in health means, and 
it means a whole lot. And they know that we’re spending 
almost twice as much as the NDP did. So I don’t appreciate 
these fellows going around my constituency with their fairy 
tales about cut-backs. Look at the new ambulance budget, Mr. 
Speaker, a 221 per cent increase. At these times, it’s absolutely 
incredible to see that kind of financial action in any area -- 221 
per cent means more for our ambulance service. 
 
And the NDP complain that the government is increasing taxes 
in cigarettes and alcohol. Well the people of Redberry have told 
me in no uncertain terms that they will support these measures. 
When the taxes are fair and distributed fairly, my people 
support it, and they support this. The difference between me 
and the members opposite is that I know my people support it 
because I ask them when I talk to them on coffee row. And 
that’s why I’m here, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

516 
 

And I want to talk about this new capital program to help our 
towns build recreational facilities. This program, Mr. Speaker, 
is brand-new. Nothing like it has ever existed before, and it’s 
going to do some great things for our small towns. 
 
Over six years we’re going to spend almost $33 million to build 
ice rinks, swimming pools, senior citizen centres, and halls. In 
the bad old days, Mr. Speaker, the big cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon had money to build indoor swimming pools and 
top-notch facilities for their citizens, but our towns had to go 
begging to the outsiders just to get a curling rink. It is good that 
the cities have excellent facilities, and they will benefit from 
this program too. But our towns are going to have some help 
now, and it’s going to be a substantial help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a small town that wants to build an indoor skating 
rink will be eligible for a $200,000 grant in this program. If 
they’re a bit larger town, over 5,000, they will qualify for 
$250,000; for a curling rink, it’s $100,000; $250,000 for 
swimming pools; $100,000 for school gymnasiums; and 
$100,000 for museums. These are the eligibilities, Mr. Speaker, 
and we’re going to go all out in my Redberry constituency to 
make use of this program. I’m going to be working with every 
town to make sure that we get the best facilities we can -- towns 
like Radisson, Maymont, Rabbit Lake and Borden. 
 
This program alone makes one of the best budgets ever brought 
down by the government, one of the best. But we’re not going 
to just build rinks and halls and pools in our towns, Mr. 
Speaker. The budget is bringing a new, $100 million municipal 
capital program -- $100 million. This program will be available 
through rural municipalities as well as urban municipalities, the 
first time that this has ever been the case; the first time a 
government is providing capital grant program that works for 
rural Saskatchewan as well as urban Saskatchewan. This $100 
million is going to help our municipalities build and renovate 
their water systems and their infrastructure. 
 
We are also expanding the work of Municipal Financing 
Corporation to help municipalities with 100 per cent financing 
needs for sewer and water projects. The people of Redberry see 
that we are building rural Saskatchewan, and they want us to 
help build their towns. We created the community development 
corporations and rural development corporations. And these 
projects are working all across the province to get economic 
activity going. 
 
We’ve been there for agriculture, working for farm families, 
and the members opposite know it, and more importantly, the 
people of Redberry know it. Our loan protection programs 
alone, Mr. Speaker, just with the low interest loans we have 
offered farm families, we have saved the farmers almost $400 
million in payments to financial institutions -- $400 million 
saved in interest payments. And you don’t hear the opposition 
talking about that. 
 
We put out $450 million in crop insurance payments, $400 
million in drought assistance, $64 million for the green feed and 
livestock assistance program, and almost 

$9 million to help rural families get water during the drought 
and against future droughts. Just a great deal of money, Mr. 
Speaker, and the Redberry constituency knows about it and they 
appreciate it and they’re using it. 
 
We’re extending the drought protection program, as I call it, the 
water assistance program, and we’re going to spend another $10 
million to secure water supplies for rural families in their towns 
and on the farms. And rural families appreciate this. 
 
You know, it’s a long way from the statement of the NDP 
premier of Saskatchewan, and that, and I’ll quote, “There is no 
God-given right to survive in farming.” What an attitude. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who said it? 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Blakeney. What an attitude the members 
have opposite, towards our farm families. 
 
I tell you the farmers claim no God-given right. They are 
workers. They’re hard workers, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t 
want hand-outs. They want a fair shake from the government 
that will listen to them and a government that’s doing just that. 
 
You can see how far the NDP has come, Mr. Speaker, by how 
they run their outfit. They haven’t come an inch. They’ve 
proudly announced the appointment of Jack Messer as the chief 
executive officer of their party just recently. This is the man 
who was the NDP minister of agriculture, and here’s what he 
said about farm families on February 11, 1975, and I’ll quote: 
 
(1645) 
 

Ownership of property has been imposed on each of us 
simply because there has never been a real alternative. 
There is a myth that the pride of ownership encourages 
farmers to reach their greatest potential. 
 

Will you listen to that, Mr. Speaker. I invite the NDP to visit 
farm families in my constituency and ask them if pride of 
ownership is important to them. You bet it is. It’s also important 
for Jack Messer. He owns some of the best farm land in the 
Tisdale area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Speaker, he can ask farmers in the Soviet 
Union, for that matter, and he’d get the same answer. Pride of 
ownership is important; it’s vital. And it’s not only vital to farm 
families, it’s important to all of us here. 
 
My forefathers came to Canada from Croatia, Mr. Speaker -- 
that’s now a part of Yugoslavia -- and they came to Canada 
because of pride of ownership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- They came because they wanted to own their 
own land and build a future for their children and create 
something with their own hands and that they 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

517 
 

could say, this is mine. This is my work and it’s good, and it’s 
pride of ownership. If they didn’t have that, they would have 
left Croatia and fought in the wilderness and the winters and the 
dry land. 
 
They pioneered here in Saskatchewan in the Redberry 
constituency, because of pride of ownership. I benefitted from 
that, my parents and my children benefitted from that pride, and 
I can tell you my kids are learning that pride of ownership. And 
that’s what the NDP call a myth. 
 
Come out to Redberry and tell my people there it’s a myth. And 
go down to the employees of the Saskatchewan government 
printers, for example, who just bought out the company they 
work for, and ask them if pride of ownership . . . Tell them it’s a 
myth. 
 
The workers at WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker. Let the NDP go 
to those employees who are now their own bosses and ask them 
if it’s a so-called myth. They just never learn, and it’s a crying 
shame. 
 
This budget says that there’s pride of ownership and we’re 
going to help farm families keep their land; we’re not going to 
have the government own it all. We are now working with the 
ag credit corporation to make loans to farm families so that they 
can buy their home quarter and get started again so they can 
keep farming. We’re going to provide start-up loans and 
refinance those who are having difficulty but have viable 
operations, and we’re going to help them keep the farm. We’re 
not going to make them sell the farm to the government because 
we think government knows best. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I was a little surprised when I 
heard the member from Riversdale during the throne speech. 
And he told us how his people came from Europe and all, and 
still he doesn’t seem to understand why they came. His folks 
and my folks had the same thing in common; they had a pride in 
ownership. 
 
And that’s why they came to Canada from Saskatchewan -- to 
build a good life for their children. And we shouldn’t forget 
that, Mr. Speaker. We should honour what they have done for 
us. We should understand it and we should build on it. And the 
people of Redberry, Mr. Speaker, do those things, and they 
have pride of ownership, just like the employees at Meadow 
Lake saw mill and the Indian bands around Meadow Lake. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I represent a number 
of Indian reserves in my constituency, and I can tell you that 
they have pride of ownership. But they want to own and they 
want to build and they want to grow. We’re going to work with 
these Indian bands and help them do these things, help build 
their own communities and good future for their children. This 
budget, Mr. Speaker, makes a number of programs available, 
and I intend to do my best to see that everyone who wants to 
take advantage of them can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- Whether it’s young people on or off the reserves 
who want to get on with the young entrepreneurs’ program, or 
folks using the venture capital 

program, or access to SEDCO loans, we are going to help keep 
building in Redberry, Mr. Speaker, and this budget’s going to 
help us do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t happen overnight. My forefathers and 
yours did not come to Canada and think that tomorrow the land 
would start farming by itself. It takes work, patience, 
determination, and confidence. The land won’t work the farm 
itself, and the government can’t farm the land. People farm the 
land, people open small businesses, and people make the 
communities. And it takes effort and there is no magic. 
 
But like I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, my people are smart, and I 
don’t have to go out to Redberry and tell them a lot of these 
things. They already know. The only people that I have to tell 
are the members who are sitting across the floor. 
 
It isn’t an overnight thing, but it’s working; one project at a 
time, one nursing home at a time, one hospital, one town. It’s 
working and we’re building, slow but sure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- And I want to say to the Minister of Finance 
that this is a great budget, and I congratulate him. And I want to 
say to our Premier that he’s a real leader, a real leader. The 
Premier has taken this province through some of the most 
difficult times in history with a crisis in grain prices, potash 
prices, oil prices, in all of it. And he’s gotten us through it, and 
still we’re growing and doing better and have a billion dollars 
for health care and education, and an interest rate program 
protection, and all those things that help us right out where we 
live. 
 
And I’m proud that I’m in this debate to pay tribute to our 
Premier. I go home and I look around the constituency and see 
that this government spent $2 million rebuilding the highway 
from Blaine Lake to Hafford; three-quarters of a million dollars 
to grade the road from Martins Lake to Shell Lake, right past 
the past NDP MLA’s house in fact; a third of a million dollars 
in paving the same stretch; and over a million dollars for the 
Borden underpass. 
 
Let me tell you something about the underpass at Borden, Mr. 
Speaker. That was a highway that was dangerous and was a 
killer. And for whatever reason, our people were being killed by 
that section of the road. They never fixed it at all; they ignored 
it. We were buying farm land; how could we fix bridges. 
 
And I told the Premier, we have to do something about the 
highway, and the Minister of Highways. And the situation was 
corrected because it was unsafe and very dangerous. The 
government just spent over $1 million in this new budget to 
build a safe, wide, new underpass. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- But in total in the last year we spent almost $6 
million just on the roads in my constituency at a time when this 
government was in a real bind for money. And all the NDP do 
is talk about a deficit. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
like deficits and I’m glad to see that the minister has things 
under control. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

518 
 

But when it comes to a bridge that saves lives in my 
constituency, I say to the NDP, go and talk to the folks in 
Borden. They’re glad we spent the money, the trucking 
industry’s glad we spent the money, and the travelling public is 
happy we spent the money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: -- We spent 221 per cent more for ambulances, 91 
per cent more in the health care, 100 per cent more in the 
budget for education. Let the NDP talk. We have the deficit 
under control, and I commend the minister for that. But I say 
thank you for the people of the Redberry constituency: thank 
you for the facilities this government is building, and the roads 
it’s building and the bridges, and the rural development 
corporations, and the interest rate protection program, and the 
pension plan. And it was for all these reasons I got into politics. 
 
And it’s for all these reasons that I will be supporting this 
budget with vigour and pride, and, Mr. Speaker, for all these 
reasons that the people of Redberry will be supporting this 
budget and the ones that have come before it. 
 
When we hit the campaign trail . . . and I look forward to the 
day, Mr. Speaker, to meet the member from Westmount on the 
campaign trail in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say that I am indeed honoured to join this budget debate 
this afternoon. But before I address what specifically was in the 
budget, I would want to make a few remarks and share a few 
remarks with the member from Redberry. And I would want to 
put him on warning that since his government’s gerrymander, 
the Bill that’s before this legislature, the new electoral 
boundaries Act, that he may want to rethink some of his 
comments regarding this Premier’s performance and regarding 
this budget. He may want to think of the people in rural 
P.A.-Duck Lake if he aspires to represent the new Redberry 
riding under the gerrymander which will be part of that 
constituency. 
 
And he may want to have a look at what those people were 
telling this Premier in 1986 when they defeated his Justice 
minister. He may want to rethink the fact that in this 
construction project for 1989-90, Highway 302 west of Prince 
Albert is not mentioned in this, a highway that is going to cause 
a loss of life if that Minister of Highways doesn’t act very soon, 
because it’s a dangerous piece of road, should have been in this 
capital construction project budget, but it’s not. 
 
And I want to say to him, if he is the PC candidate along 
Highway 302 in the next election, around Lily Plain, past the 
penitentiary by Prince Albert, he’s going to have some long, 
hard explanations to make to the people out there who used to 
support a Conservative government, but who in the past few 
elections have been turning to the New Democrats because they 
know that this is a hopeless administration, and if they want to 
get that road repaired, 

that they’re going to have to change the Premier and change the 
government. 
 
Those are the kinds of things that this fellow is going to have to 
look at, this member from Redberry. He’s going to have to go 
back and go over and rehash the promises that former Tory 
candidates in that area have done. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Dutchak. How many times did Dutchak? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- How many times did the former member 
from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Mr. Dutchak, promise that 
road? Not once or not twice; he promised it dozens of times, 
and he promised it in every house along Highway 302, and he 
had the former . . . the high-flyer, the former Highways minister 
out there promising to repair that road for them. And where is 
it? Is it in this budget? Mr. Garner promised it. Mr. Dutchak 
promised it, and he’s going to have to go out there and promise 
it again because it’s not going to get done under this capital 
works project. 
 
And he’s going to have to speak to some of the small-business 
people in Duck Lake, and he’s going to have to speak to the 
folks out on Beardy’s reserve who are not very comfortable 
with the administration of this Premier. Those are the kinds of 
things that this candidate is going to have to face when he 
moves into the Prince Albert-Duck Lake area. 
 
And I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, whether I will be the candidate 
for that area or not. That will be decided by my party and by the 
people who support the New Democrats in that area, but I’m 
going to promise the people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, rural 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake this: that if there is anything that can 
be done, they won’t be subjected to another promise of the 
repair of Highway 302 west of Prince Albert by another Tory 
candidate and then have that promise broken because they’ve 
got other priorities. They’ve got priorities of . . . like Dome 
Advertising and the Peter Pocklingtons and, as I said, those will 
be some long, hard explanations to make. 
 
And those people, I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, also have 
an understanding of what this government has done and just 
how desperate they are, and the fact that they’ve torn that 
particular area away from their natural trading partners, the 
people in Prince Albert, and they will have something to say to 
this particular member about that. And they will be asking him 
to pass that message on to the Premier. 
 
This government seems to be so proud of increasing in this 
budget the deficit by yet another $226 million. They try to pass 
it off as only $226 million, but, Mr. Speaker, the facts are in this 
book, in the Estimates, and the facts are such that $226 is a 
misrepresentation of what the actual deficit, estimated deficit 
for the 18 . . . or 1989 and 1999, or 1990 fiscal year actually 
are. And in the course of my remarks on this debate, I intend to 
tell and show the people exactly where they’ve fudged this 
budget, how they’ve cooked the numbers, and why the Finance 
Minister has once again proven that he, nor his government, can 
be trusted. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

 

519 
 

Mr. Speaker, not since 1982, when this government has been 
elected, have they one time -- not one time, this budget included 
-- been able to balance their expenditures with their revenues; 
not one time. They blame it on rain, and they blame it on 
agriculture, and they blame it on tough times, but never once, 
Mr. Speaker, will they take an inward look at themselves; a 
look at the real kind of government that they’ve been 
delivering; a look at the real problems and the real reason that 
this government is in some economic difficulties at this time. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. It being 5 o’clock, the House now 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


