


















































June 8, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 8, 1989 
 

1745 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a nice evening 
tonight, as the member for Turtleford has just said. And many 
people might well ask themselves why the Saskatchewan 
legislature might be sitting; why they themselves might be sitting 
in front of a television set watching this particular debate, a 
debate to limit the ringing of bells in this legislature. 
 
And as I was saying before supper, I think the simple explanation 
for our being here tonight is to struggle with some of the issues 
implicit in the democratic system, and what it means to have a 
parliamentary system of democracy. And those are some of the 
issues I’d like to speak to tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Earlier this evening, over the supper hour, members of the 
legislature had an opportunity to view displays here in the 
Legislative Building sponsored by the Saskatchewan Council for 
International Co-operation. And would . . . I would say this about 
this particular motion on bell-ringing: would that both the 
government and the opposition could sit down together and 
co-operate with one another to effect some sort of, if not 
reconciliation, at least some sort of communication on this issue 
so that we can get beyond it to deal with the public’s business. 
 
The Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation 
represents many different organizations, many of them church 
organizations and public service organizations dealing with the 
betterment of the human condition. And I think that they — 
knowing the work of some of the organizations myself such as 
World Vision — they work in countries where there is no 
democratic tradition. In many of those countries where relief and 
development efforts take place, there are military regimes, and 
decisions are made at gunpoint and not in a legislative way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But we don’t have a military regime here. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Now many people in Saskatchewan could well 
count their blessings if they stopped to remember that we don’t 
have, as the member from Regina Victoria says, a military regime 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some people might say that the present regime is oppressive. It 
certainly isn’t a military regime, and I think that one of the 
reasons it isn’t a military regime, and one of the reasons many 
people would argue that this government isn’t an oppressive 
regime — unduly oppressive at least — is that there are rules 
spelled out for 

the governing, not only of the province . . . That’s what this 
Assembly obviously does, is to review legislation proposed by 
the government. There are rules and legislation proposed not only 
for the province in this Chamber but rules proposed for the 
governance of this Chamber itself; rules that you, Mr. Speaker, 
are called on to enforce. 
 
But as people will know, before you can enforce any given rule 
it has to be in the Rules and Procedures book of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. And we now, fortunately, have this 
in a bilingual edition such that people of both tongues, both 
founding tongues in this country, can see the rules and 
regulations in their own tongue. 
 
And so that means, it’s not in English and Ukrainian; it’s in 
English and French. And when it comes to an examination of, let 
me see, Mr. Speaker, which rule is this we’re . . . When it comes 
to a discussion of rule 33(2) and a substitution for the existing 
rule in this book which allows for full and free debate, the 
government, the public will know, has proposed a limitation on 
such full and free debate. 
 
And that is the issue that this side of the House says is really 
uncalled for and is a unilateral action, an action which bespeaks 
a government that is insensitive to, not only the parliamentary 
tradition, but the democratic tradition as well. And it’s then with 
some dismay that the opposition finds itself in a position where 
we have to address an issue that is really in some respects bogus. 
 
The present situation is such that in the rule book for many years 
there has been a rule regarding the calling of members to a vote. 
It indicates that when members are voting: 
 

. . . preparatory to a division, no further debate is . . . 
permitted (once the call for division for the vote has been 
issued). 
 

And that rule 33(1) indicates that: 
 

Upon a division, the Yeas and the Nays shall not be entered 
upon the minutes unless demanded by two Members. 
 

That’s not unreasonable. That rule is there, rule 33(1), to indicate 
that if and when two members want a recorded vote, a recorded 
division of the Assembly, they can ask for that by any two 
members getting up. And it’s then when we come to rule 33(2) 
where the government wants to limit debate by virtue of invoking 
an end to the ringing of the bells. We say that doesn’t fly. 
 
If it flies, it flies in the face of democracy, and we know how 
important that is that the Saskatchewan municipalities be given 
the opportunity to express their opinion on such a major piece of 
legislation as the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
And we feel, on this side of the House, that that’s precisely what 
was affected by the existing rule on bell-ringing — that the public 
was given ample opportunity because,   



 
June 8. 1989 

1746 
 

expressly because, of the existing rule of this Assembly, that the 
public was given ample opportunity to judge for themselves the 
propriety of the bells ringing; and if that was deemed to be 
irresponsible or nonsensical, then by virtue of public opinion to 
punish the opposition by withdrawing their support for it, and 
eventually forcing the opposition back into this Assembly. 
 
Contrariwise, if the public felt that such expression on an issue 
of such public importance as the privatization of SaskPower were 
in need of being amplified and extended across the province, 
there would be an opportunity for that to take place by virtue of 
the existing provisions in the rule book. 
 
The issues surrounding the privatization of SaskPower are such 
that they aren’t simple and they aren’t one-dimensional, and far 
be it for me to get into the multitude of these issues, particularly 
since they aren’t simple. But I will say this, Mr. Speaker, that it 
is this whole social, political situation that we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan at this present time regarding the 
privatization of SaskPower that occasions this debate on the rules 
of the Assembly. 
 
And the two are inextricably bound together, not simply by us as 
parliamentarians, as elected members of the legislature who have 
to address a rule change such as this, but inextricably bound in 
the minds of the public because the public knows that if this rule 
change goes through, limiting debate, that the democratic process 
itself is curtailed when it comes to the consideration of 
SaskPower. 
 
And when you have some 75 per cent of the public opposed to 
such a government measure, then in the minds of the public it 
becomes terribly important to have a vehicle to address the issue 
of consequence such as we have before us now. And if 
privatization of SaskPower is such an issue of consequence, then 
it’s of consequence to address this bell-ringing rule . . . motion, 
as tangential as that may seem to some people. I think it’s well 
understood that the two are linked by virtue of the debate that 
we’ve experienced this spring. 
 
Now the democratic process and the democratic notion itself, Mr. 
Speaker, is not an easy thing to define. Throughout the course of 
history, political philosophers have reflected on what the 
meaning of the democratic process or the democratic ideal really 
is all about. At some points has had a very simple definition, that 
of direct participatory government; at other times it has been 
much more vague, and debated as to what the democratic process 
really is all about. And I think that that is part of the issue that we 
face here tonight. 
 
There is a question of what, what is the democratic ideal. What 
is fundamental to the operation of a democratic system? I think 
there’s a consensus among political philosophers that democracy 
at root consists of government by the people. And if the 
democratic ideal or the democratic principle is rooted and 
grounded in government by the people, then we have to reflect 
on what it means for us as legislators to be representative or 
reflective of popular opinion and popular wisdom. 
 

(1915) 
 
And it’s one thing for us to make that assumption and to say that 
in fact I, as the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, do in fact 
reflect the opinions and viewpoints of the people living in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland — by no means claim to 
reflect them all; it’s another thing for us to examine the degree to 
which we do that and how we do that. 
 
And I say that it is precisely in relationship to a rule such as this 
where, if I, as a member . . . elected member of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan for Saskatoon Sutherland, come in 
here and, faced with a particular piece of legislation such as that 
legislation to privatize SaskPower; and I have only one hour in 
which to leave this Legislative Assembly and reflect on the 
propriety of voting for or against that legislation, or I have the 
option as presently exists by the rule 33(2) in the book of Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly; if I had the option 
of unlimited opportunity to consult . . . I think that few members 
wouldn’t take the option at a critical juncture, where there’s 
critical legislation such as the privatization of SaskPower, to go 
out and consult at length with their constituents. And that’s 
precisely what the existing rule allows for — free and full access 
to the democratic process, to government by the people. 
 
Well certainly there’s a sense in which, during the course of the 
proposed change where there would be only one hour for the 
ringing of the bells, I could leave this Chamber and make phone 
calls to individual constituents and consult them in terms of their 
thoughts and feelings about a particular piece of legislation 
before us. I have to ask myself how many constituents I could 
contact during that course of time by phone. If I were to do one 
a minute, I couldn’t even contact 60 people. I dare say I could 
contact 30 people — probably not. That would be two a minute. 
If we were to adopt this proposed rule change and I were to have 
only 60 minutes, I wonder whether I could even contact 15 
people. That would be four people, one person every four 
minutes — hardly possible. 
 
And so what you have then is a situation under the proposed 
change in this rule where not only myself but any elected member 
would be powerfully constrained in his or her ability to consult 
with their constituents and to apply that basic democratic 
principle of government by the people. And 90 per cent of the 
time — I would dare say 99 per cent of the time, Mr. Speaker — 
this isn’t an issue. There is no need to consult with constituents 
at the drop of a hat. Most issues aren’t that galvanizing or 
commanding of the public’s attention. 
 
But there are points in time, and I think we’ve just lived through 
one of these rare times here in Saskatchewan this spring, when 
there are issues such as the privatization of SaskPower where the 
public is so consumed by the consequences of the proposed 
legislation that they demand of their representatives that they 
have an opportunity to address the political process directly 
themselves. And this is a direct step in the democratic process 
that is allowed by virtue of the existing rule that we have 
presently governing this Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know you have an appreciation for   



 
June 8. 1989 

1747 
 

this very issue and I know that because I have looked just recently 
at the 19th annual report of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association, Saskatchewan Branch, from 1987. And on page 2 
you give your report as president. And I think it’s a very good 
report and I commend you for the thoughtfulness with which it is 
written. Because in it, you might recall, you address some of 
these very issues about the nature of the democratic process. And 
you quote — or you don’t quote, you state — that it has been in 
your first year of tenure as president of the Saskatchewan Branch 
of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, you quote 
from a pamphlet entitled, The Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association. And the quote that you give reads as follows. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I appreciate the member’s 
remarks but I would also appreciate if the hon. member did not 
draw the Chair into his comments, as you could understand 
where that might lead to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I take that as a good piece of advice, and I 
apologize, Mr. Speaker, for that oversight. 
 
I’ll just say that there is a report in this 19th annual booklet from 
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association that quotes from 
the pamphlet, The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, 
and reads: 
 

“The C.P.A. (Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) is 
an association of Commonwealth Parliamentarians who, 
irrespective of race, religion or culture, are united by 
community of interest, respect for the rule of law and 
individual rights and freedoms and by pursuit of the positive 
ideals of parliamentary democracy.” 
 

The point being that those of us who are here addressing an issue 
such as a change in the rules of this Legislative Assembly for the 
governance of this parliamentary association that we’re elected 
to are united, irrespective of our race, religion, or culture, by the 
pursuit of positive ideals of parliamentary democracy. And part 
of the point that I am attempting to make tonight is that this rule 
change proposed by the member for Kindersley, that debate be 
limited to only one hour . . . Not the debate be limited to only one 
hour. In a sense we’re talking about debate being limited by 
virtue of the bells ringing for only one hour and public debate, 
which is the most important fundamental debate, being limited 
by one hour, by virtue of the bells ringing for one hour — is not 
in keeping with that democratic parliamentary ideal. 
 
Further to this particular report, the point is made that it is a 
tribute to all friends of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association who have gone before us and who have worked hard 
to build and enhance Saskatchewan’s reputation in the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association circles. And it will be 
our responsibility to maintain Saskatchewan’s place in the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and indeed to enrich 
it. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, as 
parliamentarians, do you think, do you really think that 

this motion from the member from Kindersley, that the Rules and 
the Procedures of the Legislative Assembly be amended such that 
bell-ringing takes place for only one hour, do you think that that 
will build the reputation of Saskatchewan in Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association circles? 
 
I suspect not, as the member from Moose Jaw South indicates. It 
is not likely to enhance or to build the reputation of this 
Assembly, if we consider the democratic ideal of participatory 
democracy, of government by the people, that is facilitated and 
in fact predicated on the people having a voice by virtue of there 
being full and free ringing of the bells. 
 
That will not build and enhance Saskatchewan’s parliamentary 
reputation in parliamentary circles, to constrict that kind of 
democratic debate, and I dare say that it would be a mistake. It 
would not enrich Saskatchewan’s place in the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association 
 
An Hon. Member: — Democratic backwater. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — As the member from Regina Victoria says, is 
much more likely to make Saskatchewan something of a 
democratic backwater. 
 
Now there are some people who would argue — members 
opposite would argue — that that in fact is what we have right 
now here in Saskatchewan with the existing rule and procedure 
that allows for full and free amplified public debate. They would 
argue that we have a legislative and a parliamentary . . . a 
democratic backwater here in Saskatchewan by virtue of being 
only one of two jurisdictions in Canada with such a rule on the 
books, and that to go and to move to a change in this rule would 
be a move to enhance and to build Saskatchewan’s reputation in 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association circles; that this 
would be a move, as the writer of this report says, to enrich it. 
 
And I think that it’s important, for this reason, to consider that 
parliamentary, that democratic ideal and to weigh what we really 
are doing with this change in rules. It’s the kind of question that 
really deserves some reflection. And I think it’s in this regard that 
members on this side of the House feel very uncomfortable with 
the government proposing such a fundamental change to the rules 
of this Assembly, unilaterally, in very heavy-handed fashion, 
without consultation of members from this side of the Assembly. 
We balk and we chafe at that kind of government action, quite 
frankly. We say, that’s not the way this Assembly has operated 
in the past, and it’s not the way it should be operating now. 
 
We know, as the people of Saskatchewan do, that the government 
upon occasion . . . well as one example, after the 1986 election, 
in the spring of 1987, that this government is not inclined to 
consult the opposition or the public when it’s making changes; 
that it’s very prone when it comes to major changes to simply 
dive in and start ramrodding and bulldozing changes through, 
such as many of the changes to the dental program were done. 
 
And we say it’s that kind of undemocratic process that   



 
June 8. 1989 

1748 
 

does not build and enhance the reputation of this Assembly, just 
as this proposed rule change does not build and enhance and 
enrich the reputation of this Assembly, not just in 
Commonwealth parliamentary circles, Mr. Speaker, but in the 
public ambit of Saskatchewan and the public circles of this 
country. When the people aren’t consulted; when they aren’t 
given a voice or a say or a part of the action; when the people 
aren’t allowed to rule directly; then we lose a good measure of 
the democratic institutions that we have come to know and to 
cherish. 
 
(1930) 
 
There is another report in this 19th annual report from the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Mr. Speaker, that 
you may recognize. It comes from a member of the legislature 
who went to the 36th parliamentary seminar in Westminster on 
March 3 to March 20 of 1987. And the member of the legislature 
who took this trip to England and visited Westminster notes that: 
 

During the afternoon we had our first opportunity to visit 
the British House of Commons. As you can imagine, this 
was again extremely interesting. We saw the similarities of 
our Parliamentary system, as well as the differences. I could 
write much about this, but let me just make one reference to 
Question Period as it affects the Prime Minister. Under the 
British system, the Prime Minister only answers questions 
twice each week (Tuesdays and Thursdays), each time 
precisely for fifteen minutes. This, of course, is in sharp 
contrast to the Canadian Parliamentary system. 
 

Sounds very British in a way, to have the Prime Minister perhaps 
answering questions only twice a week for precisely 15 minutes. 
And of course we note that this is quite different from the rules 
that we’ve come to know in this parliamentary Assembly. 
 
We know that the democratic process is a very fragile one and 
that there are wide varieties in the way in which the 
parliamentary systems of various countries run themselves. 
There are various substantial differences perhaps in the way in 
which the rules are interpreted, in the way in which rules are 
implemented. 
 
But it was Pericles, in his funeral oration, who is often cited as 
the single most eloquent statement concelebrating the virtues of 
Athenian democracy — that democracy was the essence of the 
Greek political system — and he tells us that in a democracy, 
Athens doesn’t choose to copy the laws of its neighbours, that it 
provides the pattern or the model that others follow. He notes that 
because Athens is a democracy, it is well and justly administered. 
 
Pericles goes on to note, in this funeral oration, that the many and 
the few . . . the many and not the few are favoured because of the 
democratic system and the democratic model, and that capacity 
is the sole criterion for office holding, that personal relations are 
easy, that lawlessness is uncommon, that valour in the service of 
the state is habitual. 
 

And it’s those kinds of democratic ideals that Pericles notes in 
his funeral oration that we would hold to still today, that in our 
democratic system, the many and not the few would be favoured. 
And I think it needs to be said, Mr. Speaker, that under the 
proposed rule change, the few would likely be favoured or served 
and not the many, because in one hour it is very difficult to 
contact more than a handful of people. One hour does not allow 
for full flowering of the democratic ideal where the many are 
favoured. 
 
And that’s why, here in Saskatchewan in recent history, we had 
to take, as an opposition, 17 days to give flower to that 
democratic virtue that Pericles of ancient Athens holds up, that 
virtue of the many and not the few being served; that virtue of 
government by the people, of popular self-government that is 
enhanced by the kinds of provisions that presently govern this 
Legislative Assembly right here and now. 
 
And while the government members might be inclined to view 
this as a certain measure of lawlessness, that was one of the 
concerns, as I indicated earlier, of the ancient Greeks, that too 
much democracy is a dangerous thing, that it leads to tyranny, 
that it leads inevitably to mob rule because the mob — the great 
masses of the unwashed — are unknowing and uncaring and you 
can’t trust them. 
 
And that’s why we hear this government say, trust us; we know 
what’s best; we wouldn’t lead you down the garden path. The 
people know that that isn’t true because when it came to the issue 
of the privatization of SaskPower, it was the Premier himself and 
the Deputy Premier who said that that would never take place. 
And that’s precisely what’s taken place, and that’s why we have 
to find ourselves addressing this kind of issue here tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well it was eventually Athens that was 
humbled by Sparta in its pursuit of the democratic ideal. 
Athenian democracy did not flourish for ever. Although Pericles 
says that it was a model copied, it wasn’t copied for ever. Other 
models of tyranny, of oligarchy, and monarchy, imperial rule, 
took over in the ancient world. But still there flourished 
throughout the ages that ideal of the democratic system, and of a 
basic accountability of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s comments are 
interesting; however, I believe he’s somewhat off the resolution, 
and I ask him to more closely relate his remarks to the resolution 
and the discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll endeavour to 
tighten this up and to relate my comments on democracy much 
more closely to the motion that we have before us. And perhaps 
I ought to really communicate to people what that motion is, and 
how it is built into the question of democratic accountability. 
 
The motion before us, the public will be interested to know — 
it’s in a little bit of a formal sense, and I really   



 
June 8. 1989 

1749 
 

haven’t quoted it directly tonight — but the motion before us has 
to do with the process of rule change and the way in which this 
Assembly calls itself to a vote. And this motion was proposed by 
the member from Kindersley, and reads, quote: 
 

 When the Speaker or the chairman of Committee of the 
Whole or Committee of Finance has put the question on a 
motion and a recorded division is requested under 33(1) . . . 
 

And I’ll just interrupt here to say, basically translated, that means 
that when someone in a position of leadership in the Assembly 
calls for a vote, and then someone else calls for a recorded 
division, which means a standing vote, so that the public can 
literally see where each particular member stands on an issue and 
how they vote on an issue; when that sort of circumstance arises 
. . . I’ll go on to quote the proposed rule change, quote: 
 

. . . the bells to call in the members (parenthetically, I’ll say, 
to call the members in to vote) shall be sounded for not more 
than one hour, provided that while the members are being 
called in, either the government or official opposition 
member serving as House Leader, Acting House Leader, 
chief whip or deputy whip may approach the Speaker or 
chairman to request that the division be deferred, in which 
case the Speaker or chairman shall announce that the said 
division has been deferred until a specified time, but in any 
case not later than before orders of the day on the second 
sitting day thereafter. 
 

Now this is the rule change that we’re addressing ourselves to, 
and the item under consideration is . . . not consideration, but 
only, but controversy as well, is that the bells call the members 
for not more than an hour. 
 
It’s in this context then, when I make my remarks about the 
democratic ideal. We’re talking about the opportunity for people 
to voice their judgement on a particular piece of legislation so 
that democracy can in fact take place. And if this government 
didn’t have privatization at the top of its agenda as a priority, if 
SaskPower weren’t a priority, this bell-ringing wouldn’t be a 
priority either. 
 
And the members opposite will claim that the opposition would 
ring the bells on something else; that willy-nilly we would be 
ringing the bells on just about any old thing that would come 
along. And I think that that’s a concern, and in some respects, in 
some fundamental respects, a legitimate concern for members 
opposite to articulate because if that were to be the case then 
clearly not only the province would become ungovernable but it 
would become undemocratic. 
 
But that argument simply doesn’t hold water, and I would ask the 
people of Saskatchewan to consider for a moment what would 
happen if it really were to be the case that whenever the 
opposition were to have an issue that they wanted to dilly-dally 
with, they would just walk out and let the bells ring. How long 
would the public tolerate that? Not very long, Mr. Speaker, not 
very long at all. 
 
(1945) 
 

I don’t know whether the members opposite have much faith in 
the democratic process at all, but I want to say that I believe in 
the democratic process and that the people in their wisdom would 
not accept that kind of frivolous, capricious ringing of the bells 
by any opposition, be it New Democratic, Progressive 
Conservative, Liberal, Social Credit, Western Canada Concept, 
any opposition that would frivolously ring the bells, and maybe 
a Confederation of Regions Party — it wouldn’t really matter 
what — that would frivolously and capriciously ring the bells for 
no justifiable reason, simply as an excuse to promote their own 
agenda, would not last very long as an opposition that had the 
confidence of the Saskatchewan public. And that’s because, 
that’s precisely because, Mr. Speaker, of this democratic ideal — 
that there is a built-in provision for accountability that sustains 
the democratic process even when the bells ring for frivolous or 
capricious reasons. 
 
And I think that’s why, precisely why, this notion of government 
by the people is so integral to the consideration of this particular 
Bill, because if in fact there is a built-in provision for the public 
to exercise a veto over any legislative hanky-panky with respect 
to the ringing of the bells, then the opposition, any opposition, 
that plays hanky-panky and plays fast and loose with the rules of 
the Assembly, will pay the price. And I think that the public has 
seen with the SaskPower issue these last weeks, that the New 
Democratic opposition here in the province of Saskatchewan has 
walked a very fine line, a very sharp edge between responsibility 
and irresponsibility in its exercise of the rule that is now standing 
in the book of Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, 
rule 33(2), that allows for the bells to ring fully and freely, and 
that that has been quite a balancing act for the opposition. 
 
And it’s been said before that really — and this is quite the truth 
— the opposition members did not know for how long they 
would be staying out while the bells were ringing. None of us 
knew for how long we would be out and about gathering 
signatures because, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t know what the 
exercise of that democratic franchise implicit in the existing rule, 
that public censorship or veto of our actions, what that would be, 
when it would fall. How could an opposition measure that? 
 
Some people were saying when we walked out on the Friday 
morning that there was no question we would have to be back on 
Monday, because if we weren’t back we would be cutting our 
own throats with the public; we would be violating the public 
trust; we would be abrogating our parliamentary responsibilities; 
and we would be playing fast and loose with the rules of the 
Assembly which are here, Mr. Speaker, to facilitate and foster 
the democratic ideal. 
 
Some people said, well no, we don’t have to go back on Monday. 
Perhaps this rule which we really haven’t paid any attention to or 
looked at previously to this and it hasn’t been invoked very often 
in this Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly . . . It’s only been 
acted on very, very rare occasions. 
 
  



 
June 8. 1989 

1750 
 

And some members of our caucus took a look at it and said, well 
my goodness, we don’t have to be back on Monday morning. 
Perhaps we should wait a few days and see how public opinion 
mobilizes and whether it begins to mount for us or against us. 
 
And how would one know on an issue that volatile, that had been 
like some sort of sleeping giant across the province of 
Saskatchewan, when it was awakened in the Saskatchewan 
people, how would or could any political party — the 
government or the opposition — know ahead of time what the 
public judgement would be, what the democratic process would 
issue in when it came? How could the government or the 
opposition know what the end result would be when this wave of 
public opinion would wake up and land on one side or the other 
side of the privatization issue? 
 
And so that is to say that when we looked at rule 33(2) and noted 
that there was, in fact, an open-ended provision for the bells to 
ring, we had to weigh where not only we stood — that was 
difficult enough — but to weigh where the public stood, which 
is even more difficult. 
 
That is the kind of exercise that one has to approach with a great 
deal of care and respect, a great deal of listening carefully to 
public opinion and the measuring and testing public opinion, 
because if you go too far you’ll pay a price far greater than that 
proposed by the rule change made by the member for Kindersley, 
who paid a far greater price than simply having debate curtailed 
to an hour. You’ll have your political options curtailed or cut off 
entirely by virtue of public opinion. 
 
I note further, Mr. Speaker, that in this same report from 
Westminster on March 3 to 20 of 1987, that the author, on March 
20, compared parliamentary experience and problems. And 
certainly as the president of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association and Speaker of this Assembly, you, if anyone, know 
what parliamentary problems are all about. 
 
And I find it interesting that the individual who wrote this report 
notes that one of the problems discussed was, “the powers of the 
opposition to stop legislation.” 
 
Now that is an issue that is a real conundrum in some respects, 
and I just wish that we had a little, in retrospect, that the author 
of this report had explained a little bit more fully what some of 
those powers of the opposition to stop legislation were, what kind 
of discussions were held there in Westminster, and what kinds of 
judgements were made with respect to the curtailing of 
bell-ringing. 
 
One wonders whether that was even discussed at all. I’ve heard 
some comment in this debate, and I haven’t listened to all of the 
comment in this particular debate — it’s gone on for quite some 
time — but I’ve heard some comment that apparently even in 
Westminster, if I’m correct, there are some strictures on the 
bell-ringing. And it would be quite interesting to know if that was 
viewed, bell-ringing is viewed in Westminster by other 
parliamentarians as a legitimate power of the opposition to stop 
bell-ringing. 
 
Now it certainly is the case that in this legislature here in 

Saskatchewan, the power . . . the ringing of the bells for an 
unspecified, unlimited amount of time is a legitimate use of the 
opposition’s power to stop legislation. That’s under debate right 
now, but unless and until the rule 33(2) is changed, the opposition 
presently has, as was demonstrated a few weeks ago, the power 
to, in effect, stop legislation by virtue of the ringing of bells. 
 
And obviously this is the bone of contention. This is what 
outrages the government: that in proposing legislation, more 
specifically legislation to privatize SaskPower, that their agenda 
can be derailed — not only derailed but stopped — by virtue of 
an exercise allowed in the rules of the legislature as they 
presently exist; that built into the operation of this Assembly is 
the provision for unrestrained bell-ringing; that built into the 
parliamentary practice of this province, built right into the 
functioning of this elected legislature, is provision for the 
opposition to stop legislation. For how long? Well we don’t 
know. 
 
Certainly the ringing of bells, as we have seen, can stop the 
legislation temporarily, and this is a question that could occupy 
us for a long time, as to how effectively the ringing of bells can 
stop legislation cold. 
 
We know that legislation to privatize SaskPower has now, at least 
temporarily, been suspended, or withdrawn, or withheld, as the 
government . . . well I was going to say reconsiders. I don’t know 
whether that’s quite the word. I was going to say while the 
government reconsiders the SaskPower legislation. I think that 
perhaps it’s more accurate to say that the legislation has been 
stopped or stalled while the government reassesses, or maybe 
regroups, or maybe propagandizes the Saskatchewan public. 
 
In any event, the mere fact that we have a rule that allows for the 
opposition to stop legislation, whether or not that exists in 
Westminster, that there exists here in Saskatchewan a measure or 
a tool for the opposition to stop legislation cold, at least 
temporarily — we can debate that — but that there is provision 
to stop legislation, points to the validity of bell-ringing. 
 
And would that we had some of the insights gleaned from that 
gathering of parliamentarians in Westminster in 1987. It would 
be very interesting to see if there were any minutes kept of this 
particular meeting other than the report that we have in this 
booklet, that would give some kind of indication as to how the 
parliamentarians from Singapore perhaps, or from Trinidad or 
from Malaysia, or any other point, Australia, or India, would 
have viewed this question of powers of the opposition to stop 
legislation, and the attendant discussions, not just of the powers 
to do it, but the appropriateness of these various legislative or 
parliamentary measures that the opposition has at its disposal. 
 
(2000) 
 
I do have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that if I were to be a member of 
the government, if I were to look at this proposed motion of the 
member from Kindersley that the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly be amended to constrict the ringing of the 
bells, I would have   



 
June 8. 1989 

1751 
 

to say to myself yes, this would limit the powers of the opposition 
to stop legislation and therefore it would be a good thing. 
 
I must confess, Mr. Speaker, that that would be my sort of 
knee-jerk reaction, if I were a member of the government. I think 
— no I won’t say I think; I know, Mr. Speaker — while that 
would be my knee-jerk reaction, that upon reflection, that would 
not be my considered opinion. Because it would be a short-term, 
a short-sighted sort of view of the parliamentary process and the 
legislative process, a short-sighted view of the democratic 
process, that I would, as a member of the government, simply 
have a tool such as we have before us in the proposed motion 
from the member from Kindersley, the opportunity to limit the 
opposition’s ability to stop legislation, to restrict the ringing of 
bells to one hour, to restrict the democratic process, and then to 
get on with one’s agenda as government. 
 
There would, I admit, be an initial attraction there, but upon 
reflection, the attraction of power, of power over the opposition, 
in my case at least, and I say this honestly, Mr. Speaker, would 
give way to a broader, deeper view of giving power to the people 
of the province, and that any legislation to be proposed by a 
government, even if I were part of it, ought to bear the scrutiny 
of public opinion. 
 
And if it can’t bear that kind of scrutiny, even if the opposition is 
allowed 17 hours, Mr. Speaker, then that legislation ought not to 
be passed. For better or for worse for the government, whether 
it’s a Conservative government or New Democrat government or 
a Liberal government or Confederation of Regions government, 
whatever the ilk, whatever the strife; if a piece of legislation can’t 
bear public scrutiny, can’t stand up to the democratic process 
itself, can’t stand up to 17 days, as is presently allowed by the 
rules of this Assembly, then it ought not to be promulgated across 
the province as the law of the land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is the situation that we 
have before us with this particular motion from the member from 
Kindersley, that the question implicit in all of this debate is 
whether the privatization of SaskPower can bear public scrutiny; 
whether the Bill to privatize SaskPower ought in fact to be 
promulgated without due parliamentary process. 
 
While there are differences of opinion as to how this process 
ought to take place, how legitimate it is for the government . . . 
or rather, for the opposition to stop legislation, we know one 
thing, that with the proposed motion that, quote: 
 

 . . . the bells (are) to call in the Members (and that they) 
shall be sounded for (no) not more than one hour . . . 
 

No piece of legislation need go through that crucible of public 
examination. There’s no need for it, if there is only provision for 
one hour of public reflection. And that’s why, because of that 
democratic ideal, that members on this side of the House are 
standing and speaking against 

the rule to change the amount of time that the bells of the 
Assembly can ring, and the amount of time allocated to the 
democratic process. 
 
We feel that there is no question of the importance of having 
ample opportunity for legislative scrutiny. It simply isn’t good 
enough for . . . Just as it isn’t good enough for members of the 
government to say, trust us — we’ve seen that they can’t be 
trusted on some fundamental issues — it’s not good enough 
either for the opposition to say, trust us. Members on this side of 
the House are saying, trust the democratic process; trust the 
democratic process. 
 
There are going to be times and seasons and occasions in which 
one party or another party can’t be trusted. We as New 
Democrats on this side of the legislature say, for sure, for certain, 
the one thing that can be trusted is the democratic process — that 
the people are always right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from 
another document that makes the same point about the 
importance of the opportunity for public scrutiny of legislation, 
for full flowering of the democratic process, and for ringing of 
the bells in full and free measure rather than in a constricted 
measure as proposed by this resolution. And the quote reads as 
follows, and it concerns parliamentary democracy: 
 

Parliamentary democracy is a precious thing in a world 
where tyranny and government by unrestricted executive 
fiat are all too common. Our institutions of parliamentary 
democracy must not be allowed to wither from neglect, nor 
to be eroded by an undue increase in the power of the 
majority of the day or of the executive. Our democratic 
institutions must be protected and nourished so that they not 
only make possible democratic government today but make 
it possible for our children and their children as well. 
 

That’s the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker. The point made is that 
parliamentary democracy must not be allowed to wither from 
neglect. I don’t think that that’s the issue before us now, when 
we’re looking at this change in the bell-ringing motion. It’s not a 
question of the parliamentary tradition withering from neglect. In 
fact, far be it from neglect, this is a good scrutiny of the 
parliamentary democratic tradition in reviewing a proposed 
motion to change the rules of this Assembly. So parliamentary 
democracy isn’t going to wither from neglect. 
 
But the other concern mentioned, that parliamentary democracy 
be eroded by an undue increase in the power of the majority of 
the day — that is a direct concern when it comes to this proposed 
change in the ringing of the bells. How might parliamentary 
democracy be eroded by an increase in the power of the majority 
of the day, as this quote talks about? How might that happen? 
 
Well I invite you to think about it for a moment, Mr. Speaker. 
How could it be, how could it be that   



 
June 8. 1989 

1752 
 

parliamentary democracy, with all of its checks and balances, this 
system of government so precious to us, that has worked so well, 
how could it be that parliamentary democracy might be eroded 
by an increase in the power of the majority of the day? If we have 
these parliamentary traditions and if we have these parliamentary 
institutions, how could it be that they would be eroded simply by 
an increase in the majority of the day, or of the executive branch 
of government? 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, how that might take place. That erosion 
of parliamentary democracy, by a majority of the day or by the 
executive, might take place precisely as we have the motion from 
the member from Kindersley before us tonight. That is how 
parliamentary democracy might be eroded by an undue increase 
in the majority. 
 
Where a government who has a majority, as the present 
government has, unilaterally introduces a motion to change the 
rules of this Assembly, to change the parliamentary practice of 
this Assembly, to limit debate by limiting the ringing of the bells 
to one hour, that’s how parliamentary democracy can be eroded 
by an undue increase in the power of the majority of the day. It 
would limit public debate and that would erode parliamentary 
democracy. 
 
That’s my point in talking about democracy, Mr. Speaker, that in 
eroding public debate the people, the demos, don’t have the same 
opportunity to put forth their view, if the bells are only ringing 
for one hour. This is a terribly important issue then for us to be 
considering. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s no accident. It’s no 
accident, whatsoever, that New Democrats are speaking to this 
democratic concern — this parliamentary democratic concern 
before us tonight in the motion on rule 33(1), that it be changed. 
It’s no accident that we’re speaking against this rule change, 
because the comments that I just quoted to you are from our 
proposals for legislative reform that were tabled in April of 1987. 
 
You’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, that it was on December 19 of 1986 
that this very Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan approved a 
motion that a special committee be appointed to examine the 
matters with respect to rules and procedures and practices and 
powers of the Legislative Assembly, that this special committee 
was appointed to look into the operation and the organization and 
the facilities and the services provided to the Assembly. 
 
And it’s no accident that the Assembly approved the motion in 
December of ’86 to examine the Rules and Procedures, because, 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, that has been the tradition of this 
Legislative Assembly from day one, that when it comes to rules 
and procedures and other such practices and powers of the 
Legislative Assembly, they historically have always been done 
by committee, by a committee comprised of members of both 
sides of the House. 
 
(2015) 
 
And what we have here tonight is a situation in which there is no 
committee to look at the rules of the Assembly, and that’s why 
the Assembly itself is stuck and mired, as 

some people might say, looking at rule 33(1) — precisely 
because there is no committee to do that kind of job as there was 
back in the winter of 1986-87. That was the proper way for the 
rules and the procedures of the House to be reviewed and 
examined by members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And confirmation of that, Mr. Speaker, is found in fact in some 
of the very debate that took place in this Assembly when the 
member from Kindersley introduced his motion regarding rule 
33(1), that the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended to allow for only one hour of bell-ringing. These 
were some of the very considerations that were raised by the 
member for Kindersley at that time. 
 
Indeed his remarks were divided, as you might recall, into three 
parts. He talked about the dealing with what the existing rules of 
the Assembly are and how they work, and what rules are in other 
jurisdictions. And he went on to talk, secondly, as to why these 
amendments to the rules are being proposed; and then, thirdly, as 
to why they’re being proposed in the fashion that they were. 
 
And I note, Mr. Speaker, that when the member from Kindersley 
first introduced the motion that we’re discussing here tonight 
almost a month ago on May 11 at about . . . at about 2, must have 
been about 2:40 in the afternoon on the afternoon of May 11, I 
note that he explains in some detail that: 
 

 . . . bell-ringing has been used by both major political 
parties (here in Saskatchewan) while they have sat in the 
Assembly. 
 

In fact, it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
from Kindersley has experienced the issue of bell-ringing from 
both sides of the Legislative Assembly. And I suspect in that 
regard he’s one of the few members here who really has had the 
opportunity to view the issue from both sides of the fence or both 
sides of the House, to put it more directly. 
 
Now he goes on to observe, Mr. Speaker, in proposing this rule 
change, it’s his submission “that these rules left unchanged and 
unchecked” spell trouble. 
 
He goes and says very directly that, as he has seen from first-hand 
experience, and I take it he’s referring to the 17-day bell-ringing 
episode over SaskPower and possibly some of his previous 
experience in opposition, it’s his contention that: 
 

 . . . left unchanged and unchecked, as . . . (he has) seen, 
(these rules) can be used by the opposition as an (quote) 
unrestricted, obstructionist tactic. 
 

He doesn’t say, interestingly enough, that they have been used as 
an unrestricted, obstructionist tactic. He notes that they can be 
used, they can be used in this fashion, they may be used. And 
well might they be used in an obstructionist fashion. That 
certainly is a possibility, and a dangerous possibility to any 
government, that an opposition would exercise this rule as it 
exists now, with only one hour of bell-ringing, in an 
obstructionist fashion. 
 
  



 
June 8. 1989 

1753 
 

The member from Kindersley notes that that hasn’t been the case 
thus far. He goes on to say that: 
 

It can in fact shut down the legislature. 
 

Again, while he notes that this existing rule provision can shut 
down the legislature, he doesn’t say that it has shut down the 
legislature cold. He notes that this: 
 

. . . can be forced . . . (that the government may) prematurely 
prorogue the House, perhaps prior to the passage of a budget 
or the legislative agenda. 
 

But this isn’t necessarily a given; it isn’t the inevitable 
consequence of having such a motion on the books. 
 
He notes further that as we have come through the 17-day 
bell-ringing incident, he notes that he, as a member of the 
government, came up against the wall, as he puts it, as it related 
to the ability to make payments out, in other words to various 
institutions and individuals across the province, without passage 
of an interim supply measure. 
 
But that’s not entirely accurate either. The government may have 
been approaching the wall with respect to its ability to make 
payments to individuals and institutions in fulfilment of its 
elected responsibility. It may have come up against the wall, but 
it’s important to note that that was not in fact the case; that it did 
not happen that funds were held back from individuals and 
institutions because of the existence of rule 33(2) as it presently 
stands. That simply wasn’t the case, that because debate was 
unlimited — public debate, that is — because there was no cap 
on the ringing of the bells, it simply isn’t true to say that any 
individual or institution went without government funding 
because of the lack of passage of an interim supply Bill. 
 
The member from Kindersley notes, as is pertinent when we’re 
considering the question of how long the bells can ring, which 
inevitably implies a question of government funding, and in the 
situation we found ourselves, the necessity of an interim supply 
measure so that payments can be made to those who need them. 
 
The member from Kindersley goes on to note that when the 
legislature is in session the government is precluded from using 
what are referred to as special warrants to make payments that 
are not otherwise authorized. And for the public I would say, I’m 
sure you understand, but for those who might not understand, this 
means that while the legislature is in session the government, in 
its executive branch, namely the Premier and his cabinet, cannot 
simply sit upstairs around the table of some sort of boardroom 
and by executive decree, by special warrant, by special action of 
themselves as a law unto themselves, they cannot make 
allocations of money for government expenditures while the 
legislature is in session. 
 
And in fact there was, as you probably yourself encountered, 
while the bells were ringing — because we had provision for that 
to happen under the existing rules — while the bells were ringing 
there was considerable confusion on this very question by 
members of the public while they were considering initially the 
question of the privatization of SaskPower and making their 
judgement 

on that issue and signing petitions. 
 
It wasn’t long into the bell-ringing, maybe day 10 or 11 or so of 
the 17 days, that some people began to scratch their heads and 
say, how long can the government go without allocations of 
money to pay school boards and hospitals, not to mention 
individuals on social services. That was a question that was asked 
just as often, in many instances, as the question about the virtues 
associated with the sell-off of SaskPower and what that meant — 
the question of how long the government could go without an 
authorized expenditure. 
 
And the government members were not remiss in this regard in 
raising that very question themselves, pointing to, as the Minister 
of Justice, the member from Kindersley, says in his remarks to 
this Bill, indicating that the government found itself up against 
the wall. And as I said, that’s not exactly true. 
 
The ability to pass special warrants was not an issue during this 
most recent bell-ringing episode because the legislature was in 
session, even though it wasn’t in session for . . . well it was in 
session — I’ve just said that. Even though members weren’t 
sitting here for 17 days, it still was in session. 
 
And in fact the Friday that we walked out and left the bells 
ringing initially, for all of those 17 days stayed, legislatively 
speaking, parliamentary speaking, that same day — all 17 days 
of it. And it was for that reason that the legislature was still 
regarded as being in session, that the government has no need to 
resort to special spending warrants, and in fact, had no need for 
it, but was, as the Minister of Justice says, was precluded from 
authorizing special warrants to make payments to people who are 
on social services. 
 
And I note in this regard that the Leader of the Opposition had a 
member of the public come into his office during this bell-ringing 
episode, during the 17 days, and as an aside happened to ask this 
woman what she thought about the privatization of SaskPower 
and the ringing of the bells. And this was about day 12 or 13 or 
14, as people were beginning to consider more and more the 
consequences of not getting social services cheques and 
institutions not being able to pay salaries. She said, keep up the 
fight; don’t let them privatize SaskPower. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Bless her soul. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, yes. Bless her soul. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And the Leader of the Opposition, being the 
kind of man that he is, said: even if that means you don’t get a 
cheque from the company that you work for? Because she 
worked as a washer for a laundry company; she laundered 
hospital linens. She said, even if the hospital . . . Leader of the 
Opposition said: even if they don’t receive money from the 
government because the bells are ringing — even then we should 
stay out? And this particular woman, with tears in her eyes, said, 
yes, even then; even if I don’t get my pay cheque. 
 
  



 
June 8. 1989 

1754 
 

(2030) 
 
Now that’s a commitment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
democratic process. And that’s a rare kind of judgement, and the 
one that I think all of us are well advised to consider when we’re 
looking at this issue of whether the rule should be changed or not. 
Because were we to change the rule and limit debate to one hour, 
then we would have precluded any necessity for that kind of 
discussion that I’ve just described to take place. 
 
And not only would we have precluded that kind of discussion, 
but we would have cut short or precluded that kind of 
commitment to the democratic process . . . to form, to grow, to 
be strengthened . . . I can’t seem to find the right word, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If we didn’t have more than the hour that’s proposed in this 
legislation, we wouldn’t allow that kind of . . . I want to say 
commitment to the democratic process; that kind of genuine 
democratic expression to arise internally — internally, that’s a 
good way to put it — from within individual Saskatchewan 
people themselves; where individual Saskatchewan people took 
ownership of what initially was a legislative issue, what was 
clearly at the beginning of the bell-ringing episode, a very 
theoretical, legislative kind of issue restricted to the confines of 
this Assembly until that Friday when the New Democratic caucus 
walked out. 
 
Then once that happened, and once the opposition stayed out for 
more than that first hour and for that second hour and then for the 
whole of that Friday morning, over the weekend, and then didn’t 
come back on Monday or Tuesday or Wednesday or Thursday or 
Friday of that week, or Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, 
Thursday, Friday of the next week, until Monday of the following 
week, then, Mr. Speaker, then individual men and women, young 
people across the province, had the opportunity to reflect on what 
kind of vision and commitment they held personally to some of 
the institutions and the . . . well the Crown corporations such as 
SaskPower, that had been built over the generations by their 
forbears. 
 
One might well ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how this particular 
woman might have felt about the issue that we’re addressing here 
tonight. One might well ask how would this woman who washes 
clothes in a laundromat, a large institutional laundry in 
Saskatoon, this woman who washes sheets and hospital linens, 
how would she feel if she had opportunity to get up in this 
Legislative Assembly, as I have, and to speak to a change in the 
rules which would limit the ringing of the bells to only one hour. 
 
I think that it’s quite clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a person 
such as that would oppose a change in the rules of this Assembly; 
that she sees and would know that there is an inextricable link 
between a change in the rules to limit debate for one hour, that 
there is an inextricable link between that and the government’s 
measures to privatize SaskPower. 
 
And for someone who would be willing to even forego wages, 
low wages, probably minimum wage, for the sake 

of an ideal . . . Well it’s not just an ideal. I was going to say an 
ideal like having SaskPower as a utility owned by the 
government. For an individual who is willing to forsake even 
minimum wage for that kind of . . . not just ideal, but practical 
reality of a public utility that touched her directly in a positive 
way, she would strongly oppose this proposed motion to change 
the rules of this Assembly to limit bell-ringing to one hour, and 
so do most people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would not have to speculate how this 
woman might feel. We know how she would feel, because when 
there is opportunity for only one hour of bell-ringing, there is no 
opportunity for ordinary men and women to partake of the 
democratic process in the way that it transpired here in 
Saskatchewan this past spring. 
 
The use, as I said, of special warrants by the government during 
this period turned out to be totally unwarranted. And why? How 
could it be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we have an existing 
rule . . . what is it again, 33(2)? When we have an existing rule 
in the rules and procedure book that allows for full bell-ringing 
without any limitation — just full, free, unrestrained bell-ringing 
— how is it that the public can participate? 
 
Well we know how the public can participate in this democratic 
exercise. They have opportunity because there is full and free 
opportunity to examine any government legislation that might 
transpire. 
 
And when the . . . If the member from Kindersley in his remarks 
on May 11 is thinking that the government was prevented from 
using special warrants, or precluded from using special warrants, 
as he says, that’s simply not the case, because although the 
existing rules allowed for the bells to ring for those 17 days, it 
didn’t result in the government’s hands being tied financially. 
There was a built-in mechanism there, not only for democratic 
expression for people such as this woman who washed laundry, 
but there was a built-in provision for a check on any opposition 
that would dare withhold government expenditures. 
 
And I might add that there wasn’t an individual on this side of 
the House that wasn’t aware of the risks associated with 
sustaining a bell-ringing episode beyond 17 days, as is allowed 
for presently by the rules. There wasn’t a member of the 
Legislative Assembly in the official opposition who wasn’t 
aware that that was a risk. 
 
There was a definite risk that if we went beyond the dictates of 
the democratic process that are implicit in this existing rule, if we 
violated the checks and balances that are written into the existing 
rule 33(2), then we would have cut ourselves off from the people 
of the province; we would have cut our credibility not just in half, 
but to smithereens. There would have been nothing left. 
 
And that’s why I say then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there really 
is no need for this particular rule change as proposed by the 
member from Kindersley. Not only is it inappropriate in the way 
in which it is proposed, namely, unilaterally, without 
consultation of the opposition, but it’s ill-considered in terms of 
its consequences for the   



 
June 8. 1989 

1755 
 

democratic process itself. That the member from Kindersley, in 
proposing this particular motion as he has, that would call for the 
bells to be sounded for not more than one hour, he has 
ill-considered the democratic process, and what it is that makes 
this Assembly tick, and what it is that sustains a government in 
power and will turf an opposition into oblivion if it violates that 
democratic standard implicit in the existing rule change. 
 
And this is so fundamental, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to understand 
that when we have a rule change that disregards the democratic 
process, it ill-behoves or -bespeaks members of this Legislative 
Assembly to support it. I think that that ought to make sense; that 
if we have a rule change that violates not just the parliamentary 
process — because there are many people in Saskatchewan who 
can’t relate to the parliamentary process itself — but if we have 
a rule change that violates not only the parliamentary process but 
the democratic process, then we have a rule change that is 
ill-considered and that ought not to be adopted. 
 
Now I think of the woman who washes clothes commercially on 
a fixed wage, and I must say I doubt that were this proposed rule 
change simply a parliamentary measure, I doubt that she would 
have given it a second thought. I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that there are members on both sides of the House, that 
all of us at one time or another look at certain parliamentary rules 
and ourselves really give little or no consideration to them. I quite 
honestly have to ask myself how often I sit down with the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and 
review them with any great detail. I simply don’t do it. I don’t 
scrutinize them. I don’t keep this book of rules under my pillow 
at night to try to absorb them by osmosis. 
 
I think most of us as parliamentarians are similar to the public in 
that regard, that whether it’s rule 33(2) or — have I got the right 
rule? — whether it’s rule 33(2) or rule 33(1) or 32, they all have 
to do with voting procedures. Ordinarily we don’t need to 
scrutinize them or to review them or to memorize them to absorb 
them into our being and into our lives on a day-to-day basis. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I think that the same . . . If that’s true of us as legislators, as 
parliamentarians, it’s certainly true of the public at large, that rule 
changes will never preoccupy them. It doesn’t really matter to 
most people; it’s of no consequence, most of the rules of this 
Assembly, until, Mr. Deputy Speaker, until they see the 
connection to real-life issues. 
 
And that’s precisely what happened a month ago when the bells 
of this Assembly rang for 17 days. Then there was an issue of 
consequence that caused people to scratch their heads, and to talk 
to their relatives and friends, and to think, what’s going on down 
there in Regina? And the people were told, well, there’s a rule. 
There’s a rule that allows the opposition to ring the bells. And 
people would ask, why are these bells ringing anyway? I think 
it’s fair to say that just as people don’t always reverence the Rules 
and Regulations of the Legislative Assembly, they don’t even 
reverence the proceedings of the Legislative 

Assembly, they don’t even reverence newspapers, radio 
broadcasts, news broadcasts or television broadcasts, especially 
as the weather is getting nice. 
 
And so people would only naturally say, well what’s going on 
down there in Regina? Why are the bells ringing? And the 
answer, of course, was the bells are ringing because the 
government wants to privatize SaskPower. And the people will 
say, well why are they ringing? So what does that have to do with 
anything? Then over the next hours, that weekend, the media 
began to explain that the bells were ringing for a reason. The bells 
were calling the members of the Assembly to a vote. And people 
would naturally ask, well if the bells are calling the members of 
the Assembly to a vote, why aren’t they voting? 
 
The press began to explain that the members of the opposition 
weren’t coming to answer the call of the bells because they 
opposed the privatization of SaskPower. And because the 
government had a majority, that legislation would be introduced 
without any possibility of stopping it unless the opposition 
decided to stay out. And that’s precisely what happened. The 
opposition did stay out. 
 
The press reported those events over the weekend, and over the 
course of the weekend it became apparent to us as members of 
the opposition that because of the bell-ringing provision, because 
of the existing rule of this Assembly, the public had an 
opportunity to review and reflect on the issue of the privatization 
of SaskPower. 
 
The point is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that simply could not have 
taken place if there had been the rule 33 . . . Excuse me. That 
simply couldn’t have taken place if the existing rule 33(2) had 
been replaced by the proposal from the member from Kindersley 
to allow the bells to ring only for one hour. There would not have 
been that public explanation of why the bells were ringing over 
the course of that first weekend, and the public would not have 
participated in the democratic process in the way in which they 
did. 
 
So we see that, far from being anti-democratic, the ringing of the 
bells serves a democratic function. And it went on for a rather 
extraordinary period of time, for 17 days, to facilitate and serve 
that democratic function in a way that surprised, I think, every 
single person in the province who thought about it for more than 
a mere passing moment. 
 
Because if you stop to think about it and consider the opportunity 
afforded, not only in opposition by virtue of the existing 
provisions for the bells to ring without limit, but if you stop to 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the opportunity afforded, not 
just the opposition but the public as a whole, to scrutinize and 
review the issues of consequence precisely because of the rules 
that we have with respect to the bells, then you have to say, this 
is the democratic ideal at work. This the democratic ideal that I 
talked about earlier of Athenian democracy where we have 
government by the people. 
 
Now it’s often associated . . . when we think about rule or 
governance, it’s often just assumed that we’re talking about those 
who rule and those who are ruled, those who   



 
June 8. 1989 

1756 
 

are governed and those who govern, as two separate entities. 
 
But what we see implicit in this rule change is that in a democracy 
there is a contradiction of sorts of that notion that to rule 
automatically implies lording it over, governing, ruling someone 
else — that there’s a dichotomy there. Because in a democracy 
we’re talking about the rule being affected by the ones who are 
ruling. The ones who are ruling are ruling, not someone else, but 
they’re ruling themselves — that in a democracy the people, the 
demos, are ruling themselves, the people. 
 
And this is a bit of an unusual paradigm of governing, but this is 
precisely the democratic model that is implicit in allowing the 
bells to ring for an unspecified, unlimited amount of time here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we see this in the government’s concern itself. Government 
members have suggested that this rule change has to be effected, 
it simply has to come to pass because without it the government 
cannot rule. And there’s a certain logic to that, that if the 
government is forced to wait while an opposition walks out of 
the legislature and leaves the bells ringing, then the government 
can’t rule; it can’t govern as it’s been elected to do. 
 
But what that view of governance and government misses is the 
notion of democratic rule whereby the people rule; where a 
government is by the people; where government is 
self-government in a democracy. And so it’s in that sense that 
this paradigm of democracy as self-rule becomes very central to 
the kind of discussion that we’re having here tonight on the rule 
change. 
 
The question in some respects is: who will rule? Will the 
government rule by being able to control the ringing of bells to 
only one hour, or will the opposition rule by being allowed to 
walk out of the Assembly while the bells ring for an unlimited 
amount of time? 
 
And the question then can be put in that context of who will rule, 
the government or the opposition, who will have their way, who 
will win the battle? In some respects, that’s the question that 
people are wondering perhaps even tonight when we’re 
discussing this very motion to limit the bell-ringing: who will 
rule? 
 
But that ignores the question that’s more fundamental — not who 
will rule, who will have their way, who will be the winner, who 
will be the loser? That ignores the question of: who should rule? 
And there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we have to say, if we are 
true to our democratic forebears, that in a democratic 
parliamentary tradition the people should rule, that the people 
should always be the winners, even if it’s with all the attendant 
risks that democracy comes with, even if we run the risk of 
tyranny. It was Senator Barry Goldwater in the United States, I 
believe, who said something to the effect of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve allowed the member a lot 
of latitude, but I don’t think that the American political system 
really has a lot to do with Bill 33, so . . . Order. I’d ask the 
member to bring his remarks back to rule 33(1) being discussed 
here tonight. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll attempt 
to constrict my remarks more narrowly to rule 33(2) to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What does it say? 
 
Mr. Koenker: — . . . that concerns . . . It’s a rule . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well I won’t read it. It’s rather long, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’ll attempt to confine my remarks to the rule under 
discussion that limits the bell-ringing to only one hour. 
 
I think it’s important to say in that regard that it isn’t true that 
tyranny can be used in the defence of liberty or democracy. That 
simply isn’t the case. Some would say that. There might be some 
Americans who would say that, but no one here in this legislature 
would certainly allow for tyranny in the defence of democracy, 
even though the ancient Greeks, as I said, expressed that concern 
about the democratic process itself becoming tyrannical. 
 
And government members, when they look at this Bill 33(2), 
express a concern at the democratic process being tyrannized by 
the opposition by virtue of unlimited bell-ringing. That may seem 
to be an excess; it may seem to be a dangerous excess to allow 
the public unlimited, shall we say, tyranny, to allow the public 
unlimited opportunity to scrutinize government actions — the 
great unwashed masses. And that’s precisely what the present 
rule allows. 
 
(2100) 
 
In a sense, I think it has to be admitted that the present rule allows 
for a tyranny of sorts, not just by the opposition, but allows in a 
fundamental sense, in a democratic sense, for a tyranny of the 
people to have their way. And there’s a sense then in which 
there’s a very delicate balance for an opposition in terms of its 
legislative or parliamentary response when the people are 
pushing in tyrannical fashion for the opposition to stay out, to 
keep the bells ringing. 
 
That can result in tyranny, and it’s then that we have to ask 
ourselves: how long can this be allowed to continue? And that 
can be an academic question as to how long the bells can ring, 
how long we can tolerate democratic tyranny, unless and until we 
appreciate the sense in which, in a democracy, the people are 
always right, that the people always have their say. 
 
Democracy is the least efficient form of government, according 
to Winston Churchill. But if the people have their way, if the 
people have their say, if the people have their day, even if it’s one 
legislative day that turns into 17 real calendar days as a result of 
the existing rule that we have, then we haven’t gone wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 8. 1989 

1757 
 

Mr. Koenker: — It’s far better to have one legislative 
parliamentary day like that that lasts for 17 days, because we 
have the rule that we do existing in this House — it’s far better 
to have that than to have one legislative day that only allows for 
one hour of bell-ringing. It’s hard to imagine that hour that’s 
proposed by the member for Kindersley as amounting to any real 
opportunity for exercise of the democratic option. With . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does that mean that all the other eight 
provinces . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The member from Rosthern wonders if the 
other eight provinces or jurisdictions in Canada that have a 
limitation for one hour, whether that means that they’re wrong. 
And I think that it’s not a question of other provinces being right 
or wrong, it’s a question of what is deemed appropriate for us 
here in Saskatchewan — what will enhance the reputation of this 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
There’s a temptation in life and in this Legislative Assembly to 
try to make decisions and judgements and exercise governance 
over things of which we have no control. Far be it from any one 
of us in this Legislative Assembly to control or to determine what 
happens to the people in Manitoba our neighbouring province, or 
British Columbia further from home, or Newfoundland, or the 
federal government, any of the provinces that have different 
bell-ringing motions. 
 
And so I would simply say then to the member for Rosthern: I 
don’t know that we need to be unduly concerned with other 
provinces. I think it behoves us to look at what they’re doing and 
to consider whether they might have considered parliamentary 
procedure that we might benefit from. I don’t know that we are 
in any position to judge whether they are right or wrong; that’s 
not the issue. The issue is whether it’s appropriate for us to 
change our own rules with respect to bell-ringing. 
 
And I hope that the member from Rosthern will speak to this 
issue and will share his thoughts as to the appropriateness of this 
change in the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
as they have been proposed by the member from Kindersley. 
 
There is a great propensity, there is a great temptation, in fact, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for government members to speak to this 
motion from their seats. And I admit it does take some effort to 
put together remarks such that you can stand up in the House and 
address a given subject. I spent a number of hours researching 
my remarks for tonight, and I’ve done some reading in historical 
sources; I’ve done some considerable reading of the previous 
debate on this issue. 
 
And I’ve looked, as I say, even at some of the reflections of 
leadership from this province in the Saskatchewan Branch of the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, because I think that 
we can’t simply rely on our own narrow prejudices as to what is 
appropriate, or what is even right or wrong in the examination of 
this rule change question. We need to look at the more 
fundamental questions of appropriateness and what, in fact, is 
appropriate for us as legislators here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s the simple task, as to what’s appropriate for us as 
legislators, when we look at this legislation. That’s relatively 
simple because then we can bring our own prejudices to bear on 
the debate. But when we ask the question of what serves the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, then we have to expand 
the debate beyond our own prejudices and beyond the parameters 
of our own opinion and delve into some of the larger questions 
that are pertinent to rule changes as they are proposed by the 
member for Kindersley. And I would say . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — To put it quite bluntly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
look at this proposed motion by the hon. member from 
Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, that the rules and procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly be changed by adding to rule 33(1) 
a subsequent section that would call for the bells to be sounded 
for not more than an hour, to limit the ringing of bells; to put it 
quite bluntly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that motion belongs on 
the order paper. I think that the member from Kindersley is 
certainly entitled to put it there, to move it; I wouldn’t deny him 
that right; I think that’s his right as a parliamentarian. But I must 
say that I don’t think it belongs on the government’s order paper. 
And I certainly must say that I don’t think it belongs at the top of 
the government agenda when, as we saw today, there is 
environment legislation to limit the number of environmentally 
dangerous products, that when we have an issue like rule changes 
precluding other parliamentary business, then we have to look at 
the question of what the rule change is trying to affect. 
 
This particular rule change is trying to effect a constriction of the 
democratic process, and it’s for that reason that it doesn’t belong 
on the government’s order paper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And I say this motion doesn’t belong on the 
government’s order paper; it would restrict the democratic 
process. What else could it do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by allocating 
only one hour to consideration of any legislative measure? 
 
The limitation of public scrutiny or examination to only one hour 
flies not only in the face of parliamentary tradition, but it violates 
the public sensibility on the issue of SaskPower. 
 
The people know that the government has an agenda to ram this 
privatization measure through. And if one hour is only to be 
allocated to a critical public issue like this, it ill serves the public 
interest that such privatization measures are blatant disregards of 
the public will, and that’s why they’ve been rejected by the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s no need then for us fundamentally to be addressing a rule 
change when there is more pressing legislation like protecting the 
ozone layer, and dealing with the real issues that are of 
consequence to men and women and families across this 
province. This limitation   



 
June 8. 1989 

1758 
 

of debate, Mr. Speaker, this limitation of the bell-ringing to one 
hour, would limit the effectiveness of this democratic 
parliamentary institution. 
 
And I am not going to begin to attempt to recapitulate or examine 
the arguments made by my colleague, the member for Regina 
Centre, in commenting on the way in which the exercise of 
parliamentary democracy has always been a constraint or a curve 
against excesses in power of the executive branch. I think that the 
people might want to look at his own remarks on that subject in 
this particular debate. His remarks were made on Tuesday — no 
it was Monday afternoon and, I believe, Wednesday afternoon, 
talking about the fact that in a parliamentary democracy, the 
parliamentary dimension of an Assembly is always meant to curb 
executive excess. 
 
I don’t want to get into that too long, but I think it’s really 
important, and I really grew in my understanding of this 
institution by listening to his comments in that regard, because 
when we have a motion to limit bell-ringing for only one hour, 
we fly in the face of that parliamentary principle that the 
parliament of Legislative Assembly is there expressly to provide 
a limit on executive power. 
 
(2115) 
 
We can easily see how this dimension of parliamentary 
democracy that puts a limit on executive privilege, on executive 
execution of power, is a very important check on executive 
excess and allows for public accountability. Fundamentally, 
without this legislature there would be no public accountability 
for a government of any stripe. 
 
Woe be the day when the people of Saskatchewan have no public 
vehicle for scrutiny or examination of government actions. That 
would be the day that the public would be ill-served and that 
democracy would wither and die on the vine. And that’s precisely 
what we don’t want to happen here in Saskatchewan with the 
introduction of a Bill . . . not a Bill, excuse me, Mr. Speaker — 
that’s precisely what we don’t want to happen with the 
introduction of a motion to limit the ringing of bells to only one 
hour. 
 
We want to keep the best of the parliamentary tradition that 
allows for a system of checks and balances on the executive 
office so we don’t have an autocratic kind of rule; we don’t have 
an oligarchical rule of a few; we don’t have a presidential sort of 
system of government, but we have a parliamentary, democratic 
system of checks and balances on executive privilege and on 
executive power. And that’s what we saw happen, Mr. Speaker, 
without a doubt, during the events of the last month and a half. 
There was, without any exaggeration, a check on executive 
privilege and executive power here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that check on executive power and privilege that we have 
in the existing rule of the Assembly to allow for full debate is a 
definite inconvenience, if not a problem, for this government, and 
it’s been a problem for other governments across the country. 
And maybe that’s why other jurisdictions have deemed it 
judicious and important to change their legislation governing the 
ringing of the bells. 
 

We owe it to the people of Saskatchewan to examine whether 
that kind of constriction on executive privilege is really 
appropriate for this place and this time, and not only for this place 
and this time but for future generations of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And in this regard I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that I haven’t 
looked into the record to see if a rule change to limit bell-ringing 
has ever been considered previous to this in this Legislative 
Assembly, maybe at some point in time that might approximate 
prehistory for many of us, maybe in a day and age 30 or 40 years 
ago in this Assembly. It would be interesting to note if there has 
ever been active consideration to such a rule change in the past. 
We don’t really know for sure, but I think it’s . . . So far no one 
in this debate has indicated that there has been such a proposal. 
 
Certainly we know that it’s been without precedent that such a 
rule change has been proposed unilaterally by the government. 
And it’s for this reason that my colleague from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Victoria on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sitting next to the 
speaker, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, who’s trying to 
make some serious comments about the matter of . . . on the 
motion that’s before us on changing the rules, and members from 
the government are laughing and carrying on in such a loud 
fashion that I’m having difficulty hearing him. And I wish you 
would, Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, call the members of 
the government side to order in this matter so that the member 
who is speaking to the motion might be heard and that his 
comments might carry the day. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — There is a little talking and laughing. 
Unfortunately it happens on both sides of the House from time to 
time, and I just remind members not to interfere with the speaker. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think there’s a sense 
in which it doesn’t matter whether people are laughing or not. 
The issue before us is a serious issue; it is an issue of 
parliamentary democracy, as I’ve said. 
 
And as I’ve been trying to explain, if we adhere to that basic 
notion of government by the people, we can look at the 
parliamentary tradition and reflect on the events of Beijing these 
past days and say, would that there were a democratic tradition 
there. If only there were a democratic tradition in China these 
days things might be quite different. But where you have no rules 
to protect the minority, then it’s very easy to have executive 
excess, and this is precisely what we’ve seen, in so many words, 
in China. 
 
And I think that we have an opportunity to seriously reflect these 
days on our own struggle for democracy here in Saskatchewan. 
And the public will know that it was during the course of this 
winter and spring that there was a television series sponsored by 
Petro-Can on that very subject, the struggle for democracy. I 
didn’t see all of the episodes, Mr. Speaker, so I can’t tell you 
whether that   



 
June 8. 1989 

1759 
 

series touched on the issue of bell-ringing or not. I rather doubt 
it, but it would be interesting to speculate. 
 
If that series were to be redone at some point in time, or someone 
were to look at Saskatchewan history as it’s unfolding these 
weeks and these days and in fact even tonight, it would be 
interesting to consider whether they might view this piece of 
legislation to amend the rules and procedures of the Assembly to 
limit and constrict bell-ringing to only one hour. It would be 
interesting to consider whether that would be viewed as part of 
the struggle for democracy in this province at this particular time. 
 
And those are the kinds of questions we really can only speculate 
on as we live through them. I think that that’s a distinct 
possibility, and that’s why I’m trying to talk about the importance 
of this particular legislation as it affects the democratic process 
itself. 
 
The parliamentary tradition of the bell-ringing always sees the 
bells ringing when the government has gone too far. If the 
government is doing its job . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Well I wondered 
how long it was going to be until he tried to tie China’s situation 
into what’s going in this room here. I mean, it was so patently so 
absurd, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to see you get him back on 
track. I mean, he’s been straying all night long and he’s not 
making any sense whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the point of 
order raised by the member from Regina Wascana, it’s my 
pleasure to speak to that. It’s seems to me that if considerable 
latitude is given by the Chair to a speaker to introduce material 
into debate, then it’s only legitimate that ensuing speakers also 
be given that latitude to make reference to timely events. 
 
Now I would point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Justice, when introducing this particular motion, the Minister of 
Justice dealt extensively with questions of what was happening 
in other jurisdictions — very extensively with what was 
happening in other jurisdictions. 
 
Now he may not have dealt with the question of China at that 
time, Mr. Speaker, but nevertheless dealt very extensively with 
what was happening in other jurisdictions. He also dealt very 
extensively . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I believe the member has 
had an opportunity to make his point. I think that the moot point 
to remember is that members when they are speaking must 
remain relevant regardless of which topic they bring up. And the 
topic they discuss must be very relevant to the issue under 
discussion which is rule 33(1). And the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, I’m sure, will want to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I say I 

will attempt in all honesty to constrict this to the subject of 
bell-ringing and the question of how that serves or ill serves the 
parliamentary and the democratic process here in Saskatchewan. 
And I don’t think I need to say anything more about China. I 
think I had left that before the point of order, long before that 
point was made. 
 
I was trying to make the point, however, that the parliamentary 
tradition always finds the bells ringing when the government has 
gone too far. If the government has not gone too far, the bells 
don’t ring. It simply doesn’t happen. The bells are silent. The 
legislature functions. There’s the cut and there’s the thrust of 
parliamentary debate as it should be. The bells are silent as they 
should be. 
 
But when a government goes too far, as this government has gone 
with the privatization of SaskPower, then the bells ring, and 
rightly so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — This then is the central issue before us with 
this legislation: should we have a change in the rules of this 
legislation that would ill serve the opposition’s and the public’s 
ability to serve notice on the government that it’s gone too far? 
Rarely, Mr. Speaker, is it necessary for the bells to ring, but when 
those circumstances arise, when the government goes too far, 
then we say, it’s necessary for the bells to ring. It’s the essence 
of the parliamentary tradition that they ring, and that they ring as 
the public mandates the opposition to stay out of the Chamber as 
the bells are calling members in. 
 
(2130) 
 
The bells should have rung, I say . . . If wishes were horses, 
beggars would ride, there’s a saying. But I would say, the bells 
should have been ringing in the spring of 1987 because there was 
a widespread feeling raging across the province of Saskatchewan 
that at that point the government had gone too far with its 
cut-backs to the drug program. But the bells couldn’t ring, and 
many people are confused about this very question. They’re 
asking, why was it that the bells didn’t ring back then when the 
government changed the prescription drug program and 
eliminated services to the dental program for children and other 
things? Why weren’t the bells ringing then? 
 
And that’s a very good question, and one that is related the matter 
at hand in that there was no calling of the members to a vote at 
that time. In the spring of 1987, the explanation is quite simple. 
There was no calling of members to vote on whether the drug 
program should be continued or the dental program should be cut 
because there was no Legislative Assembly in session. 
 
Legislators were not sitting in their seats, or standing at their 
desk, as I am doing now, in the spring of 1987 because they were 
at home; there was no session. And would that there had been a 
session of the legislature at that time, because the bells likely 
would have rung then and there, and the people would have 
expressed their displeasure and their anger at what the 
government was doing in cutting and hacking and slashing social   



 
June 8. 1989 

1760 
 

programs valued by the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s 
patently uncalled for. 
 
We then look at the present circumstances that we find ourselves 
in, when the government is doing something similar to what it 
was doing back in 1987, only now there’s an important 
difference. Then the legislature wasn’t in session; that’s why the 
bells weren’t ringing. Now the legislature is in session, and so as 
is explained in the existing rules, any two members can rise and 
ask you, Mr. Speaker, for a division vote which will record where 
members on either side of the House stand with respect to a 
particular issue such as the privatization or the sell-off of 
SaskPower. And that’s the important difference. 
 
And we say then, thank God for the Legislative Assembly, thank 
God for the parliamentary tradition, thank God for the particular 
provisions of the rules that we find right now that have been in 
the book of rules for the Assembly for many a day, for many a 
year. Thank God for these provisions because they protect the 
public interest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Now I’m sure that many members of the public 
might well wonder why have a recorded vote anyway. Why can’t 
members of the legislature simply get on with their business and 
vote on various pieces of legislation, and that could be recorded 
that the government won a particular vote or the opposition won 
a particular vote, as the case may be? Of course, most votes, if 
not all votes, we could expect would be won by the government, 
inasmuch as the government is the government precisely because 
it has a majority and there is no need then to get into the 
particulars of a recorded vote — the government simply wins 
them all. 
 
And there’s a certain logic to that kind of thinking, particularly 
for people who aren’t close to the proceedings of this Legislative 
Assembly. In a fundamental sense, it makes little difference as to 
having the vote recorded or not. The public for the most part is 
simply interested in the outcome of the vote — whether the 
government wins the vote or the opposition wins the vote. 
 
But I might say, by way of explanation as to the logic for this 
particular rule concerning a recorded vote, a division vote, that 
there are times when the public wants to know more than simply 
who won and who lost a particular issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — There are times in which the public wants to 
know, and that’s why we have this rule as it exists, wants to know 
whether their member is reflecting their particular concerns, 
whether their member is representing them in any given vote, and 
it’s for that reason then that there are times and circumstances 
where one or more . . . excuse me, two or more members of either 
side of the legislature will get up and stand in their places, as I 
am standing now, simultaneously, and call for a recorded vote 
which is known otherwise as calling for a division. 
 

At that point then, the legislative clerks will signal . . . The signal 
is given for the bells to ring, to call the members to a vote, so that 
any member who wants to make sure that his or her constituents 
know where they stand on a particular vote — they come into the 
Assembly and take their seat, after which the House leaders on 
either side will indicate to the Sergeant-at-Arms that they are 
ready for a vote to take place. 
 
That vote doesn’t take place unless and until both House leaders 
nod to the Sergeant-at-Arms that they are ready. They have all 
their members present from all parts of the building, maybe from 
outside the building even, at times, they’re called to come in for 
the vote. And we can well understand why this might be a matter 
of some consequence, because it isn’t simply a matter of winning 
and losing when a vote is called. It’s also . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I have to think 
of where I was. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Better start over. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Some members are suggesting that I start over. 
I’m not prepared to do that. 
 
As I reflect, I was talking about the reason or the rationale for a 
recorded vote or division. And I was talking about how 
government . . . the government House Leader and the opposition 
House Leader will signal to the Sergeant-at-Arms that the time 
has come for a vote to take place. 
 
It’s at that point then, after the bells have been ringing, as we 
presently have in this regulation — that this legislature has lived 
with quite nicely for years and years and years without any 
change at all — it’s at that point then that the bells that are 
ringing, for whatever period of time, are shut off by the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, and the doors are closed by commissionaires 
so that no one else can come into the Assembly, and then a 
recorded vote takes place. 
 
And a recorded vote transpires then with one of the Clerks of the 
Assembly rising to record the individual votes of individual 
members from both sides of the House, calling for those who are 
in favour of the particular motion at hand, and calling then for 
those who are against a particular motion at hand. And depending 
on the circumstances, the government might be for one motion 
or the opposition might be for another motion that goes one way 
or another, depending on the issue at hand, as I say. 
 
And the vote is then taken with the Clerk going in order   



 
June 8. 1989 

1761 
 

starting with the Premier, if it’s the government whose vote is 
being recorded — it always starts with the Premier as the head of 
government — recording, then, the individual position of each 
and every member of the government caucus and then going in 
turn to the opposition if the opposition is against a particular 
motion, and starting, correspondingly, with the Leader of the 
Opposition to record the particular stance of each and every 
member of the opposition who might be present and voting on a 
particular issue. 
 
Now it’s important in this regard to consider that it isn’t simply 
a given or an automatic that on a particular vote every member 
of the government will vote for or against a particular motion as 
the Premier does. Or, correspondingly, on a particular vote, any 
given vote, that every single solitary member of the opposition 
will vote in concert with the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That’s, as one hon. member says, that’s 
supposed to happen. But at least on this side of the House, we 
aren’t simply parrots or puppets who inevitably and inexorably 
do what the leader does. We believe that we have a responsibility 
to scrutinize the issues as individual members, that certainly we 
act in concert as a caucus when we vote, when we’re called to a 
vote, but that we don’t necessarily have to vote with the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
And the same is true, I would assume, for members of the 
government. It depends really what kind of discipline is 
interjected into the situation by the whip, or sometimes the 
deputy whip. The deputy whip has been known upon occasions 
to be even more severe than the whip in his enforcement of 
discipline on members of the opposition side. 
 
(2145) 
 
But, be that as it may, this raises the question of having a vote 
recorded. And this has been a rather long discourse, but I’m sure 
that people will want to understand why we want a vote recorded. 
There are issues of such considerable public importance, issues 
like Bill No. 21 that flew into this Assembly on April 21 of this 
year, on Friday, April 21 in the 10 o’clock sitting of the 
legislature that morning. 
 
There are issues of such consuming importance that the public 
will want to know where their individual member stands on a 
particular issue as important as the privatization of a public 
utility. And that is why the bells rang on that Friday, April 21, 
calling the members to a recorded division so that each one of 
them could take their place if they wanted to, to vote on the 
government’s privatization initiative with SaskPower. 
 
And the public will know that while the bells rang that particular 
day, it’s expressly because of the present rule that we have in the 
Assembly that they rang not only for that day, but for 17 days. 
And if the proposed motion by the hon. member from Kindersley, 
the Minister of Justice, had been the rule of the Assembly at that 
time, the bells would have rung for only one hour. And I must 
say, Mr. 

Speaker, because I was in Saskatoon in my constituency on that 
particular Friday, I would not have been able to vote on first 
reading of Bill 21 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation 
Act. 
 
Being that the member from Kindersley had not introduced his 
motion to amend the rules of this House, to limit bell-ringing to 
one hour, they rang, as we know, for 17 days. And it was then on 
May 8 that members of this Legislative Assembly came back into 
the House — the bells had been ringing all this time — to vote 
on Bill No. 21. 
 
Now I must say parenthetically that some of the public will know 
that the government members, or certainly the majority of them, 
were here that period of time, those 17 days, sitting in their places 
from 2 o’clock in the afternoon, waiting to see if perhaps the 
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly would resume on any 
given day. 
 
Being that the bells continued to ring, it simply meant that we, as 
members of the opposition, were continually being called to 
come for the recorded vote that I’ve been talking about. 
 
And as I said, we didn’t come back into the Legislative 
Assembly, in spite of the fact that many of the government 
members were ready for a vote long before that, and in spite of 
the fact that you yourself, Mr. Speaker, may have been sitting in 
the Chair, ready and waiting for a vote to transpire. It simply 
didn’t happen because of the existing rule that we have which 
allowed for the bells to ring without end. And it’s then that when 
we finally deemed it appropriate, based on the public sentiment 
and the expression of the democratic will allowed by the existing 
rule 33(2) that simply talks about the members being called in by 
the bells, and doesn’t have any reference to any time limit. 
 
It’s a very simple, brief section of the rule, actually. It isn’t very 
fancy. It just simply doesn’t specify any limit to the bell-ringing. 
It’s because that rule was in effect that the bell-ringing could go 
on for 17 days and that we could finally come into this 
Legislative Assembly then on May 8 to vote on Bill No. 21, An 
Act to amend The Power Corporation Act, an Act to privatize 
SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And I think it’s quite interesting and 
informative at this point to refer to what actually took place there 
as the bells came to an end. And the bell-ringing came to an end, 
because this is very important to understand in terms of the 
circumstances as to whether the bells will end after one hour or 
17 days. 
 
Now the Deputy Premier at that point rose and said: 
 

I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Power 
Corporation Act. 
 

And it says here in Hansard, the official record of this Assembly, 
that: 
 

The division bells rang from 10:33 a.m. until 1 p.m. 
 

  



 
June 8. 1989 

1762 
 

And then it goes on to say after that . . . The Speaker calls, and I 
quote: 
 

Order. I have not been notified that the House is ready to 
proceed with the division currently under way. Therefore, in 
accordance with past practice, the bells will be turned off 
and this sitting is suspended until 9 o’clock a.m., Monday, 
April 24, 1989. 
 

And then it continues with a note in Hansard that: 
 

The division bells then continued to ring until 2:08 p.m., 
Monday, May 8, 1989. 
 

And continues to read: 
 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

This is the important, pertinent point, Mr. Speaker, that the 
motion was agreed to on the following recorded division. That 
means that the vote finally took place, after all those 17 days, 
following a recorded listing of what each and every member 
voted. 
 
And so now we know how . . . not only how each side of the 
House, government and opposition, voted — who were the 
winners and who were the losers, if that’s the important thing — 
the people know that the government, having a majority, won that 
particular vote. 
 
But it’s very interesting to note, and this is the logic then for a 
recorded division, when the bills ring for a recorded division it’s 
very important then to note — important and interesting — 
actually interesting to note too, and revealing too; it’s not just 
interesting, it’s revealing to see who does what in this Legislative 
Assembly, to see who votes to sell off the heritage of this 
province and to privatize SaskPower, and who stands up for the 
interests of working men and women when it comes to the 
privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite sure at this juncture 
whether it’s appropriate to read Hansard or to refer to the 
members otherwise. Perhaps to err on the side of discretion I will 
not read their names. People can find that out on page 973 in 
Hansard for the day April 21st, 1989. There were 31 yeas and 26 
nays on the vote to privatize SaskPower. And that means that 
there were 31 people to vote yes, or yea, in favour of the motion 
moved by the Deputy Premier, the member from 
Souris-Cannington, to move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Power Corporation Act, which is shorthand for privatizing 
SaskPower. 
 
There were 31 members who voted for that, and there were 26 
who voted nay — against it. And the 31 who voted to sell off 
SaskPower were, as you might suspect: the member from Biggar; 
the member from Souris-Cannington, who moved the motion, the 
Deputy Premier; the member from Wilkie; the member from 
Estevan — and people will remember that it’s the member 

from Estevan who had promised never again to . . . would 
anybody in his government even think of privatizing SaskPower. 
He said that it was a utility and that utilities such as SaskPower 
would not be privatized. So that was the member from Estevan, 
who is the Premier, who had made a promise, solemnly, not to 
privatize and had no mandate in fact to privatize SaskPower. He 
voted yes to the motion to amend The Power Corporation Act. 
The member from Maple Creek voted yes. The member from 
Redberry . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. The power issue of 
the SaskPower . . . as I indicated earlier, members are being very 
repetitive in referring to it over and over. The hon. member has 
referred to that issue two or three or four times tonight, and I 
think he’s made his point on that, and I ask him to move on to 
another topic. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’ll refrain, Mr. Speaker, from talking about 
that particular subject, and talk more directly about the matter at 
hand, which is the rule change to limit bell-ringing. 
 
And I think this is very important because, as I indicated, had the 
bells not been allowed to ring for 17 days, I would not have taken 
part in this particular vote. And so, by virtue of having a full 
ringing of the bells for 17 days, I was allowed to participate in 
this historic vote. And there were . . . all of our members, in fact, 
on this side were able to vote against the motion. 
 
And it’s interesting . . . That still doesn’t mean, simply because I 
was called to a vote, there were still . . . that doesn’t mean 
necessarily that all members were here for that particular vote, or 
that all members are here for any particular vote. And the point 
I’m trying to make is that when it comes to the ringing of bells 
and to a recorded vote, you can never be sure who will be present 
or who will be absent in spite of a recorded vote. 
 
A recorded vote is helpful, as I was trying to illustrate, in terms 
of letting you know what individual members did do or did not 
do on a particular issue. But I found it very interesting, in 
reviewing the record of Hansard, to note that there were a 
number, actually, a number of government members who 
weren’t present for the particular vote that I was talking about — 
and good thing for them perhaps. 
 
But there’s still . . . something known as guilt by association, and 
there’s complicity, so that even if a particular member is not 
present, is not called by the ringing of the bells — whether it’s 
for one hour, as is proposed by the member from Kindersley, or 
17 days — there is still a price to be paid, depending on the 
particular issue. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the member from Kindersley, the 
Minister of Justice, who introduced this motion, wasn’t present 
for the attendant motion that would privatize. 
 
Now some might say that it’s important to have all government 
members present for a particular vote, but that’s not necessarily 
the case. You don’t have to have all members present for a vote, 
whether it’s the government   



 
June 8. 1989 

1763 
 

or members of the opposition. 
 
I’d like to continue some of these remarks, Mr. Speaker, but I 
wonder, that it being 10 o’clock, whether I could beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — According to rule 283: 
 

A motion “That the House do now adjourn” is always in 
order but no second motion to the same effect may be made 
until some intermediate proceeding has taken place. 
 

No intermediate proceeding has taken place, therefore the motion 
to adjourn debate is out of order. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I find that motion 
very helpful, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 10 o’clock, the House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


