





























































Hansard: August 01, 1989


August 1, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 
Lane that Bill No. 72 — An Act to raise Revenue for Hospitals by the Imposition and 
Collection of Taxes with respect to Participation in and the Operation of Lottery Schemes 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is my first opportunity to speak to this 
Bill, Bill 72, which in effect authorized a collection of the lottery tax that has been 
misnamed by this government as the hospital tax, indicating they’re trying to do one of 
two things — either giving an indication that they’re putting a tax on hospitals or, more 
accurately, what they are doing is trying to make it look like it’s a tax that is going 
directly for the hospitals and trying to make it look like a legitimate tax, and a tax the 
people should accept under these conditions. 
 
I want to indicate that the proper name, and I want to indicate to the members opposite in 
that we will be asking to change this name to the proper name . . . This is actually the tax 
on lotteries and it should be called the lottery tax. 
 
This is a tax, Mr. Speaker, to which people across the province are opposed in very, very 
large numbers. The general public is opposed to this tax because, I think, largely because 
they are fed up with the way the government has been spending tax money, and they no 
longer trust this government to raise any taxes because they’re afraid it’s simply going to 
be wasted the way previous tax increases have vanished, just simply vanished. People are 
paying more tax, they’re finding their services decreasing, and at the same time the debt 
of the province is increasing at unparalleled proportions. 
 
So what I’m going to do, Mr. Speaker, is I’m going to speak to this motion and at the end 
of my delivery I’m going to propose an amendment to this motion to this Bill No. 72. The 
motion is to read Bill 72 a second time and I will make the motion that all the words after 
“Bill No. 72” be deleted and the following be substituted therefor. 
 
The words that would be substituted are not to be read a second time because, (a) it 
imposes an unfair financial burden on sports, cultural, and charitable organizations; (b) it 
is causing severe hardship to Saskatchewan small businesses and; (c) it fails to allocate 
the tax revenues explicitly for hospitals or health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as indicated in the wording of the amendment 
which I will be putting to the Legislative Chamber, I’ve indicated three reasons. And the 
first, I suppose, is perhaps the most significant, and that is that the lottery scheme which 
is put into place in Saskatchewan was put into place for very good reason, and has had a 
very excellent success. It is a success story for Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen implemented in the ’70s a system unique to any province in the country, 
where our system of running, funding sport organization, cultural organizations across the 
province, and a system that helps out many, many charities, those involved in sponsoring 
any sort of lotteries or sponsoring things like bingo, have found a way of getting money 
and using it for purposes which are community based and used right in communities. 
Unfortunately, this tax seems to be scuttling the good works that was done by the lottery 
scheme, and I would ask the government to be very, very careful in how fast it’s 
implementing it; that they would take a real good look at it, and give very strong 
consideration to not implementing this tax before it’s too late, and withdrawing it before 
it’s too late. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one thing I could say about the tax when I compare it to other taxes, 
and that is that this tax is not, is not a good way to tax. It’s difficult to say at any time if 
there’s any good way to tax. We know that people in general will question any tax that 
you put in, but reluctantly we have found that the people . . . reluctantly, but have given 
reasonable acceptance to certain taxes: income taxes, property taxes, fuel taxes, and 
tobacco taxes. These have been developed over the years, and these have been 
appropriate ways to raise money for our hospitals and for our other community activities. 
 
However, this tax has not found the public acceptance of these other taxes that I have 
mentioned. What has happened is the public in this particular case has objected in a rather 
very dramatic fashion and in a very personal fashion. The public feels that because they 
have been taxed, and taxed over and over, that this is one tax to which they can state their 
opposition very plainly, very simply, and very distinctly, and that is simply by not going 
to the kiosks, not going to the bingos, and that way avoiding the tax. 
 
Now in the process that this government has put into place, the government is . . . By 
putting this tax into place, we’re finding that it’s actually destroying the organizations, 
the underpinning of all the organizations sponsored by Sask Sport. It’s considered as a 
nuisance, and particularly those organizations who are now raising money for the 
government . . . They used to be able to raise money for themselves and for the projects 
that they sponsored. But now that the organizations like the service clubs across the 
province find themselves in a position where they’re actually raising money for the 
government, and it becomes more than a nuisance then; it becomes something that they 
totally abhor, and they feel that it’s not in their position to use their volunteer time, which 
they want to use for the betterment of the community, to use it for raising money for this 
government to blow. 
 



I predict, Mr. Speaker, that this tax is going to go the way of the used vehicle tax; that the 
public opposition to it will be so great that the government will be embarrassed into 
withdrawing the tax. And I think if they were wise, the best way to do it would be to cut 
and run soon before too much damage is done. 
 
If it was a good tax, Mr. Speaker, more people would be willing to pay it. We wouldn’t 
be seeing people staying away from the kiosks at the rate of 24 per cent or 25 per cent. 
There are people who have actually in this province, in order to avoid this tax — who go 
to the kiosks on a recreational basis with the idea of spending a little money that will give 
them some recreation and at the same time provide some benefit to the cultural and sport 
charitable organizations of Saskatchewan — there are people who have now organized 
systems where they are actually purchasing these taxes from the Alberta system and in 
some cases the Manitoba system. 
 
So what’s happening is this is adding to the drain of the revenues for two things: for 
taxes, and secondly and more importantly, for the cultural organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to give you some specific reasons for bringing in this amendment 
and this motion. The effect of the amendment to the motion that I’m proposing and that 
the members on this side are proposing will be to put a postponement on the collection of 
this tax. It will in effect give the government a way out, a way out of just not having to 
cancel the tax on its own, because later on they’re going to find that the cultural 
organizations and the sports organizations and the 800-and-some community clubs that 
are now sponsored by the Sask Sport are going to be down their necks because they’re 
going to find themselves short funded. They’re going to find themselves any place from 
10 to 25 per cent short of funds, short of what they’ve budgeted for, and then what’s the 
government going to do? Are they going to cough up other tax dollars to make up for 
that? What’s going to happen? 
 
What you’ve done here is you’ve introduced something that you’re going to regret, and I 
think the sooner you bail out of it, the better off you’re going to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Let’s take a look at some of the things that the lotteries scheme has 
been promoting, and I would say, rather successfully. 
 
And if any of the members looked at the annual report put out by your very . . . by Sask 
Sport Inc., which is legislated and supported by your government, I think, until you 
brought this tax in . . . You give the impression that you’re trying to kill it. 
 
And in the president’s report — and I would like to quote a couple of sentences out of it 
— in the president’s report, the president, Mr. Thurmeier, indicates that ’88-89, the past 
year, was a successful year by many standards. He says: 
 



The most important accomplishment was a negotiation of a five-year lottery 
licence with the provincial government. 
 

At that stage then, he felt quite confident in the direction that this scheme was going. A 
little later on he mentions that the tax is going to cause him some problems. 
 
But I want to indicate to the members opposite just how important this fund was and still 
continues to be, and how difficult it will be to everybody in Saskatchewan if this fund is 
ruined. And that’s what this tax is doing; it’s ruining this fund. 
 
If you take a look at the report, look at some of the highlights, it indicates in one place 
here that Sask Trust, and I quote: 
 

Sask Trust for sports, culture, and recreation received $20 million for 1988-89 
compared to 14.75 in the last year. 
 

It indicates a good year. The president indicates in another part in his report: 
 

The trust initiatives program for communities received 2.25 million allocation 
compared with the 2.3 million last year. 
 

And he says: 
 

This will help more than 825 communities to develop broad-based programs, plan 
for the need of older adults, and co-ordinate sport, culture, and recreation 
activities. 
 

He is talking about 825 different groups in many of the towns of Saskatchewan, every 
city, every large town, and many villages — any place that has a recreational committee. 
They have all benefitted from this. 
 
Now what are they going to be saying when they come to a meeting, some meeting at 
some stage of the game, a month or two down the line, and you members of the 
government side are going to have to tell them, well you’re 20 per cent or 20 per cent 
short because we put on this tax. Now you know what they’re going to tell you. 
 
(1915) 
 
I say, cut the tax and cut it now before the damage comes. It’s not only those 825 groups, 
not only those 825 groups, but there are other people that receive benefits. And in this 
same report, and I quote, there’s a quotation here from the vice-president and he indicates 
that the efforts — and he refers to the lottery retailers — are appreciated by more than 
1,200 beneficiary groups. 
 



And he’s talking about all of the soccer clubs and some of the hockey clubs and some of 
the figure skaters and the badminton and the wrestling and the gymnastics clubs, all of 
those groups who are benefitting from this, 1,200 more. 
 
You go and you ask anybody who’s involved in Sask Sport and ask him how many 
people are involved by the moneys received from here. How many do you think there 
would be? How many do you think there would be? And their estimate is more than half 
of the people in this province — over 500,000; closer to 600,000 people is their estimate. 
Six hundred thousand people have benefitted from a program which you’re trying to 
scuttle which you will scuttle if you don’t do away with this tax. 
 
Let me indicate a little further of some of the things that this pays for that is very valuable 
to this province. Consider yourself a parent of a son or a daughter who may be involved 
in some program, say gymnastics, where you’re looking for a coach and where you’ve 
exceeded the limits of what the local school can provide. 
 
Well it’s this organization, it’s this organization that provides the programs, the coaches, 
and helps provide the officials. Otherwise people would have to leave the province or go 
elsewhere, move to a bigger centre. But it provides them right there in their communities, 
in many of the communities. 
 
Now what’s going to . . . What’ll happen to this same person who’s had a youngster 
training, say in gymnastics, since the age of, say 6, and you’re going on to 7, 8, 9, and 10 
and all of a sudden this is cut short? Think of the tragedy. Think of the undeveloped 
potential of that youngster, and many youngsters like that; all because you figured you 
had to tax something. That really wasn’t a wise move. 
 
In addition to the sports that I’ve talked about, there are multicultural groups, heritage 
arts groups . . . heritage groups and arts groups across the province that have benefitted 
from this organization, Sask Sport — Sask Sport Inc., which is now threatened as a result 
of your tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you might well ask the question, how was it that I know that this is 
happening? How do we know that these organizations are threatened? How do we know 
that businesses are suffering as a result of this? How is it that we know that hospitals 
aren’t necessarily going to receive this money directly? How do we know? 
 
Well let me answer those questions, first with respect to what’s happening at the kiosks. 
Members on this side of the House, myself included, found out, first of all simply by 
going and talking, asking people some questions: how are your lottery sales going? It was 
brought to our attention by several vendors. And they’re telling us that they noticed a 
sudden decrease in their lottery sales. 
 
First of all, they told us they saw a decrease in the lottery sales back in March when the 
tax was announced. People objected at that stage because some people . . . because of the 
way that it . . . the way they interpreted it. It appeared as if the tax was already there, so 



some of them stopped going at that stage. There was a marked decrease, approximately 
10 per cent. 
 
Then when the tax was implemented in July 1 of this year, they found another decrease. 
 
Since then we’ve been monitoring the situation. I’ve been making attempts to get in 
contact with many of the . . . as many as possible of the vendors, people who are in small 
business, people across this province, at least one person in every centre, and many 
people in some of the bigger centres in Saskatchewan, and asking them questions about 
what is happening to their lottery sales. 
 
I spent some time, Mr. Speaker, and I sent out a survey to which I’m going to give a 
preliminary report tonight, a preliminary report. The survey isn’t all out. There are still 
some people who will be receiving it this week. But I’ve got a pretty good indication 
already from the few pieces that have come in today, in today’s mail. 
 
And the kind of question that I’ve asked on the survey, Mr. Speaker, is . . . The first 
question is this: has the provincial 10 per cent lottery tax decreased sales? Have I done it? 
Has it decreased sales? 
 
And I have an answer here: yes; yes; yes. Here’s one that says no; I’ll put that one to the 
side. Yes; yes; and yes. Okay. Of the answers I’ve gotten today, weigh them out. Weigh 
them out. Eight yeses. At least I would say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five to one. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — My partner says about five to one. I think it’s . . . Well exactly in this 
case, it’s six to one. Of these that I’ve got here — six to one, six to one. All right? 
 
I asked also the question, by how many per cent was this decrease? Here are some of the 
estimates. Some weren’t sure. Here’s one that says 50 per cent; here’s another one that 
indicated 40 per cent; another one that indicated 15 per cent; one, 25 per cent; here’s one 
30 to 40 per cent. 
 
They are confirming in writing, Mr. Speaker, what we have heard verbally. I would ask 
the members opposite me, any member, to go and visit any one of the kiosks. Well 
perhaps visit several. There are pockets — and I will admit to that — there are pockets 
where this isn’t happening, because I did talk to a couple of people who said, well they 
didn’t notice it. But the large majority . . . And I think this preliminary report that I’m 
giving you here today is a fair indication of what’s happening across the province. I asked 
them the question: does the collecting of taxes cause an inconvenience to the vendor? 
Does it cause an inconvenience to the vendor? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members, allow the member from Prince Albert to 
continue his remarks. 
 



Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, I asked in the survey, we 
asked in the survey: does the collecting of taxes cause an inconvenience to the vendor? I 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the answer is not predictable. But in all cases here, without 
objection . . . No, there’s one — pardon me, there’s one, one that says, very minor. He 
says, very minor. The rest say yes, and they add a comment, and I’d like to indicate what 
some of the comments are. Yes, it causes an inconvenience, and one person, and this 
person happens to be from Maple Creek, says that the odd numerical value of the tickets 
make the daily totals hard to balance. It’s one of the problems that they have. 
 
There’s another comment here about what has happened to the comments that they’ve 
expressed that they’ve received from their customers. What are their customers saying 
about the lottery tax? It says, we feel that we have 10 times as much bookkeeping for this 
compared to the E&H (education and health) tax, which pays an equal commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in talking to a couple of the vendors, they indicated to me that one of their 
biggest difficulties was that in calculating the tax, their tills were already full. They did 
not have a special button to calculate this tax with, and it would cost them about $4,000, 
4 to $5,000 to put up a new till. 
 
Well the member laughs. The member laughs. I’d like to take him to a vendor and 
explain to him how, at making $30 a month selling the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Debate across the floor between the hon. member on his 
feet and the hon. members in their desks really serves no real purpose except to cause 
some confusion in the House. You will all have the opportunity to enter the debate if you 
so wish. Let us allow the member for Prince Albert to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I took very seriously the vendor’s plea to me 
when he indicated to me, and he brought me up to his till and he said, look, I’ve got this 
till. I use it for all of my transactions, for all the cigarettes that I sell, for all the chocolate 
bars I sell, and, he says, all the lottery tickets I sell. 
 
He says, and I have a limited number of buttons, input buttons on this till. Now with the 
input of this tax, he says, I am short a button on it. And he says, I have to collect my taxes 
and do the calculation over and above. 
 
The member from Regina laughs. The member from Regina laughs. Well it’s an 
inconvenience, and that’s one of the problems. That is one of the problems for the small-
business people who were quite pleased to do this for Sask Sport, but who are now 
questioning whether they want to continue collecting this tax. 
 



And I’d be interested to find out from the Minister of Culture, or from the Minister of 
Finance, how many people have quit, how many people have indicated they’re going to 
quit collecting taxes for you, and are quitting this because it’s no longer paying them to 
do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve also received a few replies from some bingo operators. The bingo 
operators indicate a rather similar pattern about what’s happening in their business, and 
they’re finding that in a couple of cases that — I have, I think, approximately six replies 
— that we’ve got a variance from 10 to 50 per cent decreases in bingo sales. They don’t 
attribute all of the bingo sale reductions to the imposition of the tax, but not one person 
told me that that tax is actually helping their bingo sales or their bingo turnover and 
they’re all indicating quite the opposite — that it’s adding to some of the difficulties that 
they’re having with the revenues from bingo. And they’re predicting that, for example, in 
the town of Yorkton, that there are going to be clubs like the Lions club and the band 
boosters in Yorkton who are going to find themselves somewhat short of revenue 
compared to what they had projected from their bingo sales, which is part and parcel of 
the same tax package, the tax on lotteries and on gambling. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the survey, I had mailed out a petition along with the 
mail-out to some of the vendors — a copy of a petition —because, as you know, a 
petition to be received by this Assembly needs to be written in some rather complicated . 
. . in a rather complicated form. And so in response to a request from a couple of people, 
I’ve simply added it to it so that those who wanted to might avail themselves of this 
opportunity of exercising the democratic right by petitioning this government to stop its 
tax on lotteries. 
 
(1930) 
 
I have here a copy of the petition and I want to read into the record, Mr. Speaker, what 
the petition says so that anybody that may want to get a copy of the petition will know 
that it’s available through our caucus office. And it’s just another way that can be used, in 
addition to the silent protests that the people are now using about this tax and about 
taxing in general, just another way that they can use to exercise a democratic right and 
tell this government that they ought to pull back on this tax, pull it back, drop it before 
it’s too late. 
 
The wording on the petition, and I would like to quote two paragraphs from it, Mr. 
Speaker, the wording says as follows: 
 

That the new 10 per cent provincial lottery sales tax will lead to a substantial loss 
of revenue for charitable, cultural, and sport organizations. 
 

And: 
 

That the provincial lottery sales tax will have a negative effect on the livelihood 
of vendors who operate lotteries. 



 
And it asks that the government eliminate the provincial lottery sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was by the minister of cultures and recreation’s own admission this 
morning that I give additional testimony, in addition to the results I’ve received on my 
preliminary survey, in addition to the conversations that members on this side of the 
House — and I am sure, or at least I would hope, members on that side of the House — 
have had with lottery and sale of vendors. And it’s by the minister’s own admission in 
public today and yesterday on different programs, when he indicates that he wants to 
survey the effects of it, and he asks for two months of time to do that. 
 
I say to the minister that two months is too long. Two months from now that’s going to be 
pretty well a full four months — a full third of a year worth of sale losses, worth of losses 
which is going to result in a substantial problem to those cultural organizations. I say 
that’s going to be too late. 
 
I say to the minister that he is able to get the figures every two weeks very accurately, 
because it’s every two weeks that these people submit their numbers. He’s able to get 
them every two weeks. He should have a running account. He should be able to make a 
recommendation directly to the Minister of Finance and to do it soon. 
 
And I know that if the minister is sincerely interested in sustaining the well-being of Sask 
Sport, which in turn helps all the cultural organizations in Saskatchewan, that he will 
want to do that. And I sincerely hope that he does so and that he gets some support from 
some of the members opposite to do that and to do that quickly. Give your Minister of 
Culture some support on this; he needs it. Bail out of this before you become as 
embarrassed as you are with the used vehicle tax — do that! 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn for a moment to what I believe are the reasons that 
people are staying away from this tax. Why are they avoiding it? Why are they avoiding 
it? What they’ve seen by this government is an unrelenting search for places to get 
money. They introduced flat tax. We’ve never had a flat tax before. They started out by 
just putting in a little bit so it wouldn’t hurt too much and then they raised it and they 
raised it and they raised it, so now it’s at 2 per cent, 2 per cent flat tax. Never before. 
Who did it? This government, this government. They increased the sales tax from 5 per 
cent to 7 per cent. Who did it? This government. That was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members don’t seem to stop. They just keep 
continuing and continuing. I must rise and call them to order. Continued interruptions are 
not part of the Assembly debate and I would like to once more remind members of that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The people are saying that, first of all, this government has increased 
the sales tax. They have implemented a flat tax. People across the province are finding 
their property taxes increasing because this government has decreased its proportion that 
it now pays to school boards and to municipalities, revenue sharing. That proportion has 
gone down. 



 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the hon. member’s point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The member opposite, in his remarks just now, pointed to property 
taxes and the revenue sharing to municipalities and school boards, and he made a 
statement that is totally irrelevant to this debate. The fact of the matter is that the revenue 
sharing, which is a totally different debate, has had no impact on property taxes, and 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban municipalities Association) understands that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member does not have a point of order and the 
member for Prince Albert continues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I will try to explain to the member so that even he can understand why 
people are staying away in droves from the lottery so that they can avoid paying the tax. 
And the reason, Mr. Minister, is that they are fed up with the way your government has 
taxed and overtaxed and repeatedly taxed the people of Saskatchewan. And this is one 
way that they can stand up and show you and tell you and demonstrate in no uncertain 
terms that they are fed up with your taxation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In addition to those three taxes that I’ve mentioned — the flat tax, the 
sales tax and the property tax — ask anybody whether their income tax has decreased 
lately. Ask anybody whether their cost of utilities has decreased, or which way has it 
gone. 
 
So when it comes to something like a lottery tax, which is a voluntary tax where people 
can make a protest, they are making a protest. And maybe it’s a good thing that they are 
making a protest, because the government, if it comes back to its senses, can use this as a 
signal and fall back and retrench and think things over — just redo it. 
 
People are seeing themselves being taxed on the one hand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m going to once more interrupt hon. members and I’m 
just going to remind hon. members that if you’re not going to cease and desist, I will have 
to point out the guilty persons in this House, because there are only a few of them. In all 
fairness and justice to the other members, there are only a few of them causing a 
disruption, and I’ve spoken to them several times and they refuse to heed my request, and 
therefore I’m asking them one more time. 
 



Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re dealing with a motion to have second 
reading for an implementation of a tax on lotteries. At the end of my remarks I intend to 
move a motion which would put a delay to the second reading of this particular Bill. 
 
And I’m doing it for reasons to support what the public has already indicated by staying 
away from the lottery kiosks in droves. That is, they want this tax dropped. They want it 
dropped because they feel that it’s very much like some other tax that this government 
has already implemented. They feel overtaxed. On the one hand, they see taxes . . . And 
I’ve listed five different types of taxes that this government has increased. 
 
They see this government increasing taxes, and at the same time they see this government 
giving money away, that they’ve raised in taxes from the people of Saskatchewan, to the 
likes of Pocklington, and more lately Cargill, 200 — how much to Cargill, 235? — and to 
Mr. Guy Montpetit. They see the waste and the patronage that has gone to people like 
Ken Waschuk through this GigaText outfit — moneys that end up in Bermuda, taken 
from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And it’s not a small wonder that they’re staying 
away from the kiosks and telling you folks, drop the tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about another mandate for Sask Sport, how people are 
going to be hurt. This government is trying to indicate that somehow they’re going take 
this money and they’re going to use it for our health, for the good of our health. Now 
picture this for a minute. Here we have all of these organizations sponsored by Sask 
Sport, sponsored by Sask Sport, which are contributing to a positive, healthy life-style for 
many, many people in Saskatchewan — Sask Sport themselves indicate close to 600,000 
people. 
 
This money is being used to promote healthy, athletic activities, healthy for the body, 
healthy for the mind. They’re taking money away from it. They’re undermining this 
organization. Instead of promoting preventative measures, instead of putting more money 
into it and promoting it, they’re taking money away from it. 
 
You know what’s going to happen. What’s going to happen is, if you pull the rug out 
from underneath these cultural organizations by scuttling this scheme for getting money 
through Sask Sport, if you do that you’re going to find that you’re going to need more 
and more money at the other end, at the other health end. 
 
It’s rather a commonly accepted thesis at this stage that we need more emphasis on 
preventative measures. It’s very commonly accepted. Your own Minister of Health 
accepts that, your Minister of Culture accepts that, but your taxman doesn’t accept that. 
And I can’t understand why you accept that, why you accept it. It just doesn’t make 
sense. 
 
You’ve spent millions of dollars, hundreds of thousands of dollars advertising life-styles 
— life-styles. You’ve spent hundreds of thousands of dollars advertising it, and now 
you’re pulling the rug out from under the very organization that sponsors and is working 
towards better life-styles in Saskatchewan. 



 
Mr. Speaker, is it for health? I say there’s nothing in that Act that says that the money is 
going to go directly to health. As a matter of fact, it says in that Act that the money is 
going to go into the general revenue fund. When you put money into the general revenue 
fund, are you going to take that money and put it in a special bundle there and then 
transfer it into the Health budget? 
 
What it amounts to is a lot of rhetoric and a lot of advertising. It seems to be a way that 
this government wants to make this tax acceptable. The people of Saskatchewan know 
that the Health budget needs a good influx of money; they know that. They know that. 
And they know that you should be taking money from your birthday party, from your 
GigaTexts, from your Pocklingtons, from your Cargills, and putting that money into 
health, into there. That’s where you should be taking it from. And from the general 
revenues, of course. 
 
But to try to pull a hoax on the people of Saskatchewan by advertising that you’re going 
to put it directly into health is unbelievable — it’s unbelievable. Not only that it’s 
misleading. You’re misleading the public by calling it the hospital tax, and we’re going to 
put an amendment. I’m going to indicate that we’re going to put an amendment because 
this is not a tax on hospitals. 
 
I don’t think you want to call this a tax on hospitals. You have a fuel tax; that means 
you’re taxing fuel. You have an income tax; you’re taxing people’s income. If it’s a 
tobacco tax or a liquor tax, that’s what you’re taxing. This is a tax on lotteries and 
nothing else but lotteries, and that’s what it should be called and that’s what it would be 
called if you were honest about it. 
 
(1945) 
 
So I want to summarize then, Mr. Speaker, before I pass the . . . pass over to my 
colleague or other colleagues who have things to say about this motion. I want to 
summarize that we are in opposition to this. There are people of Saskatchewan in large 
numbers who are in opposition to this tax. 
 
There are good reasons why we’re in opposition to this tax; we feel that it imposes a 
burden on sports, cultural, and charitable organizations; we feel that it causes a hardship 
on Saskatchewan businesses; and we feel that the government is not being honest when 
they are calling it the hospitals tax. 
 
I therefore move, seconded by the member from Sutherland constituency: 
 

That all the words after “Bill No. 72” be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 
Not now be read a second time, because: 
 



(a) It imposes an unfair financial burden on sports, cultural, and charitable 
organizations; 

 
(b) It imposes an unfair financial burden on sports, cultural, and charitable 

organizations; 
 

(c) It fails to allocate the tax revenues explicitly for hospitals or health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my colleague from Prince Albert has just 
indicated, this piece of legislation should not be called the hospitals tax Bill, it should be 
called the lottery tax Bill, according to my colleague. I would go one step further and say 
this should be called the hoax Bill, the Hoax tax Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Because what this legislation does is perpetrate a hoax on the people of 
Saskatchewan, purporting to fund hospital and health care by way of a lotteries tax when 
none of that money will wind up into the health care system. 
 
And I want to make the point, as the amendment that was just moved has made, that there 
is nothing, there is absolutely nothing in this legislation that requires the Minister of 
Finance to spend a penny on health care. Now I want people of Saskatchewan to know 
that this Bill No. 72 is titled, An Act to raise Revenue for Hospitals by the Imposition and 
Collection of Taxes with respect to Participation in and the Operation of Lottery 
Schemes. And it’s another fraud. That title is a front for Progressive Conservative cut-
backs to health care. 
 
And I want to go on and say that according to section 8 of this legislation, where you 
would expect to find something requiring these funds not only to go to the Minister of 
Finance but to go into the general fund of the province to the Minister of Finance, there 
should be something here requiring that money to be going, not just into the general 
revenues of the province, but into health care. But we don’t find it there because this 
government is not serious about health care and funding it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I want to say in the most clear terms possible that this piece of 
legislation is pure, unadulterated propaganda. This legislation is not concerned with the 
health care of the people of this province; it’s concerned with the health of the 
Progressive Conservative government and its re-election fortunes. 
 



What this legislation wants to do, Mr. Speaker, is create the image of concern for sick 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. It wants to give the illusion that this government 
is actually going to be doing something about waiting lists in Saskatoon and Regina 
hospitals, is going to be doing something for rural hospitals, is going to be doing 
something to increase new technological equipment for the province. And yet we know 
that there’s nothing in this legislation requiring that. 
 
In fact, we’re asked, as an article of faith, to believe that the money will go to health care. 
We’re asked to believe that as an article of faith by the Minister of Finance. We’re asked 
to take him on his word. And the people of Saskatchewan know that if there is one person 
in this province that we cannot take for his word when it comes to financial matters and 
reckoning straight with Saskatchewan people, it is precisely the Minister of Finance in 
this government. 
 
I also want to comment on how the Minister of Consumer Affairs gets into this act in 
perpetrating this hoax. On June 26 of this year, the Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs sent a letter to the charitable and service groups across the province 
of Saskatchewan, announcing this new tax, this new hospitals tax, as he calls it, that it 
would be in place effective July 1 for lotteries, bingos, and break-opens, and that it would 
apply to casinos and raffles beginning September 1. 
 
And he goes on in the second paragraph of this letter, and I want to quote this, to say: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan has identified health care as a priority in our 
province. The new hospitals tax will be introduced in order to maintain and 
enhance our hospitals and to meet the growing demand for health care. 
 

Allegedly, that is the agenda, to maintain and enhance health care in the province. I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that there is a hidden agenda behind this piece of legislation, and that 
agenda is to show the people of Saskatchewan that health care is too expensive for the 
government to be involved in. This is the first step in the long road down to the erosion of 
a universal medicare system. And how it happens is quite simply like this. The 
government says, health care is too expensive to afford; we don’t like imposing a tax on 
lotteries; we find it distasteful, but it’s something that we have to do; health care is just 
too expensive. We have no choices so we’re going to fund new hospital construction, 
we’re going to fund new equipment, we’re going to eliminate waiting lists — we’re going 
to do all these good things by virtue of a lotteries tax or a hospitals tax. 
 
And that will sit for a year, and then what we’ll find is this same government, after their 
re-election, coming back to the good people of Saskatchewan and saying, well you know, 
we tried; we tried to fund health care. We tried to fund it by way of introducing a 10 per 
cent tax on bingos and lotteries, and it didn’t work. It’s just too expensive. We can’t 
afford it. Even as distasteful as it was, we introduced this tax on the lotteries and bingos, 
but it doesn’t do the job, and folks, you’re just going to have to give up on more of your 
health care. 
 



That is the scenario. That is the step that the people of Saskatchewan can expect from this 
particular piece of legislation; that there is a hidden agenda for health care from this 
government and that this is part of that hidden agenda to set the stage for the erosion of a 
universal medicare scheme. And the people of Saskatchewan know full well that this 
government is capable and willing and wanting to do precisely that when it eliminates the 
dental program and the prescription drug program from the people of the province. 
 
Another point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s nothing in this legislation 
requiring the health tax, the hospitals tax, to stay frozen at 10 per cent. And I think that 
people in Saskatchewan can well expect this tax to float upward as time moves on. 
 
This is precisely what we saw with the flat tax that was introduced initially at only a half 
a per cent. Only a half a per cent, people will recall, because it was only in place for half 
a year. Had it been in effect for a full year it would have been one percentage point. 
 
So we have a flat tax that starts out at half a per cent, the next year it goes up to 1 per 
cent, the year after that it goes up to one and a half per cent, and now it’s at 2 per cent. 
 
And this flat tax, incidentally, was hailed as a first in Canada — a very progressive idea 
from the Progressive Conservative government — and it certainly was. It progressed up 
from a half a per cent to 2 per cent, and that’s what we’re going to see from this particular 
hospitals tax. We’ll see it floating up from 10 per cent to 15 per cent to 20 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And the people of Saskatchewan know by now . . . And they know this 
is true because Tory times are tax times, they’re tax times. The taxman cometh when the 
PCs get elected. 
 
In fact, departmental officials in the Government of Saskatchewan have already said that 
there’s going to be tax added to this 10 per cent tax on lotteries when the federal Finance 
minister, Michael Wilson, introduces his tax on goods and services, which they support, 
incidentally. Not a peep, not a whimper, not a cry of protest against that unfair tax 
increase from the Progressive Conservative government federally. 
 
And so what we’ll see, what we’ll see is inclusion of lottery sales in this 9 per cent 
federal national sales tax for goods and services, just like the flat tax. The tax bill goes up 
and up and up. 
 
Now the government talks about the importance of this tax for health care. The people 
who are actually in the business of providing health care, doctors, nurses, hospital 
administrators and the like, know that this government is not funding health care, does 
not have a commitment to health care. And these people know this because they are the 
ones who have to go out and chase the bucks. 
 



In Saskatoon, you can go into University Hospital and take an elevator up to visit a 
patient and see posters in the elevator indicating that there’s a special fund-raising dinner 
in town to raise money for the hospital burn unit, or another particular unit. It varies 
really from month to month, about what the fund-raising project is by the hospital 
auxiliary or by the nursing staff. And the same is really true for City Hospital in 
Saskatoon and St. Paul’s Hospital. Hospital health care personnel have become fund 
raisers, fund raisers because this government is negligent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know as well as I do that this is true when it comes not just to the door 
of the elevator in the hospital, but to our own doors, the doors of our homes on the streets 
across Saskatchewan. People in Saskatchewan are absolutely fed up to the neck with all 
sorts of charitable organizations and health-related organizations such as the Heart Fund 
or the kidney fund or the united way, the Saskatchewan Association for Community 
Living or the abilities council or what have you — coming to the door begging for money 
from the good people of Saskatchewan because the provincial government won’t 
adequately fund health care and social services. 
 
And so what we have is a situation where people involved in these fields with a 
commitment to the heart foundation or the kidney association, for example, have to go 
out and pound the pavement, pound the pavement and go door to door or phone 
solicitations to raise money for health care because it isn’t forthcoming from the 
provincial government. 
 
And now, to add insult to injury, these same people now have to go out and play tax 
collector on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan when they have their lotteries 
and other fund-raising activities. And that people in the charitable field find very 
offensive indeed. 
 
(2000) 
 
And no wonder then, little wonder that we find a growing number of people not only 
going to Alberta to purchase lottery tickets, as my colleague from Prince Albert indicated, 
in order to avoid paying this 10 per cent tax. Little wonder that we find growing numbers 
of people pooling their money and going out of province to buy lottery tickets. We also 
find growing numbers of people leaving the province. 
 
And I don’t say that’s because of this particular Bill 72, the hospitals tax, necessarily. I 
think it’s part and parcel of the larger picture of the erosion of health care services here in 
Saskatchewan, a province that used to have the best universal medicare system in North 
America, with a dental program adding new children year after year so that eventually the 
whole of the province would be covered. And now these services are being eroded and 
people are leaving the province because of it. 
 
I’ll say parenthetically . . . I think this is already well-known but some people viewing 
might be interested to know that at this point in 1989 there has been a net loss of some 
13,000 people from the province of Saskatchewan — in other words, a net loss of 13,000 



more in this half of the year than in all of last year put together, leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the rumour has it, Mr. Speaker, would you believe, that this government is even 
going to start taxing people who are leaving the province on their way out, penalizing 
them for leaving the province. Maybe even when they go out of province to take holidays 
there will be a tax imposed because they’re leaving the province even temporarily, not to 
mention a tax imposed if they leave permanently. 
 
One of the things I personally find most offensive and most scandalous about this 
particular hospitals tax is that it hits those who are least able to afford it. It hits those 
people on low income who play the bingo parlours. Bingo, for many people on low 
incomes, is not an opportunity to win a million dollars, because you simply don’t win a 
million dollars playing bingo. You win some small change. Your fortunes may change for 
a week or two on the basis of your earnings from a particularly lucky night at the bingo, 
but nothing more than that will change. These are low income people who are being 
asked to front this 10 per cent bingo tax, this tax for hospitals. 
 
And how typical for this Progressive Conservative government to go after these people 
— those who are least able to afford it. I say, Mr. Speaker, that if this government were 
serious about raising money for health care and wanted to collect revenue from lottery-
type schemes, I say that this government ought to tax stock market . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The level of noise is getting a bit too high, and I ask 
members to quieten down. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that if this government is serious about raising 
money for hospitals and wants to go after people who gamble and play the bingos and 
play the lotteries, why doesn’t it get serious and tax the high flyers of society, the people 
who speculate on the stock market? 
 
Why not tax all stock market transactions originating in the province of Saskatchewan 
with a 10 per cent tax and raise some real money for health care? And bring in legislation 
that requires that money to go into health care rather than legislation such as we have 
here that doesn’t have a word of commitment to health care other than in the title. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that people who have high disposable incomes to 
play the stock market, that have high disposable incomes to take risks there, ought to be 
the ones more than willing to pay a 10 per cent tax on their stock market transactions 
rather than the little people who play the bingos — but that’s typical Tory philosophy, 
typical Tory philosophy. 
 
There’s a lot of money to be made in gambling, this government believes. I say, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a lot of misery to be made on gambling; a lot of human misery that this 



government pays no attention to at all when it introduces this bogus kind of Bill to raise 
money for hospitals. 
 
This government claims, I say, that it can’t afford to pay for health care and that it has to 
have a 10 per cent tax on lotteries to fund it. This government could afford decent health 
care if it weren’t carrying the biggest deficit in this province’s history. And the people of 
Saskatchewan should know that right today, each and every day of the year, the good 
people of Saskatchewan are paying a million dollars a day in interest on the provincial 
deficit for nothing — for absolutely nothing. And that has been brought in since 1982 
from this government opposite. Give them one term; give them two terms; give them four 
years; give them six years — seven years, it doesn’t matter. We have had consecutive 
deficit budgets from this government so that now we are paying a million dollars a day in 
interest just to service the provincial debt. People will know that that is a million dollars 
that cannot go, that cannot go to health care in this province. 
 
And so when the Minister of Finance talks about this piece of legislation raising possibly 
$10 million this year for health care, and next year, because it will be in place for a full 
year, raising possibly $23 million for health care, it’s laughable because that is less 
money than this government pays out in a month just to service the provincial deficit. 
And that has to be remembered by the people of Saskatchewan that are paying this tax. 
And it is remembered and that’s why people resent this tax so much. 
 
This lottery tax, this hospital tax, as I began saying, is really nothing but a hoax tax. It’s 
nothing more than a ploy to convince Saskatchewan people that health care is simply too 
expensive to afford; the provincial treasury can’t afford it. And no wonder, because this 
government’s priorities are all wrong. When there’s $240 million for Weyerhaeuser and 
there isn’t money to deal with hospital waiting lists in the province, and to reduce those 
waiting lists from record highs, then there’s something rotten in the state of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When there is 280 or $290 million in grants and loan guarantees for Cargill corporation, 
which is the world’s largest private grain corporation, and there isn’t money to 
adequately staff Saskatchewan’s hospitals, then there’s something rotten in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
When there’s $5 million to invest in a hogus-bogus GigaText Translation scam, so that 
people can fly around the country in jets and Saskatchewan people can pay the bills, then 
there’s something rotten in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When there’s $9 million to celebrate the provincial birthday party, and there isn’t money 
to deal with rehabilitation services in Saskatoon’s rehabilitation centre, then there’s 
something rotten in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And people in Saskatchewan know where that rot is located. It’s located right in the 
highest places of government. It’s permeated this government for the last number of 
years, and it’s time for a change, people are saying. It’s time for a change. We’ve got to 



get rid of this sick, rotten government. We’ve got to have a government as good as 
Saskatchewan people. We’ve got to get rid of this kind of hogus-bogus hoax legislation 
calling . . . fund-raising ploy, a hospitals tax, when it’s only a prelude to getting rid of a 
universal health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
People know what this government’s agenda is; it’s to dismantle health care. It’s to take 
care of their own friends and its own welfare. And they’ll recognize this piece of 
legislation for what it is, nothing more than part of the larger Tory hoax. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to enter briefly into this debate 
tonight on the Bill before the legislature relative to the rather innovative hospital tax that 
the Minister of Finance announced in the budget speech some several months ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we have heard tonight, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP come out clearly against the 
hospital tax. We’ve heard the last member speak. The last member who spoke referred to 
it as a hoax, Mr. Speaker. The other member put some other labels on it, Mr. Speaker. 
But what they are clearly saying is that they’re against levying a tax on bingos and break-
opens and lotteries to support our hospitals and hospital system and our health care 
system in this province, Mr. Speaker. This tax, Mr. Speaker, was intended and is 
designed to give hospitals, specific hospitals in this case, some additional funding. And 
the NDP have clearly said they’re against that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members of the legislature, I ask my 
colleagues: after this tax was announced in the budget, Mr. Speaker, and they went to 
their constituencies and talked to the people in their constituencies, whether it was 
housewives or ranchers or teachers or nurses or technicians or lawyers or truck drivers — 
I don’t care what walk of life they were from, Mr. Speaker — when you talked to those 
people after this lottery tax was announced in the budget, did people say to you that that 
was an awful idea, that it was wrong, that it shouldn’t be done, Mr. Speaker? No, Mr. 
Speaker; in fact, quite the converse is true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can speak from personal experience at my riding. I didn’t even bring this issue up 
in conversations, and before you could barely get a hello out, people were saying what a 
good idea that is to tax bingos and lotteries and break-opens, Mr. Speaker, what a good 
idea it is to tax that segment of the gambling industry. That’s income, that’s money that 
people spend voluntarily, Mr. Speaker. And what a good idea that is to have that kind of 
tax. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, if you remember, on the days after the budget speech was 
reported across Canada other jurisdictions, including some of the newspapers of the day, 
too said what an innovative idea that is, that hospital tax. 
 



And in fact, Mr. Speaker, as you talk to people, the more they thought about this . . . In 
fact, some of them have been saying, well that should have happened years ago, and a lot 
of them would make mention of the Irish sweepstakes and that how that money was 
dedicated towards hospitals and that at tome time or other their mother or father or 
brother or sister or uncle or aunt had bought those kinds of tickets some several years 
ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s unfathomable to me, Mr. Speaker, as to why the NDP, if they are really in touch 
with their constituents, how they could come out against a tax on lotteries and bingos, 
Mr. Speaker, with the funding being dedicated to hospitals. Because clearly the people 
support that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now why then are the NDP against the tax? Well tonight, Mr. Speaker, we heard a new 
low in rationale in this legislature. We heard a new low, Mr. Speaker. And I know that’s 
hard for members to believe, given the level of debate we’ve experienced on the potash 
Bill in this House. 
 
But tonight, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that was stated, in fact the reason, the reason 
that the NDP critic stated as to why they’re against this tax after talking to people in and 
about the province, why they’re against this tax, Mr. Speaker, is that there aren’t enough 
buttons on the cash register, Mr. Speaker. Can you believe it, Mr. Speaker, that somehow 
because the cash register doesn’t have enough buttons, that this administrative glitch 
can’t be overcome so that we can’t raise money for hospitals in this province, Mr. 
Speaker? Now if that isn’t the weakest reason I have ever heard. 
 
(2015) 
 
Now I don’t know. Maybe in that area, Mr. Speaker, where that member is coming from, 
maybe they still have water-cooled cash registers too. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. But that 
has to be one of the weakest reasons I have ever heard for standing in the way of 
supporting hospitals through a tax, is because there isn’t enough buttons on the cash 
register, Mr. Speaker. That is a new low in debate in this House. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how low will the NDP stoop in terms of pretending to be a 
responsible opposition? How low, Mr. Speaker? Do they really care about what’s going 
on or are they looking for some little self-interest here that they can sort of exploit to their 
own advantage? I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is what their motivation is. 
 
They are looking to see what political gain they can get out of this apparent initial 
administrative hassle that I think many people would observe has taken place with the 
introduction of the tax — a minor inconvenience. I would argue, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re missing the fundamental point, Mr. Speaker. Do people think it’s a good idea to 
tax bingos and lotteries to support health care? And the answer resoundingly is yes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



I ask one other fundamental question, Mr. Speaker, one other fundamental question 
relative to this debate tonight. We all know, Mr. Speaker, that health care is a complex 
area. The Premier and the Minister of Health have seen fit — because of the changing 
demography, because of the changes in technology, because of changes in health in terms 
of life-styles, Mr. Speaker, for many reasons, Mr. Speaker — the Premier and the 
Minister of Health have struck a blue-ribbon commission to plot our health care strategy 
for the next decade and more, Mr. Speaker, for the next 25 years. 
 
Medicare has served us well. Under Progressive Conservative ministers of Health, 
medicare has even done better than it did under the NDP. But, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 
NDP, the Progressive Conservatives know that you can’t just stick your head in the sand, 
close your eyes, and pretend that the world is not changing, and everything will be all 
right if we just go along the way we have been. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know, we know in this Progressive Conservative caucus that in 
the area of the changing health care needs of society there are no place for NDP 
dinosaurs, Mr. Speaker. We know that. We also know that in dealing with complex issues 
like health care there are no easy answers, whether the question is dealing with an 
increasingly elderly population, Mr. Speaker, or financing health care. 
 
We all know it takes a lot of money. For example, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, as I 
understand it, for a family of four, if you divide the health care expenditure by the 
number of families in the province, it works out to something in excess of $5,000 is spent 
on average for an average family of four. 
 
Now you and I both know, Mr. Speaker, there’s probably no such thing as an average 
family. But of all the tax dollars we collect from the people across the province who give 
them, for the most part willingly, many of those tax dollars are pledged to the health care 
system. And on average for a family of four, we redistribute $5,000 of the wealth that 
people have created in this province. Quite a princely sum, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 
deterrent fees, no premiums, Mr. Speaker. Collect the taxes and pay the bills on behalf of 
the people. 
 
And yet we all know that there is more that we could do and we would like to do, Mr. 
Speaker. And as this commission plots that course, I’m sure we will see that strategy 
unfold over the months and years ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I raised this point, Mr. Speaker, for this reason. We recognize that there is changes 
and changes that must be made, but do the NDP dinosaurs? I would suggest not, Mr. 
Speaker, because it doesn’t matter whether it’s a health care commission or a health care 
or hospital tax on lotteries, they are against everything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The have absolutely refused to put one alternative forward. The Health critic consistently 
sits on her hands, Mr. Speaker, or if issues are raised in this House, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
of a guerrilla tactic nature. Mr. Speaker, no substance, no vision of the future — 
condemns the health care commission, condemns the hospital tax. 



 
Mr. Speaker, times are a-changing and so must we. We cannot afford to stick our head in 
the sand, close our eyes, cover our ears, Mr. Speaker, and pretend that everything will be 
all right. 
 
I am telling you, Mr. Speaker, on health care, on agriculture, in small business — it 
doesn’t matter the area; industrial policy, Mr. Speaker — the NDP are bankrupt of ideas, 
and we see that in spades tonight in this debate, Mr. Speaker. They are bankrupt of ideas. 
And I’ll tell you, the classic example of how bankrupt they are, Mr. Speaker, is 
characterized by the lethargy in the NDP leadership race. 
 
They are torn, Mr. Speaker . . . It doesn’t matter whether it’s health care or any other 
issue, they are torn between clinging to the past, pretending all is well, and if all else fails, 
as the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg well knows, scare the people. Tell them 
you’re going to close down the hospitals. That’s their idea of responsible opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, are at a break point. Either they can continue to cling to the past 
or they can join us. They can join us with new and innovative programming in health 
care, like a hospital tax, Mr. Speaker. They are bankrupt of ideas. In fact, someone has 
characterized the NDP leadership race as a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m not sure that the NDP leadership race is on topic, and I 
bring that to the member’s attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, they are at a break point. Whether it’s health or 
anything else, Mr. Speaker, they are either clinging to the past; they’re engaging in 
fearmongering and scaremongering, Mr. Speaker, but cannot, cannot enunciate or devise 
a strategy for the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on this hospital tax issue, Mr. Speaker, that’s yet another example of this same 
lethargy —another example of the same lethargy — because you see, if you listen to their 
arguments here tonight, Mr. Speaker, they’re against the hospital tax. And the critic also 
said, and we’re against the other five taxes that this government has put in place, things 
like flat tax, etc., etc., Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet we also know, Mr. Speaker, we also know, Mr. Speaker, that when the 
government moves to try and curb spending, they’re all in an outrage about cut-backs. So 
here we have them, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand they don’t want us to increase taxes, to 
spend more on health care for the families of this province. They don’t want us to cut 
back on spending, Mr. Speaker. So what’s left? Let the deficit go up? Do they want that, 
Mr. Speaker? Do they want to see us transfer a mortgage from our generation onto our 
children’s back and our grandchildren? Well that would be typical of NDP socialist 
mentality, Mr. Speaker, but it is not the Progressive Conservative way, Mr. Speaker. 
 



And I think this Minister of Finance and this Premier and this Progressive Conservative 
caucus, whether the issue is health or anything else, have always struck that balance, Mr. 
Speaker, between asking for the people to give us more in taxes, holding the line on 
spending, and at the same time getting that monster deficit under control. 
 
And I stand by what we’re doing, whether the issue is hospital tax or fiscal policy in this 
government, Mr. Speaker, at all. Because you see, Mr. Speaker, the NDP cannot have it 
all ways. They can’t have it all ways. They can’t say, no tax increases; don’t cut back on 
spending; and reduce the deficit. 
 
You see, you can’t have it all ways, Mr. Speaker. There’s only a couple of ways you can 
deal with that equation. Either you raise taxes or cut spending. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
the hospital tax is a very fair and reasonable tax. And I’m telling you what, Mr. Speaker, 
so do the constituents of Weyburn, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Nobody every really 
wants to pay more taxes. They know in their heart that they probably have to pay because 
it’s taxes that fund some of the things that we all consider important. 
 
I think Winston Churchill, as my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said, put it as 
well as anyone, and I’ll paraphrase it because I can’t recall the exact quotation. But he 
said some several years ago, Mr. Speaker, that people ought to be proud to pay taxes, 
because they build our schools, they provide us with our hospitals, they build roads. But 
he went on to add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, that he’d be just as proud to pay half as 
much. And isn’t that the case with all of us. We’d all like to pay less, but we all want 
more service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people here in Saskatchewan are no different. We don’t want to pay more taxes than 
necessary. We want to see them spent prudently. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker. In 
Weyburn, Saskatchewan and all across Saskatchewan, they see the hospital tax on 
lotteries and bingos and break-opens and that form of gambling, Mr. Speaker, as prudent 
taxation policy and in favour of a changing health care system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just say to the NDP, break out of the leashes, throw off the chains 
that fetter them and bind them to the ideology and the way of the past. Join our Minister 
of Finance, join our Premier, join our Minister of Health in courting and putting together 
this new vision for the future. 
 
Can’t we just once put aside these partisan arguments, this stooping to, I don’t have 
enough keys on my till to record a tax. Can’t we look beyond that just once in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, and do something on behalf of the people and the families in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Because that’s why I’m going to support this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. Because it makes sense in Weyburn, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, well I have just witnessed a case 
of extreme intellectual dishonesty in this legislature. When the member from Weyburn 



reduces the critic’s argument to buttons on a till, I say that that’s intellectual dishonesty, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The New Democratic opposition is against the levying of this tax, Mr. Speaker, because it 
is against a tax on bingos and lotteries to help hospitals, because it is not a dependable tax 
and because it is a tax on the poor. And that’s a very simple concept, Mr. Speaker. There 
is no guarantee in the legislation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from Weyburn did not 
acknowledge to this legislature that there’s no guarantee in the legislation that this tax 
will, in effect, go to hospitals. Au contraire, Mr. Speaker, he said it was dedicated to 
hospitals. Nowhere is that dedication that this tax will go to hospitals. In that sense he 
was also intellectually dishonest. Mr. Speaker, intellectually dishonest in his arguments. 
There is nothing in the legislation that guarantees the tax will go to hospitals — nothing. 
And for that reason we have called this a hoax, because that tax will go into the 
consolidated revenue, Mr. Speaker, and will be used for the GigaTexts of the PC 
government. 
 
There are a number of ways that we can raise revenues for health care, Mr. Speaker, a 
number of ways, and I do agree that it is necessary to raise revenues for health care. We 
do it through the proper management and development of our resources, instead of selling 
it off to large out-of-province corporations. We use the revenues from our resources for 
developing our health and education programs. We tax wealthy investors and 
corporations fairly, Mr. Speaker, instead of taxing ordinary people in this province and 
taxing people who play the lotteries and bingos, who are in many cases low income 
people in the province, Mr. Speaker, because often this is their only form of enjoyment. 
 
What we do is we eliminate waste and mismanagement from government which we have 
witnessed repeatedly throughout the years — PC waste and mismanagement to the tune 
of 4 or 5 million in the GigaText scandal, for example, Mr. Speaker. We eliminate self-
serving advertising at the rate of millions of dollars being conducted by the PC 
government. We eliminate large sums of money being paid for empty office space in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2030) 
 
And these arguments have been set out and made repeatedly in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
What we need is a good government with good management, a government that can 
manage our resources and our revenues and our income for the benefit of the people and 
that doesn’t have to put a tax on people whose only pleasure may be playing bingo or 
playing the lotteries, whose only hope may be with winning a lottery, Mr. Speaker. 
 



As I indicated earlier, there’s nothing in this Bill that dedicates, to use the words of the 
member from Weyburn, that dedicates this tax to hospitals — nothing. And can we 
believe the member from Weyburn and the PC government? I say no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government said that there would never again be a gas tax, never in the history of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, when you drive up to the pump, do you pay a gas tax? 
Yes you do, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, do you get a rebate? Well only if you submit 
it, Mr. Speaker; only if you do, and many people don’t. But the fact of the matter is that 
the government collects that gas tax when you drive up to the pump and it has that money 
in its coffers for several months before it’s rebated to you. That’s hardly consistent with 
the earlier statement that there would never be a gas tax in the history of the province. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know they can’t believe them. They know that. They 
promised that there’d be no sales tax, and what do we see is an increase in the sales tax. 
They promised a reduction in income tax, and what we’ve seen is an increase in income 
tax. They promised no privatization of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. The member’s comments are totally 
irrelevant. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members by and large have been relevant in their comments 
tonight and I ask the member also to be such. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just for the benefit of the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who has a little bit of difficulty getting from A to C, let me 
repeat the line of argument here. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the member from Weyburn said that this money was 
dedicated to hospitals. There’s nothing in writing to that effect, and even if there was 
something in writing, Mr. Member, we know that we cannot believe you on your 
statements and your promises. 
 
And I am setting out on a point-by-point basis, which I can understand you would not 
want to hear. I am setting out promises that have been made by your government, some 
of them in writing, that you have systematically breached and broken trust with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Now, Mr. Member, do you understand a little more clearly? 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Point of order. The member’s comments are totally irrelevant. 
 



The Speaker: — Order. I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of order, and it is the 
responsibility of the member to indicate the relevance of her points. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I just indicated the relevance of my points, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg reminds me of my seven-year-old son. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe that perhaps if hon. members would stop debating 
personally with members from the desk, the debate would proceed in a more orderly 
fashion, and I ask the member to do that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s an insult to your son. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, it is an insult to my son; I’m sorry, I apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Weyburn indicated that the Minister of Health and the 
Premier had set up a blue-ribbon commission, that they set up a blue-ribbon commission 
because they wanted and desired this long-term plan for 10 or 20 years down the road. 
That’s what the member of Weyburn said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is that this government cut back and underfunded on health care to 
such a drastic extent that they created a crisis in the health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And the people of Saskatchewan were out for their political hide, Mr. 
Speaker, because of their mismanagement and their incompetence in administering our 
health care system in the province. They were in political trouble, and that is why they set 
up their health care commission, Mr. Speaker, not because they had any vision or any 
desire to implement a long-term strategic plan. 
 
We have witnessed in this province, over the last seven years, ad hoc decisions made by 
this government with respect to health care — arbitrary cut-backs, slashing and cutting at 
health care, Mr. Speaker, slashing and cutting in a ruthless fashion. And for the member 
from Weyburn to now claim that they have some high and principled reason for setting 
up a commission is simply ludicrous because their actions for the last seven years have 
told us entirely differently. They have indicated that health care is not a priority, that if 
they could have got away with it, they would have completely destroyed our health care 
system, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they told us in the last seven years. 
 
Now they’ve set up a commission and try to claim credit for this, and that their objectives 
are laudable. Well I don’t believe them for one minute, Mr. Speaker, and neither do the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. They’ve driven health care planners and health 
care professionals out of this province at record numbers — at record numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



And only yesterday or the day before there was an article in one of the papers about 
ophthalmologists and the difficulty, the long waiting lists for getting cataracts, and people 
are having to go to Alberta to get their cataracts paid and pay a portion of the medical 
fees for the procedure — just the other day in the paper. 
 
We still have long waiting lists in this province, Mr. Speaker, long hospital waiting lists 
for needed surgery that are unprecedented in the history of this province, completely 
unprecedented. And yet the minister, the member form Weyburn says, oh yes, we wanted 
a long-term, strategic plan. They say that now after they drove most of the health care 
planners out of this province, and health care professionals, with their underfunding to the 
health care system that demoralized the health care professionals in this province, and 
that caused them to leave because their working conditions were so poor and because the 
quality of health care that they were being allowed to deliver because of the financial 
restrictions was so substantially reduced from previous years. 
 
And the member from Weyburn stands in his place and goes on about how the New 
Democrats have no ideas. Well I remember, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I was just reviewing a 
speech that I had made earlier in this session in which we set out a New Democratic 
vision of health care. And the member from Weyburn, who stood up subsequently or 
shouted from his sleep . . . who woke up and shouted from his sleep, what vision, simply 
hadn’t listened for the five to 10 minutes preceding that. And he’s not listening every day 
he’s in this House, Mr. Speaker, because we have repeatedly told the PC government the 
directions they should be moving in health care. We’ve talked about preventative health 
care and the directions we should be moving, not some phoney self-serving advertising 
program like the Minister of Health would have you believe is his preventative health 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — We talked at length about this in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
asked for a community clinic study from the Minister of Health that shows that high 
quality health care can be delivered in this province at a substantially reduced rate. And 
does the public have access to this study some four or five months after we first asked the 
question? No, Mr. Speaker, we still can’t get that study. 
 
And that is the member from Weyburn’s, and the Minister of Health, and the Premier’s 
commitment to health care in this province. It doesn’t want the public to know how 
quality health care can be delivered. Instead it would prefer to levy a tax —a tax which 
will be a tax on many poor people in this province, Mr. Speaker; a tax that they say is 
dedicated to hospitals. But we know that we can’t believe them in that regard, Mr. 
Speaker, as I illustrated earlier on the numerous occasions on which they have broken 
their promise and on which they have broken trust with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
How can we believe now, Mr. Speaker, how can we possibly believe that they will 
actually dedicate this tax to hospitals? Well we can’t, Mr. Speaker, we simply can’t. and 



the people of Saskatchewan know that. This government opens a new building and 
doesn’t staff it, doesn’t have adequate staff. 
 
This government engages in self-serving advertising, self-serving advertising that they 
claim is preventative health care. This government now levies a phoney tax and it says, 
we have a vision for hospitals, we have a vision for health care. Well I say that is the 
extent of their vision, Mr. Speaker, that’s the extent of their vision. 
 
After seven years of cuts and reductions in services, it is obvious that they have no vision 
and no real commitment to health care. This tax is simply another way to raise money to 
put in the consolidated revenue with no real commitment to hospitals. There’s no real 
commitment in this Bill to hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a medical care system that is in crisis. We’ve seen cut-backs to the prescription 
drug plan that were causing untold suffering in this province — untold suffering, Mr. 
Speaker. And then they came in and tried to patch it up with a plastic card and they said 
oh, this is the greatest innovation in the world; it’s fantastic. We wouldn’t have needed 
the plastic card, Mr. Speaker, but for their incompetence and their harsh and cruel 
policies with respect to providing needed medication to the sick and elderly in this 
province. 
 
We have seen them privatize the school-based children’s dental plan. They privatized it 
and threw out some 400 dental workers who were out of employment as a result of their 
privatization procedures, and reduced the services that were available to children in this 
province —substantially reduced the services. We still have communities in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, who don’t have access to dental services. Oh yes, maybe they can 
drive to Moose Jaw or to a city somewhere, but they don’t have ready access in their own 
communities as they had enjoyed previously under the school-based children’s dental 
plan. 
 
We still see that in this province. We see unprecedented hospital waiting lists and staff 
that is grossly overworked, hospital staff, health care professionals who are grossly 
overworked, and I only have to look at the Minister of Health and the PC government’s 
initiative in the public health area. And the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg should 
be able to identify with that, because his was one of the constituencies that was involved 
and affected by the cut-backs to public health nurses and the twinning of the health care 
regions. 
 
As I recall, the people in that area were very concerned about that at the time, Mr. 
Speaker — very concerned. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the hon. member’s point of order? 
 



Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening to the member opposite very intensely, 
and I have yet to hear any relevancy in the last few minutes or four or five minutes in 
regards to the Bill that’s before us. She has not indicated, sir, and I tied it back into the 
Bill before us and has made no attempt to do so. I would tend to think that when we’re 
discussing this particular motion it should be either related back or she should be called to 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — I too have been listening to the hon. member’s remarks, and I must say 
that I too have been waiting for the hon. member to relate her remarks to the Bill. And on 
that basis, the point of order in this instance is well taken. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will describe for you my line of argument. I 
em describing a health care system that is in crisis. I am describing a health care system 
that has been rendered into a crisis situation because of this government’s policies. And 
what is this government’s answer to that? A tax on lotteries and bingos. That’s this 
government’s answer. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, there are the answers that are much better: cut the 
patronage; cut the waste and mismanagement; start developing the resources for the 
people of Saskatchewan rather than for the multinational corporations from the United 
States and overseas. That’s what the alternatives are to a lottery tax on bingos and on 
poor people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2045) 
 
What they are doing with respect to this lottery tax, as pointed out from the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, Mr. Speaker, is to set the groundwork, to set the groundwork for 
other health care initiatives on their part like deterrent fees or privatization of health care. 
 
What this government has been saying repeatedly for at least the last couple of years is 
that health care costs are spiralling out of control, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’re 
saying and that’s why they’re alleging they need to impose this lottery tax. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, in their brief to the health care 
commission, indicated that the allegation that health care costs are out of control or are 
completely unreasonable is an unfounded allegation without any substance. And that was 
clearly put out in the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association’s brief, and that is what we 
have been maintaining repeatedly in this legislature. 
 
It’s not that health care costs are out of control; it’s that those guys over there don’t know 
what they’re doing and when they do do something, do it completely incompetently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The Minister of Health has indicated that he is committed to preventative 
health care, Mr. Speaker. He’s committed to it. So he launches, he launches a self-serving 



advertising campaign in preventative health care, and he says the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan must pay for this self-serving, great, preventative health care program. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the taxation, the money raised through taxation would be far 
better spent, rather than on a self-serving advertising campaign, it would be far better 
spent if they . . . And I have said this repeatedly in this legislature on numerous occasions 
during this session, and obviously the member from Weyburn was not here at the time, 
but I will say it again. I will say it again, Mr. Speaker. The money would be much better 
spent if this government put community workers and public health workers out in the 
front lines working and helping people in the area of preventative health care. That would 
be a real preventative health care program, Mr. Speaker, not some self-serving, phony, 
advertising program. 
 
But instead they’ve cut back on public health nurses. They twin public health regions, 
and then they saw we need to tax because health care costs are spiralling out of control; 
refusing to recognize that through a proper preventative health care program, health care 
costs in the future can actually be contained, Mr. Speaker. And they refuse to understand 
that. And I hope that the member from Weyburn now has . . . takes note of that point 
which I have made repeatedly during this session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatchewan, the establishment of medicare has been a great accomplishment. It has 
been an emotional accomplishment for the people of this province, but something that the 
people can be proud of, Mr. Speaker. But it was never envisaged at the inception of 
medicare that we would have to resort to a lottery tax to pay for it, Mr. Speaker. Never 
before has that been the vision of any government, except for the government opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we need for funding health care is, as I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, proper 
management, proper development of our resources, proper taxation of wealthy 
corporations and investors. That’s how we fund health care. We look for new and 
innovative ways, Mr. Speaker, to contain costs but still provide the highest quality health 
care in this country, which we have had, Mr. Speaker, in the past except for the last few 
years under PC mismanagement and incompetence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it’s for those reasons, it’s for those reasons — not because 
of buttons on a till as the member from Weyburn would have the people believe —but 
it’s for those reasons, it’s for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that he New Democratic 
opposition will not support the imposition of a lottery tax when the government refuses to 
clean up its own house, cut out its patronage appointments, clean up its waste and 
mismanagement, and develop the resources in Saskatchewan for the benefit of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It give me a great deal of 
pleasure to enter the debate at this time to correct a few of the examples of 



misinformation that are being put forth by members of the opposition. I would point out 
to the member that no one questions the importance of medicare in this province and the 
value and the terrific program that we have and how fortunate we are, and nobody can 
question that. 
 
The problem is that we find with the NDP that they’ve never, every really come up with 
any good ideas as to how this has to be paid for, or the fact that it has to be paid for. 
There’s no doubt about it either, that when we look at ways of raising revenue, the main 
way that governments raise revenue is through taxes. That’s always been the case. I can 
certainly recall back in the time when the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — When we listen to members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
almost as if the only time that taxes have ever been put forward in this province is during 
the last seven years. But I can remember times in the 1970s when we had reasonably 
good times, and yet the taxes that the NDP kept putting on, I think, many people figured 
were fairly exorbitant at that time. Now it’s really something when they stand in their 
place and talk about taxes that we're imposing today. 
 
The role of government, Mr. Speaker, is to provide services for the people. And the way 
in which people can contribute to those services, of course, is helping to pay for them, 
and that’s of course why we have to have taxes. It’s a necessary evil. And the hospital tax 
is another example of where we have a source of revenue — a source of revenue, I might 
add, that has found favour with many people in the province. 
 
We’ve heard the member from Saskatoon Sutherland and the member from Regina 
Lakeview talking about the hospitals tax and trying to give it all sorts of names, but really 
it’s just another example, I think, of trying to mislead the people. There has never been a 
tax imposed in this province that has had the same amount of consultation as the hospitals 
tax. They make an awful lot of noise about the hospitals tax and that people are opposed 
to it and that there’s nowhere that it’s indicated that this is for health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that this has been clearly enunciated that this money 
is to go directly into health care and to hospitals. The only ones that don’t seem to be 
aware of that is people such as the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. It might be a 
good idea, Mr. Speaker, if he went home and talked to some of his constituents, because I 
know for a fact that many of them are in favour of the new hospitals tax. The money is 
definitely going to be going for hospitals; that’s already been designated and indicated 
where it’s going to be. 
 
The opposition members have made mention of the fact that this a tax on the poor. Well 
if lotteries are a tax on the poor, I think it’s quite interesting to note that one of the NDP 
methods of raising funds is to have lotteries. Now isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
They say that it’s going to be a tax on the poor because the poor are the only ones that 
buy lottery tickets. Well I find that highly unlikely. The taxes that are enforced right now, 



Mr. Speaker, apply to three things; they apply to bingo, to break-opens, and lottery 
tickets. 
 
During the month of June, Mr. Speaker, and this is about what the average has been in 
this province for break-open tickets — and I hope the opposition will pay attention to this 
— we are averaging just about $7 million in revenue. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to ask the hon. members to allow the Minister of Science and 
Technology to continue his remarks. Now I don’t think it’s necessary for the minister to 
be interrupted in his remarks by members in the House on a continuing basis; that 
shouldn’t be an integral part of debate. And let us allow the minister to continue in a 
reasonable manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The break-open tickets, the Nevada 
tickets in this province, Mr. Speaker, have been averaging about $7 million a month — 
$7 million a month. Now I don’t think that if you ask the average person on the street that 
if charging a 10 per cent hospital tax on break-open tickets is a bad idea, that they will 
think that it is a very good idea, and that more of this revenue should be going to 
something such as health care — $7 million a month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bingos — we’ve heard the members over there talking about the bingos and how this 
is unfair because it’s being charged on the poor and they’re the ones that play bingo. We 
know that many people play bingo, Mr. Speaker, but the tax on bingo is built right into 
the price of the bingo cards. There is no difference in the bingo parlours if you go in there 
today than if you would have gone in there prior to July 1. There may be a difference in 
so far as the prize is concerned, but bingo players in the province of Saskatchewan have 
been spoiled. The prize boards that we’ve had here in the province of Saskatchewan far 
exceed any other province in this whole country, so I don’t think that this is a hardship on 
the players to have the prize boards just a little bit smaller. 
 
Now the hospitals are the winner. I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that in the many, many 
consultation meetings that we had around the province — and I believe I attended all of 
them but one — we met with the commercial bingo hall operators. We met with the 
exhibition boards which run the casinos. And we had a very good response with the 
groups that we met with. 
 
Now there was no doubt about it that there were some people that were not . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . We had an excellent meeting, as a matter of fact, in Prince Albert, Mr. 
Speaker. The point that was raised up there, Mr. Speaker, was that this was absolutely no 
problem. There was no difficulty in charging a hospital tax of 10 per cent; in fact in some 
cases they thought it could be higher. 
 
Now as far as the hospitals tax is concerned, the main point that the people raised in the 
meetings that we had, Mr. Speaker; they were not opposed to the hospital tax per se; the 
main problem that they had was to how it was going to be implemented. And we listened 
very carefully, Mr. Speaker, to the many different groups that we met with and we tried 



to summarize all of the concerns that they had raised and the suggestions that they had 
put forth as to how this could be implemented. And the implementation that took place on 
July 1 was the feeling of all of those different groups that we met with from one corner of 
this province to the other. 
 
So for members on the other side to stand in their place and say that this is such a terrible 
thing, I would suggest that they need to go back and talk to more of their constituents. I 
can certainly assure the members of the opposition that in Saskatoon Mayfair that the 
residents there, in my constituency, feel that this is an excellent idea and another method 
of raising money that can go to a very good cause. 
 
Now, we just heard the Health critic from Regina Lakeview talking about this being 
another way of paying for health care. Well I believe that he Minister of Finance hopes to 
raise in the neighbourhood of 22 to 24 millions of dollars. 
 
Now I don’t think that we need to point out to the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government has committed $1.4 billion to health care this year, $1.4 billion. 
Now it’s not that we are paying for health care in any . . . We are just paying for a very 
small portion of it through something like a health or a hospital tax — $1.4 billion. 
 
Ask the members of the opposition how much they were spending in the last years that 
they were in power, and it certainly is a far cry from what we are spending today, Mr. 
Speaker. One of their answers that they had as to how they could save was to have a 
freeze on nursing home construction, a freeze on nursing home construction, Mr. 
Speaker, at a time when it was very, very badly needed. Now this government has had to 
try and play catch-up in constructing more nursing home beds for our seniors. 
 
So when the opposition members try to say that there’s no commitment for health care, 
Mr. Speaker, that is just so much nonsense, and the people of this province don’t buy it 
for one second. Compare our expenditures then, Mr. Speaker, to what they spent in the 
last years that they were in power. 
 
Now another thing I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, and that’s with regard to the fact that 
the latest speaker in the opposition, the member from Regina Lakeview, is condemning 
this government for the money being spent on the Everyone Wins or everybody wins 
program, that this is not a good idea at all. 
 
Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that every one of us has a responsibility not just to society but 
to ourselves, to take better care of our health because there’s not a person in this room 
that wouldn’t agree that health care costs are rising very, very rapidly. And this is a major 
concern not just in Saskatchewan. This is a major concern all across this country, and in 
fact in other countries throughout the world. How do we cope with rising costs of health 
care? 
 
(2100) 
 



So when we talk about spending some money on prevention, I think, Mr. Speaker, that it 
is very, very well spent. I would think that money being spent on an ad campaign like this 
certainly made much more sense than money that the NDP felt that they should be 
spending on the family of Crown corporations. They could have been saving a lot of 
money there too. 
 
Well we know that taxes are necessary, Mr. Speaker. The hospitals tax is just one 
example of a tax that people, I don’t feel for the most part, mind paying. They know 
where the money is going to be going. 
 
I’ve indicated what the effect is on bingo, and there shouldn’t be any difference from 
what there was prior to July 1. As far as the break-open tickets are concerned, the prizes 
may be a little bit smaller there but we’re certainly monitoring this very closely. When 
you’ve got $7 million being spent in a province that only has a population of 1 million 
people, that is a tremendous amount of money going into that area, and I don’t think that 
there’s anything wrong with having a hospital tax there. 
 
In so far as the lotteries are concerned, we have certainly seen to this point, probably in 
some cases, that there has been a slow-down in the ticket purchases. But I think that we 
would probably see that come back as people get used to it. 
 
I don’t think that when we consider the fact that people are buying these tickets with the 
idea of trying to win large sums of money, that on a dollar ticket that paying another 10 
cents is going to be any serious hardship for them. But when we consider the god use that 
this money is going to be put to, I think that it’s a very fair tax. 
 
The opposition also has talked an awful lot about some of the things that this government 
is doing that they’re very much opposed to, and they always keep making mention of 
things like Cargill. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t have economic 
development in the province, where are we going to have the increased revenues that we 
need to carry on our educational programs, to build our hospitals, and to provide the 
social services that we need for our citizens. 
 
So we are committed to economic development and through this, through diversification. 
This is one of the reasons too why we look at public participation and the importance that 
it has in helping to diversify our economy and raise our revenue so that we can provide 
more and more of these services. 
 
One other comment I would make, Mr. Speaker, and that’s to do with the fact that we 
know that there have been people leaving the province in the last few months. And I 
guess when we consider the fact that we’ve had a very severe drought for the last couple 
of years and that something in the neighbourhood of 14,000 jobs have been lost in 
agriculture, that it’s understandable why people would be looking for employment 
wherever they can get it. 
 



And going back into the good years when the NDP were in power, the good economic 
times, we had many people leaving the province then, Mr. Speaker, young people leaving 
our province and going and getting jobs elsewhere. So that’s not new, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We certainly have seen an increase in the number of people that are working in the 
manufacturing field and we’ll see that continue to increase as we continue to diversify 
our economy. So we need revenues to carry out these programs, Mr. Speaker. The 
hospitals tax is just one source of getting more money to carry out some of these 
programs. 
 
And for the member from Saskatoon Sutherland to try to say that we’re probably going to 
see this continue to rise and all the rest of it, is just again so much nonsense, trying to 
mislead the people. And here is a new tax that has been in force for one month. And 
you’d almost think when you listen to them that it’s been in force for a couple of years 
and that we’ve seen terrible, terrible things happen, that all of these different groups are 
really suffering hardships because they’re not getting the revenue that they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there hasn’t been enough time yet to see what the real effects of this are 
going to be, but I can assure you that as far as some of the areas that I have checked on to 
date, there has not been significant change. But we do have to continue to monitor and 
see what is happening. 
 
But to ask the majority of the people out there whether or not the hospitals tax is a good 
tax, they would say yes, it is. When you consider that we have in the neighbourhood of 
over 200 millions of dollars being spent on gaming in this province in the course of a 
year, I don’t think that anyone would disagree that there should be more of it coming to 
the government than $4 million. We’ve got a good amount of money, 35 to 40 million, 
that are going to charitable organizations, but only $4 million, Mr. Speaker, coming to the 
government in revenue. 
 
With the increased revenues from the hospital tax, then, we can provide more of those 
necessary services that the people of the province look forward to the government to 
provide. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I will certainly be opposing the amendment and voting in 
favour of the motion because I feel that the hospitals tax is a fair tax and it’s one that the 
majority of the people in the province of Saskatchewan will agree with. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, unlike the member from 
Saskatoon Mayfair who will be voting for the amendment, I will be voting in favour of 
the amendment because the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, are speaking by their 
actions of what they think about this tax. 
 



And the minister for consumer and corporate affairs can stand here in the legislature and 
say that all is well with the hospital tax — well what he calls a hospital tax. Everybody 
else in the province of Saskatchewan calls it by its right name, calls it by what it is, which 
is the lottery tax. 
 
Everybody in this province, despite what the minister says, knows that this tax is an 
unfair tax and that they have an opportunity to express themselves in this tax, Mr. 
Speaker, unlike unfair income taxes, which a great many people in this province are 
forced to pay, or unfair sales tax. 
 
The people of this province have a direct way of saying to the minister and to this 
government what they think about this lottery tax. And what the people of the province 
are saying, Mr. Speaker, about this unfair lottery tax is this: they’re saying, we’re not 
going to pay it. We’re not going to pay this tax, and the way we’re not going to pay this 
tax is that we are going to boycott the charities and lotteries which should benefit and 
which have by tradition in this province, have benefit from the lottery system that has 
been introduced in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the arrogant attitude of both the minister of commercial and 
corporate affairs, and despite the arrogant attitude of the Minister of Education, who think 
that they see all and know all in this particular issue, the facts of the matter are this, is that 
the people of Saskatchewan are giving you a message. 
 
They are saying to you, by not purchasing lottery tickets or by not going to the bingo 
halls, by boycotting your tax, they are saying to you that they do not believe, first of all, 
that that is revenue that is going to be generated for hospitals or for the health system or 
for the educational system. They’re saying that, well it may be a good idea if a portion of 
the lottery taxes go to education or health or wherever. They’re saying to you that they 
don’t believe that that’s where that revenue is going to go. 
 
They are saying to you that, instead of taking that money . . . because if you look at the 
Bill itself, Mr. Speaker, there is no mention that this money will be earmarked for health 
or education or any socially useful project. 
 
They are saying, as they did on the used vehicle tax — and I’ll get to that in a minute —
they are saying to this government that we don’t’ believe that the money is going to be 
used for anything other than to fill the pockets of your friends like the Bob Silzers of the 
Supercart kind of scam; like the Mr. Nices of the Joytec business scam; like the Guy 
Montpetit of the GigText business scam. That’s where the people of the province think 
that the money from this tax will be going. 
 
And they think that, Mr. Speaker, for very good reasons, because they have seen the 
educational and they have seen the health system in this province deteriorate since 1982. 
And they have seen the deficit in this province grow since 1982, and they have seen the 
fat cat Tory friends enrich themselves at the people’s expense since 1982. And the people 
of the province by boycotting the lottery tax are saying enough is enough, and we’re not 



going to make these Tory fat cats any richer any longer. And enough is enough, and 
we’re not going to pay this unfair tax. That’s what the people are saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they’re saying it. And you don’t have to believe me. You certainly don’t have to 
believe me, but you can believe, if you like — at least the government can believe, if you 
like — the Minister for Culture and Recreation. 
 
The Minister of Culture and Recreation was on a local television program yesterday here 
in Regina, and he got talking about the tax. And it was clear from the comments of the 
Minister of Culture and Recreation that hey, this was not the brightest idea that the 
Minister of Finance, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, has ever introduced in his 
life. It ranks up there with the used vehicle tax for bright ideas. 
 
And so the Minister of Culture and Recreation is saying no, we’re not particularly pleased 
at the response of the people of this province to that tax; no, we don’t think that this tax is 
carved in stone. And he said that in two months, in two months he is going to be urging a 
review, a review of the tax. Now, Mr. Speaker, you know and I know that when a 
government says we have to have a review, that we have to have a review of a tax — 
excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I was watching the antics of the Minister of Labour — that you 
know and I know, Mr. Speaker, that when there is a . . . 
 
Well the Minister of Labour is certainly entertaining the crowd here tonight, right, as is 
his wont, or certainly earning his reputation of the clown prince of the Tory caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I don’t think that’s quite relevant to the Bill or the amendment. 
I’d ask the member for Regina Rosemont to . . . 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, that it’s relevant only to the extent 
that the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan are paying this buffoon’s salary, but 
be that as it may, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you see a minister of the Crown performing like the Minister of Culture and 
Recreation did yesterday on television — backing off, trying to distance himself from a 
tax which is obviously unpopular, you know very well that the government has made 
another booboo, that the government has got itself into another bit of taxation hot water, 
that the government has gone ahead and once again used the polls. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
polls say this, the polls say yes, the majority of people in Saskatchewan would support a 
tax on lotteries going to health. 
 
What the polls didn’t say because the government didn’t ask them was, do you favour a 
tax on lotteries? That’s what happened. So the Minister of Finance, in another one of his 
brilliant coups, comes up, goes to the cabinet table and says listen folks, the folks would 
like out there — they would support a tax on lotteries for health care. They would support 



a tax on lotteries for health care, but he didn’t tell them that he didn’t ask the question, 
would you support a lottery tax? 
 
And what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is very simple. The people for this province do not 
support that lottery tax, and they’re showing it by a number of ways. One is, of course, 
the decrease in the sales of individual lottery tickets. Secondly is the decrease in the sales 
of group buying agreements, an incredible drop in the number of groups which are 
purchasing lottery tickets, going to Alberta and buying them, not because it costs 10 cents 
on the dollar. That’s not the real reason, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The real reason is they’re saying that I’m sick and tired; I’m fed up to here with paying 
money to a Tory government that wastes the money, that gives it to the Guy Monpetits, 
that puts it in their own back pocket, that ends up somewhere in somebody’s pocket 
who’s probably going to go to jail. All you have to do is open up the front page of every 
newspaper in the country and you see another Tory on his way to the slammer. 
 
And what the people of this province are saying is this — we don’t want to pay any more 
taxes to this group of people. And that’s what’s happening. That’s what’s happening. 
That’s what’s the politicization, if you like, of this tax. 
 
(2115) 
 
But this government is so arrogant, this government is so out of touch, this government is 
so much into being good managers of a system which they themselves have corrupted, 
that they don’t recognize the reality. They don’t recognize that there is a problem. They 
don’t recognize that there is a massive boycott of the lottery system in this province. 
 
They don’t recognize the hurt that is being done to the charities that benefit, the sports 
that benefit, the recreation and culture that benefits from this. They don’t recognize the 
fact that they are doing long-term irreparable harm to those people who depend on that 
lottery funding, because the people who depend on that lottery funding, because the 
people are changing their mind. 
 
If you go to kiosk operator and kiosk operator and kiosk operator and ask them, well has 
there been any bounce-back, has there been in increase since the initial shock wave of the 
tax, they’ll tell you no. In fact what they will tell you, kiosk operator after kiosk operator, 
they will say, I’m thinking of getting out of the lottery business altogether. I’m thinking 
of just packing it in. Or as one lottery operator told a colleague of mine, I’m not sending 
the tax money in. I’m not going to give them 1 red cent. I’m not collecting it and I’m not 
sending it in. 
 
That’s the attitude the people of this province have towards that lottery tax, Mr. Speaker. 
And it amazes me, it amazes me, although I guess it’s inevitable, I guess it’s inevitable 
given the composition of the front bench of that government, that they cannot recognize 
what in fact is the real life our there — what people are trying to tell them in real life. 



Instead what we have is the Minster of Labour in here trying to act like bozo the clown. 
Right? I mean, that’s not what the people of this province want. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member is not to make personal comments about 
people in the House, personal comments about what the ministers or members are doing 
in the House. I’d ask the member to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much for your ruling, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all 
members here know what’s going on so I don’t have to comment on it. 
 
I want to conclude my remarks this way though. I want to conclude my remarks this way, 
You know, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, what has to happen to this government is what the 
people from this province did to them on the used vehicle tax. Perhaps that’s what has to 
happen to them, Mr. Speaker. Right? 
 
You know when the people of this province had the used vehicle tax staring them in the 
face, they either didn’t buy used vehicles or found some way because of a friend of a 
friend that they bought the used vehicle from, they avoided paying the tax altogether. 
And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that’s the answer. 
 
Perhaps, you know, if everybody boycotted the lotteries for a week in this province, 
perhaps if there wasn’t 1 cent going into the lotteries the government would be forced to 
recognize the reality of what’s out there. Perhaps they’d be forced to recognize that the 
people for this province think this is an unfair tax. Perhaps they would understand that the 
charities in this province who are being squeezed and bled by the activities of this 
government, would then have something around which to rally. 
 
Perhaps if people boycotted the lotteries across this province and said they’re not going to 
get 1 red cent of tax money, perhaps then the front bench and in particular the Minister of 
Finance, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, would understand what the people of this 
province are trying to say. That’s maybe what it’s going to take, Mr. Speaker. Maybe it’s 
going to take a week long boycott of lotteries altogether. 
 
And if the people of Saskatchewan, I say this, if the people of Saskatchewan are 
concerned about the lottery tax — we know their concern, we’re concerned, we think that 
the tax is unfair — we want them to contact us. I want them, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province to contact our caucus office here in the legislature, room 265, or you can 
call us at 787-1890 or 1895 or 1900, or 787-1886, to contact us in the caucus office and 
tell us your concerns. 
 
We’re particularly interested in those kiosk operators who are hurting because of this 
government’s operation. We’re particularly interested in the charities, because we know 
out there that the charity revenue has fallen dramatically because the government has 
gone and cut first of all the prizes, and secondly, raised the licensing fee, and then thirdly, 
added this unfair lottery tax on top. 
 



So maybe what will happen, Mr. Speaker, that if all the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan get together and boycott the lottery for a week or two and let us know here 
in the opposition . . . and call the Premier’s office. By all means, call the Premier’s office. 
And you can call it collect, here in the legislature, and the Premier’s office will accept the 
collect phone calls. 
 
Perhaps if we’d begin to communicate in dramatic and real ways, the people for this 
province can speak together, maybe then can get the same result that the people of the 
province got with the used vehicle tax. Because the people of the province forced the 
same government to back down on tax, blatantly unfair, blatantly unpopular, and a tax 
which inspired a tax revolt in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all the people of Saskatchewan to contact us. I invite the people of 
Saskatchewan to boycott the lottery — join all the other people in the province who are 
boycotting the lottery — to go ahead and let this government know that you think that 
this tax is an unfair tax. 
 
We in the opposition are fighting the tax here in the legislature. We want the people of 
Saskatchewan out there to fight this unfair tax along with us. That’s the way, that’s the 
only way that this arrogant and insensitive government will listen to you. Go ahead and 
keep up the struggle. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was not really 
going to enter into this debate for too long a time, but I did want to make some remarks 
regarding some of the matter that the member from Rosemont had brought up in a very 
radical, systematic way. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir that it does not surprise me, the member from Regina 
Rosemont, in raising some of the more radical ways of being able to handle an issue in 
this province. The member is well versed on boycotts and strikes and everything else. 
And I would say it’s a fairly indecent way of having to have to debate an issue in the 
House. 
 
I want to say, though, that in regarding the expenditures of this government towards 
health care, that the reasonable people that are watching the procedures here tonight, 
and/or the people of Saskatchewan that basically have not the time to pay attention to 
some of the ridiculous comments of the NDP and/or even to listen to the procedure here. 
 
Do understand that a government does not have money just through the fact of having a 
machine to print it out. The moneys are raised through taxations, and those taxations are 
therefore then doled out amongst all the various different lobbyist groups throughout the 
province. 



 
And I want to indicate to you, sir that this government takes pride in what they’ve done 
for health care in this province. We’ve now hit an all-time high and it’s been totally my . . 
. some even of my lobbying on behalf of my constituents. The reasons is for the 
escalating costs in health care. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, sir, that it does not come from this government directly, the 
idea of building new hospitals or creating new nursing positions or adding new doctors 
and specialists into the particular health care field, or building new nursing homes or 
these kinds of things. 
 
Sir, where those ideas come from is the grass roots. It comes right down from the elected 
representatives on hospital boards or on municipalities or town councils. Representation 
comes from those individuals; they then lobby their MLAs, especially those on the 
government side. I’m not so sure whether there’s anybody even talking to members on 
the opposition, the NDP opposition side but, sir, I know on several occasions I’ve been 
lobbied for hospitals and nursing homes. I’ve been lobbied for various types of health 
care funding in my constituency, and I know other colleagues of mine have also been 
lobbied for this constituencies. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, sir, that I have 125-bed, brand-new, swanking hospital built 
in the city of Lloydminster. And I tell you, I have a 25-bed hospital built in the 
community of Maidstone in my constituency. And I have a brand-new hospital built in 
Cut Knife, Saskatchewan, along with a brand-new nursing home, and a brand-new 
nursing home in Lloydminster. 
 
And these, sir, don’t come from strict politics entering into it or anything. That comes 
from the heart of individuals at the grass root beginning to lobby the government to 
recognize the needs in their communities, to recognize the fact hat these people need this 
type of care in their communities. These are what the dollars are spent on. 
 
And I’ll tell you, sir, here’s another thing. When they get the nod for these facilities, these 
community minded people, they’re proud of the fact that they’re able to go ahead and 
build these facilities. And what do they do, sir? They hire an architect, and they get right 
down there with that architect and they say, now we want to have a nice, presentable 
facility for these people that are going to have to use these facilities. 
 
And nobody wishes anybody to have to use a hospital; nobody wishes anybody to have to 
eventually have a nursing home and that kind of health care help. But I’ll tell you, sir, 
when they are there, they want to have a bright kind of atmosphere for these individuals. 
 
And they sit down there and they plan, and they plan hard. They spend many hours, many 
days and weeks and months and years in planning these types of facilities. And they do it 
a lot of the time and most of the time, in fact, 99.9 per cent of the time, most of this, is all 
volunteer labour, all volunteer. And I’ll tell you, I’ll take my hat off to those individuals 



for putting in those kinds of hours and dedication towards the betterment of health care in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t think it’s for members opposite or the NDP or the government, even in the 
Progressive Conservative government here, to take total credit for the health care in this 
province. I take my hat off to the ladies and gentlemen and youth of this province that are 
out there and in a meaningful way are willing to put forth some decent health care 
facilities and health care through labour and sweat and tears. And I’ll tell you something, 
I’m proud of those people out in those local areas, and I think you ought to be too. 
 
When you people, when the NDP, sir, stand up and criticize this government, well I want 
to invite everybody that’s listening that that criticism has to then pass through this 
government right back to those local communities. As they criticize this government for 
building those facilities and for spending those kinds of dollars on health care, sir, then 
they are criticizing the very fact that those people at the grass root are being blamed the 
same as they’re blaming this government. 
 
And I want to indicate, I want to indicate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There’s the 
member from Moose Jaw. He’s saying oh yes, yes, yes. He’s saying that in Moose Jaw 
people are telling him what to say and this is what . . . and so he comes here like a robot 
and he says some things. 
 
I don’t believe that people in Moose Jaw are talking to that member. I don’t believe that 
for a minute, because I think those people in Moose Jaw understand and feel for the need 
of health care in this province. And I don’t say, sir, that this government is done all it 
should or could do in health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And the member’s cheer, that’s fine, the NDP members cheer like a 
bunch of radicals, they cheer. But I’ll tell you, sir, we’ve doubled the health care 
expenditures in seven short years in this province, and the NDP, they cheer snidey 
remarks, they have a sneer on their face, and they make jests at this government’s 
expenditures to health care in this province. 
 
I want to say, sir, that when it comes to the people of this province, they can take pride, 
they can take pride because we are leaders amongst the health care field throughout this 
country and North America. In fact, the world looks at Saskatchewan as far as health care 
concerned. 
 
And I want to say to you, when you have doctors coming from South Africa or India or 
England or wherever, United States, and they’re settling in this great country of ours and 
in this province of ours, I want to indicate to you that once they get in here and get the 
feel of the people in this country, they understand that we have one of the best systems 
and they’re working within one of the best systems. 
 



(2130) 
 
The nurses, I take my hat off to nurses. The long hours and the tedious hours that they 
have to put in time and time again. You people snicker at those individuals, and I say, 
shame on the NDP opposition for that particular type of thing. 
 
But these kinds of dollars, sir, these kinds of dollars go towards that kind of health care, 
those long hours that the nurses and doctors spend in these facilities. And these dollars go 
towards the facilities. 
 
I just want to say, it goes right back through, sir, to the grass roots, that’s where the ideas 
start; that’s where the ideas start, and it comes forward to government. We don’t go 
hunting, sir. The government doesn’t go hunting to spend dollars unnecessarily. It’s the 
people that come to government and tell us about the need. And here the NDP say, well 
there’s such a great need out there. Well, sir, I agree, there is a great need out there, and 
there will continually be a great need out there as science changes, as health care changes, 
and new technology comes aboard. There’s going to be phenomenal changes in the 
future. But I’ll say they won’t ever recognize it, sir, because they’ve had their head in the 
sand for so many years it’s pathetic. They can’t see darkness for darkness, I’ll tell you. 
It’s just . . . it’s unreal. 
 
But I’ll say, sir, I’ll say this government, this government has a commitment to the people 
in this province. This government will continue to have a commitment to the people in 
this province, will continue to help the people strive for a better health care system in this 
province. 
 
And I, sir, am going to be proud, am going to be proud in the years to come to be serving 
on this side of the House and watch the deterioration of all these radical NDP members 
who can only through radical accusations, through talking out of the side of their mouths, 
never speaking facts, never speaking the truth, but saying anything to gain any kinds of 
means, sir — to gain any kind of means. And I’ll tell you, sir, that is low. That is a low 
type of life. 
 
I have never seen this Assembly in such a low from where those radicals, the NDP 
radicals, have taken this legislature. They have brought this legislature to an all-time low, 
and that’s because of speaking out of the sides of their mouth. They laugh, they laugh. 
 
The member that’s on the camera, sir, tries to talk in all sincerity, but as the member’s 
saying and talking and trying to say things that aren’t quite fact, members off on the side 
are laughing and jeering and all this kind of thing. And that’s the kind of thing, if the 
people of this province could only understand. 
 
But I’ll say, sir, I can say one thing. The dollars raised through this tax is going to be a 
test to the provincial people. I don’t ask them to boycott the lottery, I ask them to take 
part in the lottery. I ask them to help out the health system of this province. I ask the 
people to partake in helping out the young people in their sports activities. 



 
The members opposite are asking just the opposite. They’re asking for the boycott for a 
week or two weeks that cost this province hundreds and thousands of dollars. Well that’s 
fine. That’s typical radicalism. 
 
But I say, sir, is that those dollars are going to be well spent. They’ll go into health care. 
And I want to say we have programs set aside for our youth in this great province, but not 
only the youth, but for all ages. We have a community sport facility grant program now 
which enhances the arenas, the curling rinks, the golf courses, the golf . . . all these kinds 
of things that are set aside from even this kind of program. 
 
And I’ll say to you, sir, that I’m proud of this government for having all the 
determination to bring forth new and innovative programs. Sure, sir, there are people in 
this province that don’t like change, and I’ll tell you, that’s the NDP, sir. They don’t like 
the change because they know that if there is a change and it’s a positive change, that 
they would never stand a chance for re-election as a government in this province. 
 
And I, sir, will do whatever it has to make sure that the NDP never do have an 
opportunity to govern and take this province backwards into what they say is backwards 
into the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I only want to speak very briefly on this particular Bill 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . and if I get as much applause at the end of my remarks as I did 
at the beginning, I’ll be quite happy. 
 
I did want to say a word about the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster. I wonder if the 
member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster canvassed the kiosk operators in Lloydminster to see 
what they thought of this legislation. And I wonder to see what they thought of this 
legislation. And I wonder, when the minister is closing debate on this particular Bill, 
whether he’ll tell me whether the conditions of this Bill will apply to the people of 
Lloydminster, Saskatchewan. We’d like to know that because it will either destroy or 
elevate the remarks of the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. We’ll get a chance, 
we’ll get a chance probably; if the Minister doesn’t answer in closing remarks, we’ll get a 
chance in committee to ask the Minister that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 72, which begins an entirely new PC tax in Saskatchewan, is 
another unspoken admission of the failure by this PC government. That’s exactly what it 
is. You see, Mr. Speaker, this government is getting near the taxation pain threshold of 
the people of Saskatchewan, if they’re not already past it — the taxation pain threshold. 
It’s something that people will tolerate; they’ll tolerate taxation and more taxation. 



Eventually they get to the point where the duplicity of the government in continuously 
saying one thing and doing another, gets to the point where they no longer can bear the 
pain, and I think this particular Bill will illustrate that point. 
 
This government in its comments about taxation has said to the people of Saskatchewan, 
we’re going to reduce the provincial income tax by 10 per cent. Instead, of course, they 
have added the 2 per cent flat tax. They said they would completely remove the E&H 5 
per cent tax; they haven’t done that. They’ve increased it to 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker, as 
you’ll be quite aware of. Hundreds upon hundreds of fees and charges have been raised 
by this government since they became the government. 
 
Let me just give you an example, Mr. Speaker. The birth, marriage, and death certificates 
to the people of Saskatchewan have gone up 300 per cent under this government — 300 
per cent. That’s just a small sample, a small sample of the increase in taxation that this 
government’s put on. 
 
They have inaugurated an entirely new prescription drug fee of $125 per family, plus a 20 
per cent deterrent fee on prescription drugs, a sick tax of 20 per cent. But they told the 
people that, you know, we’re going to protect and improve your health care plan. But 
what they’re doing is they’re putting a deterrent fee on prescription drug plan. 
 
You will remember, no doubt, Mr. Speaker, the guarantee, and I have a carbon copy of 
the guarantee here. And this is a guarantee that’s signed by the very minister that brought 
in this Bill, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance. This is his 
guarantee, and it’s on the keystone of their program, their election program which is 
health care. They said, we can do it better than the NDP can do it. They told the people of 
Saskatchewan that, and the Minister of Finance signed this guarantee which says: 
 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan rejects any form of deterrent 
fees or health insurance premiums. 
 

False. 
 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan will abolish the unfair 
deterrent fees for prescription drugs. 
 

False. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they tell you one thing and they do another. That creates a credibility gap, 
creates a credibility gap. As long as they keep telling you one thing and doing something 
else, then with this government what they do speaks so loud I cannot hear what they say. 
What they do speaks so loud to the people that they cannot hear what they’re saying. And 
this is a serious situation for a government to get into, but they’ve got themselves into this 
position just on health care, leave aside many other things. 
 



How many times, Mr. Speaker, have we seen a gambler desperate at his losses finally 
realizing that the house always wins, decides to set up his own operation, muscle out the 
competition and reap the profits. With this tax, Bill 72, we see a government desperate 
for cash moving into the gambling operation directly. That’s what we see in this Bill 72, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Does this government qualify as the stereotyped desperate gambler that I’ve just 
described? What is the evidence? What is the evidence? First there is a gaping $4 billion 
hole in the government’s financial fabric, a $4 billion hole rent in the financial fabric of 
the province of Saskatchewan by this government. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, a government taking our province from a have province 
to have-not province in less than eight budgets — in less then eight budgets we’ve gone 
from a have province to a have-not province. We’ve gone from a positive surplus to near 
a $4 billion deficit in just less than eight budgets — less than eight budgets, Mr. Speaker. 
This government certainly qualifies as a really desperate gambler with the taxpayers’ 
money. 
 
Secondly, the Provincial Auditor in his recent report fully documents this government’s 
waste, mismanagement and lack of accounting for the taxpayers’ hard-earned dollars. The 
Provincial Auditor, the servant of this Chamber, points that out quite clearly, 
demonstrates it graphically. This government is gambling with the taxpayers’ money, and 
they want more taxpayers’ money to gamble with more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Provincial Auditor attests in his professional opinion that this 
government may be gambling with the taxpayers’ dollars. It’s quite possible. It’s quite 
possible because the auditor hasn’t been able to see the figures. 
 
There are other serious reasons why this government has become a desperate gambler. 
They have to support their expensive gambling habit; it’s called GigaText. That’s their 
expensive gambling habit. Over . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Point of order. That’s totally irrelevant. They . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I can’t hear the member’s point of order. Could you 
restate your point of order. 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — The member’s comments are totally irrelevant. There’s no relevance to 
The Hospitals Tax Act at all. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s point of order is well taken. The member was 
straying quite a long ways from the context of the Bill and the amendment that’s before 
the Assembly. I’d ask him to relate his comments to the Bill. 
 



Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d be very glad to relate my comments 
directly to this Bill, Bill 72, which is referred to as The Hospitals Tax Act — Bill 72 
under discussion. 
 
And I said this government has created an atmosphere in Saskatchewan where the 
taxpayer doesn’t trust them any more. The taxpayer feels that this money that the 
government’s taking in from many sources from all the people of Saskatchewan is being 
wasted. It’s being wasted on many things, one of them being GigaText, an operation 
where the government has poured over $5 million in, continues to pour it into GigaText 
at the rate of $50,000 a month. That’s taxpayers’ money that should be going to health 
care. We wouldn’t need this tax if this government would get the corruption out of its 
operation. We wouldn’t need this tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the tax extraction business, our 
Finance minister is being hailed as a unique innovator. 
 
I want to refer to a couple of articles in newspapers which refer to our Finance minister as 
a unique innovator. Here’s one from the Moose Jaw paper on April 1, 1989: 
 

As the old carny once said, you paid your money, you take your chances. Starting 
July 1, when you toss your dollar for one of the one in 14 million chances at Lotto 
6/49, you will have to come up with an extra dime for Uncle Gary, Saskatchewan 
is the first province in Canada to tack an extra tax on gambling. 
 

Let’s go to another paper. Let’s go to The Toronto Star. This is The Toronto Star of April 
19, just a couple of weeks later from Moose Jaw paper, and it says: 
 

Most people figure that modern governments have pretty well run out of sins to 
tax, but in his budget, Finance Minister Gary Lane from Saskatchewan has proven 
them wrong once again. His proposed 10 per cent levy on every bingo card and 
raffle or lottery ticket sold in Saskatchewan breaks new fiscal ground in Canada. 
The gambling tax is expected to raise nearly $27 million a year needed for 
Saskatchewan hospitals. 
 

Now obviously the Star hasn’t read the Bill, because they don’t know that this money is 
not dedicated to Saskatchewan hospitals, and you can’t trust what they say; you cannot 
trust what they say. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the heading on that article from the Toronto Star explains it all. It 
says, “Outside view, a devilishly clever tax.” Well I have to hand it to the Minister of 
Finance. It is a devilishly clever tax. 
 



Incidentally, this Bill, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, does not say that the money goes to 
the hospitals. It does not say that. This news item, as I stated, said that this is a devilishly 
clever tax. And it’s devilishly clever, Mr. Speaker, because it uses the cover of the 10 per 
cent tax for hospitals. The minister is not obligated to put the money into hospitals. 
Certainly a devilish new tax — the only one in Canada. 
 
Incidentally, this PC Finance minister also uses the cover of health and education in his 
fuel tax program. That’s a fuel tax they said they’d never put on. And I have it right here. 
He uses a cover of health and education. This is the interesting little brochure the 
Minister of Finance sends out when he sends your rebate tax, your rebate from the 
gasoline tax. 
 

The fuel tax was introduced to raise revenues for the funding of health and 
education and other vital programs. 
 

Well there is the Minister of Finance masquerading under the heading of raising money 
for vital programs such as health and education. It’s a cover; it’s a cover. The Minister of 
Finance has used it before, he’s using it again, and he’s going contrary to what he said. 
 
We can only speculate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether this new Tory tax will impress the 
taxpayers sufficiently, or will they go the way . . . or will this tax go the way of the used 
vehicle tax. 
 
The title of this Bill has 25 words in it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s really irrelevant, but 
it’s more than any other Bill has in the title of the Bill. It’s designed to confuse people 
about what the real intent of this new tax Bill is. But if you boil it all down, you boil it 
down, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a PC tax increase on top of many that they have already 
initiated. I think we should support the amendment and defeat the Bill. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 9:51 p.m. until 9:55 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 

Shillington 
Lingenfelter 
Koskie 
Thompson 
Brockelbank 
Upshall 
Simard 



Kowalsky 
Atkinson 
Anguish 
Goulet 
Hagel 
Calvert 
Lautermilch 
Koenker 
 
— 15 
 

Nays 
 

Muller 
Andrew 
Lane 
Taylor 
Smith 
Swan 
Muirhead 
Schmidt 
Hodgins 
Gerich 
Hepworth 
Klein 
Meiklejohn 
Martin 
Toth 
Sauder 
Johnson 
McLaren 
Hopfner 
Swenson 
Martens 
Baker 
Wolfe 
Gleim 
Neudorf 
Gardner 
Kopelchuk 
Saxinger 
Britton 
 
— 29 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
Yeas 

 
Muller 
Andrew 
Lane 
Smith 
Swan 
Muirhead 
Schmidt 
Hodgins 
Gerich 
Hepworth 
Klein 
Meiklejohn 
Martin 
Toth 
Sauder 
Johnson 
McLaren 
Swenson 
Martens 
Baker 
Wolfe 
Gleim 
Neudorf 
Gardner 
Kopelchuk 
Saxinger 
Britton 
 
— 29 
—  

Nays 
 

Shillington 
Lingenfelter 
Koskie 
Thompson 
Brockelbank 
Upshall 
Simard 
Kowalsky 
Atkinson 
Anguish 
Goulet 



Hagel 
Calvert 
Lautermilch 
Koenker 
 
— 15 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(2200) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 
Meiklejohn that Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting Gaming and the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Commission be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, since we last debated this Bill in the House, I’ve taken the 
opportunity of the time which has intervened to more carefully review the comments of 
the minister in his comment to the Bill. But I think more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
taken the opportunity to consult with a number of people within the province of 
Saskatchewan, in the community, who will be affected by the Bill. 
 
I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 67 has basically two broad issues which it covers. 
Bill 67 provides for the functioning and the operation of the Gaming Commission. It 
provides powers to the Gaming Commission for licensing and regulation of the operators 
of gambling in the province. That’s the one side of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other side of the Bill, summarized in part VII of this legislation is that part of the Bill 
which will now enable the government opposite to do two things: one, to become an 
operator of gambling in the province of Saskatchewan; and two, to introduce to the 
province of Saskatchewan electronic gambling. 
 
So what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill here that I describe as having good news and bad 
news. Mr. Speaker, in terms of those first provisions, the provisions that empower the 
Gaming Commission, particularly empowering the Gaming Commission to be able to 
license the providers of gambling opportunities in the province, is a welcome provision, 
Mr. Speaker, that provision is welcomed by myself, by members on this side of the 
House; it’s welcomed in the community; it’s welcomed by people who are in the 
gambling industry. That’s a welcome provision, and there’s no question that that 
provision of this Bill enjoys the support of all members on this side of the House. And, 
Mr. Speaker, if indeed that were the only provision within the Bill, this Bill would have 
no difficulty in finding passage through this legislature, no difficulty at all. 
 
The bad news, Mr. Speaker, the bad news is the provision in this piece of legislation that 
does the two things. One, it provides for an expansion of gambling in the province of 
Saskatchewan; and secondly, it provides that government opposite in fact can become a 
player, a manager within the gambling industry. 



 
Contrary to all our tradition in this province, where in the tradition of the province of 
Saskatchewan is that the only groups licensed to provide gaming and gambling 
opportunities are charitable groups, non-profit groups, agricultural societies, and so on, 
this allows the Government of Saskatchewan to enter that field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask, and I’ve asked this of a wide number of people in the province. I’ve 
asked a wide number of people; do we need, do we need in Saskatchewan today an 
expansion of gambling opportunities? Is that the first priority of the people of 
Saskatchewan? Is that what the people of Saskatchewan are asking for? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that seems to be the answer of the government opposite. We have a 
situation where literally thousands of people are leaving our province in record numbers 
and the government opposite seems to say the answer is, what do we need? — more 
gambling. That’s the answer, and we’ve got a situation where young people are unable to 
get into university because of quotas, and the government opposite brings legislation that 
says, what we need is more gambling. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people that I’ve talked to in the community simply do not see it 
that way. They do not see the need for an expansion of gambling activities in the province 
of Saskatchewan. This Bill would enable the government opposite to move Saskatchewan 
into the field of electronic gambling. members opposite are saying what that means now 
is the introduction of electronic bingo. There is nothing in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that 
prevents the government opposite from moving us beyond electronic bingo into other 
forms of electronic gambling, i.e., casino gambling, slot machines, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further to that is the question: does the Government of Saskatchewan have a 
place in competing with the charities, with the non-profit groups, with the agricultural 
societies? Does the Government of Saskatchewan opposite have a right to go into 
competition with the charities in Saskatchewan for the gambling dollar? And I would 
argue, Mr. Speaker, that that is a limited dollar. And if the government, now so desperate 
for cash, thinks it can find a cash bonanza in that field by going directly into gambling 
and looking for revenues through gambling, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, they’re mistaken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the government that has cut back so much on programs available to 
Saskatchewan people that what has happened, in fact, is that the charitable community, 
the service clubs of Saskatchewan, had to move in to pick up the slack. They’re out there, 
working hard, volunteering to provide services, to fill that need vacated by the 
Government of Saskatchewan opposite. And what does this government do? Well, one, it 
wants to first of all tax those groups as we’ve seen in the debate tonight; and secondly, 
now it wants to move in, to move in on the action and try and to begin its search for 
revenue from revenues now available to the charitable community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we get to committee, we’re going to have a large number of questions 
on this Bill, and I think that’s the most appropriate place for the questions to be asked. 
And we can have a dialogue with the minister and try and get from this government some 



rationale and reason on why it thinks it important to have an expansion of gaming and 
gambling opportunities in the province just now, and why this government wants to move 
in on the action in direct competition to the charities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me indicate now that if this provision of the Bill were removed, this Bill 
would enjoy the total support of this side of the House and all members of the opposition. 
If we could separate these two issues, the issue of empowering the Gaming Commission 
and providing it the opportunity to licence gaming operators in this province, this Bill 
would enjoy the complete support of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the committee stage I’ll be asking that of the minister, perhaps in the 
form of an event, Mr. Speaker. And so at this point, given that these two provisions have 
been pushed together into one Bill, we will be opposing the Bill at this point. We will 
then reassess that position during the committee to see if in fact we can’t work together to 
put together a good piece of legislation that all members of this House can support. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks I’ll take my place in the debate. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fundamental issue posed to the public by 
this Bill 67, as my colleague from Moose Jaw has indicated, is: does the public of 
Saskatchewan want their government involved in the spread of gambling across the 
province? 
 
The Minister of Consumer Affairs, on June 28 when he addressed this Bill during second 
reading indicated, and I quote: 
 

The proposed Act represents the next stage in the evolution of gaming policy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

And what might that mean? What might it mean for the Minister of Consumer Affairs to 
say that this particular Act respecting the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission represents 
the next stage in the evolution of gaming in the province? 
 
It means simply one thing: that the government will now legitimately, by means of this 
legislation, be involved in the enterprise of gambling. This Act opens the door for the 
Gaming Commission to run gaming enterprises on the government’s behalf, not simply to 
regulate when other people are gambling but to regulate and introduce gambling by the 
government itself. That is what this legislation does, and that is why we oppose it quite 
strongly. 
 
This government, the Minister of Consumer and Commercial and Commercial Affairs, 
wants to legitimate . . . would have us believe that the legitimation for this particular 
piece of legislation to have an autonomous gaming commission is so that it will generate 
more revenue for Saskatchewan’s charities. 
 



But what he ignores is the charity that needs to be generated as a result of gambling. Poor 
people are the people who principally gamble. These are people that have been 
effectively disenfranchised by the province. Saskatchewan now has the second highest 
level of poverty in the country. One in six Saskatchewan families lives in poverty; one in 
four Saskatchewan families lives in poverty; one in four Saskatchewan children live in 
poverty, and that’s why this government wants to introduce this gambling legislation — 
not because it wants to address real problems, but because it wants to get involved in 
gambling activity itself. 
 
And I just want to take a few brief minutes to give voice to some of the opinions of 
community leaders —clergy, such as myself — who recognize the negative effects of 
such a piece of legislation. 
 
The minister of consumer affairs may pooh-pooh the effects of gambling on the poor, but 
those who work most directly with the poor — clergy and social workers — know full 
well that this legislation ill serves Saskatchewan families. For example, the Salvation 
Army’s captain in Saskatoon, Wilson Noble, says: 
 

Gambling will hurt the people who can least afford it. It’s certainly going to 
increase the poverty level. 
 

And we all know how the Salvation Army works with the poorest of the poor. And I 
think that Captain Noble has some pretty noble thoughts about this legislation. He goes 
on to note that the government is going to be spending money to clean up the social mess 
created by this piece of its legislation. 
 
Again from Saskatoon, Westgate Alliance Church, pastor Dennis Keith indicates that: 
 

The problem of gambling worsens in tough economic times when the poor try to 
find fast answers to their money problems. 
 

And isn’t that what we see when Saskatchewan has the second-highest level of family 
poverty in the country. And he goes on, Rev. Keith does, to say that: 
 

The whole thing feeds on poverty. It’s the people who can ill afford it that are so 
often addicted to gambling. 
 

And again I’d like to just quote one more clergy person from Saskatoon, Reverend Wasyl 
Makarenko of All Saints Ukrainian Orthodox Church, and he goes to say, quote: 
 

Gambling is a tax on the poor. Rather than relying on the weakness of humanity, 
we should rely on the strengths that we have. 
 

And he goes on to say: 
 



But when the government comes out as a policy that we are going to use gambling 
to raise money for government projects, that’s going too far. 
 

And I think that Saskatchewan people echo those sentiments, that there was a time when 
they could look to the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan to stand for 
something more than this kind of legislation, when they could look to the Progressive 
Conservative Party to look for more than quick fix solutions to the province’s financial 
predicament, to look beyond a tax on the poor and the introduction of expanded gambling 
to the province in the name of the government. 
 
There was a time when the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan took a stand 
against alcohol advertising and took a stand against gambling; but not any more. Once it 
has bankrupted this province financially, it now attempts to bankrupt the province 
socially and morally as well, with the introduction of legislation such as this. And I find it 
abominable and abysmal. I think that this is morally indefensible for a government to 
introduce legislation that allows it to enter the gambling casinos itself. I might add that 
any government that does this is certainly gambling with its political future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The Minister of Consumer Affairs said earlier tonight when we were 
talking about the hospital tax or the lotteries tax or what I would refer to as the hoax tax 
he said, quote: 
 

The role of government is to provide services to people. 
 

That’s what the Minister of Consumer Affairs said in this Assembly tonight. And I 
couldn’t agree with him more. I think that’s the role of government, is to provide services 
for people, particularly those services which people can’t provide for themselves, 
individually. 
 
(2215) 
 
But I ask that minister if this introduction of gambling legislation, if the introduction of 
the province into the field of gambling is one of those services that the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking for? And it isn’t. Anybody who has any sense knows that 
people aren’t asking the government to get involved in gambling. And so he betrays his 
own trust, his own principles in introducing this particular piece of legislation. 
 
I’d just like to close by indicating some of the commentary from the Saskatoon letters to 
the editor. Dana Voneroy writes to the Star-Phoenix on March 9 that: 
 

Casinos will only create more social problems. The answer to the legalization of 
casinos in Saskatchewan is clear. The public must stand up for what is morally 
correct and simply say no. 
 



Is what is written. 
 
Erik Nelson, another resident of Saskatoon, says, quote: 
 

Gambling, like prostitution, alcohol or drugs, has one reason for being — to 
exploit human weakness. In this case the weakness is an expectation of something 
for nothing. And this is a government that’s exploiting the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Another individual, from Melfort this time, speaks of gambling as an addiction. J.E. 
Richards writes to the Star-Phoenix on March 16 of this year: 
 

Gambling is a disease, an addiction as much as alcoholism or drug abuse is. Many 
years ago I was led to believe that a gambler was less desirable as an employee 
than an alcoholic because the alcoholic would come to first. I challenge the people 
doing lottery advertising to prove that lotteries have ever helped anyone in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

And this Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs talks about this being a high-tech 
age and we have to get in sync with the high-tech age and we have to get in sync with the 
high-tech age by virtue of indulgence in gambling. 
 
And I just want to conclude by quoting a letter to none other than the Premier of this 
province, from the head of the Moose Jaw ministerial, written on March 23, 1988, and he 
writes . . . This is Rev. John Klassen, who is president of the Moose Jaw ministerial: 
 

We believe that the role of government at any level should be the promotion of 
the betterment of society as a whole and to help provide the conditions where 
healthy and productive citizens can flourish. Casino gambling will not teach that 
productive labour and responsibility are the keys to satisfaction in our society; it 
would only encourage people to go for “the big kill.” We want to ask: should the 
provincial government and the city of Moose Jaw lend active support and 
encouragement to such a philosophy in our society? We think not. We believe this 
contradicts the very purpose for which you were elected. 
 

And I go on to just conclude by noting that this letter from the Moose Jaw ministerial was 
signed by 28 clergy from Moose Jaw, with an additional 10 indicating their support even 
though they were not at the meeting that drafted this letter. 
 
So in short, what we have is a piece of legislation that greases the skids for the 
government itself to profiteer from gambling by way of electronic bingo and keno and 
slot machines, in spite of what the Minister of Consumer Affairs says. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan say that this is not the Saskatchewan way to 
pay for health and education and social services by way of government gambling. 
 



One positive alternative . . . the minister from Weyburn asked earlier tonight, there’s 
never a positive alternative from the opposition. I’ll offer him one tonight. Kill the 
government and gambling plan; kill the government gambling plan and keep the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan to pay for programs for the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of 
the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 
Duncan that bill No. 82 —An Act respecting Small Business Investment Incentives be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have just a few short comments tonight respecting 
Bill 82, which is basically a Bill that will replace the old venture capital Bill, the Bill had 
dealt with venture capital corporations. 
 
I want to indicate tonight to members on the other side of the House and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that members on this side of the House have done nothing to hold the 
passage of this Bill and will do nothing to hold the passage of this Bill. It has been a long 
time coming, simply because the government has been so busy with their privatization 
agenda that there hasn’t been time for us to deal with any substantial legislation. And I’m 
pleased to be able to speak on this in second reading tonight. 
 
I want to indicate that I want to give the minister some advance warning that I would like 
to ask some questions in committee regarding this Bill. As I said, basically we agree with 
the concept of the changes that this Bill entails. But some of the concerns that we do have 
are this Bill is not unlike other pieces of legislation, that there is so much in regulations 
that it’s very difficult, in fact, to tell what the end results of this Bill will be, which means 
the cabinet, through order in council, has pretty wide-sweeping directions. 
 
I would like to ask — and as I said, I’m giving the minister some advance warning — in 
terms of application for registration under section . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Second reading is an opportunity to speak on the Bill in 
general terms, not by specific reference to clauses. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess what I was trying to do was to allow the 
minister to prepare through Hansard for some questions that we may have, in that it’s 
awfully difficult to get an answer from that minister when you’re questioning her directly 
without some time for warning from one of her officials. But I will respect your ruling, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say that in respect to the regulations, I will be asking some questions. I won’t 
refer specifically to which regulations, but in recovery of government funds, of provincial 



government funds, I will be asking what the regulations will be. And I will as well . . . 
would like to indicate through Hansard to the minister if she would, in fact, give us a 
copy or a list of the regulations that will surround this Bill, and that will make this Bill 
what the end result of it will in fact be. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I have no other comments. But the hour being near 11, I would 
now move that this House do . . . 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the Whole 
at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:25 p.m. 


