


















































June 5, 1989 Hansard Evening


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 5, 1989 
 
 

1647 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I know that members 
opposite would not want to conclude consideration of this until 
they have heard all of my comments. I briefly considered letting 
this go, but I could see there was a popular demand that crossed 
the way, Mr. Speaker, for a few tightly knit sentences on this 
subject, so I’ll continue in that fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before supper, before 5 o’clock, it was suggested 
that given this government’s shoddy behaviour, given its lack of 
integrity, given its penchant for breaking its promises, the 
fashion in which it has dealt with us, we can’t deal with this 
group on the basis of trust. And if we were to abolish the 
bell-ringing rule, we would, in fact, have to do that. That basis 
simply does not exist. 
 
We don’t trust them in their dealings with us; we certainly don’t 
trust them with respect to the management of this province’s 
affairs. And if the bell-ringing is done away with, they have a 
virtual free hand. 
 
Normally, Mr. Speaker, these sort of problems are self 
correcting. As I was saying, normally public opinion brings 
itself to bear on a government, they respond, and by and large, 
Mr. Speaker, this institution has served the public and the 
people of Saskatchewan fairly well. 
 
But that has not been the case with respect to this 
administration. They have proceeded to fly in the face of public 
opinion and done an enormous amount of damage in the 
process. Their management of public affairs is such that no one 
would trust them; no one would want to give them the kind of 
free rein which an abolition of the bell-ringing will do. 
 
With an abolition of the bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, this 
government can do whatever it would like. We have no 
effective means of stopping them, given the party discipline that 
exists in all legislatures at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why does it work every place else? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well because nobody else has a 
government like this one, I say to the member from Kindersley. 
 
There is not, Mr. Speaker . . . The member from Kindersley 
raises an excellent question. He says, why does it work 
everywhere else? Mr. Speaker, there isn’t another government 
in Canada that operates in the fashion in which these people do. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Nobody else, Mr. Speaker. No other 
government came into office with balanced books, with no 
deficit — no operating deficit — proceeded to run up a $4 
billion deficit. 
 
Nobody else, Mr. Speaker, promised to abolish, not one, but the 
two major taxes in the province and proceeded to do so without 
any worry about the consequences. Nobody else, Mr. Speaker, 
solemnly promised there would be no privatization of utilities 
and proceeded to do it anyway. No other government in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, has dealt with the opposition in the sort 
of reckless abandon that this government has. I venture to say 
there’s not another government in Canada of which it can be 
said, not a single solitary suggestion from the opposition during 
all their years in office has ever been accepted. 
 
The hon. member asks, why does it work everywhere else? It 
works everywhere else because those in office have some 
minimum sense of integrity, some minimum sense of fair play, 
Mr. Speaker, some minimum sense of honour. The member 
from Quill Lakes is right — no other government is as amoral 
as this government. So this province is different, and different 
rules must apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I went home at 5 o’clock I received quite a 
number of telephone calls from people who were interested in 
the proceedings — wondering what was going on — by and 
large called to lend their moral support to what we were doing. 
 
One of them asked if bell-ringing is necessary, as you say, 
because of this government’s lack of integrity and lack of 
honour. What should they be doing differently? I don’t suppose, 
Mr. Speaker, I really did the question justice. But there is a 
number of things that will have to be done differently before 
this government can expect to receive the sort of trust from the 
opposition and from the public which most governments are 
accorded. 
 
One of the things is illustrated by the fashion in which this is 
presented. This is a unilateral move to change the rules, done 
apparently by the member from Kindersley. It appears, Mr. 
Speaker, that he sought the co-operation of the opposition; got 
it. At the 11th hour, whether he was unable to handle his caucus 
or whether the member was bitter or any one of the scenarios 
might have been . . . He might not have been honest with the 
caucus initially; he might not have been able to persuade them; 
he might not have talked to them at all. For whatever reason — 
the reasons appear largely petty — at the 11th hour, just as we 
were to consummate the deal, send the whole problem off to a 
rules committee, the member from Kindersley announced that 
they were proceeding unilaterally. 
 
I was interested, Mr. Speaker, in the recitation by the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can’t trust that Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, but that’s right. It’s another example 
of people you cannot deal with in good faith.  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1648 
 

There was obviously some element of risk for both sides. We 
accepted that element of risk. We said, we are prepared to take 
the risk to make the House work. We’re prepared to send this 
problem off to the rules committee, and then we can get on with 
dealing with some of the problems which need to be dealt with. 
I’ll get back to that subject, Mr. Speaker, a little later. 
 
However the member from Kindersley chose arbitrarily, 
abruptly, without any explanation, at the 11th hour to can the 
deal and proceed unilaterally. I will never understand why, nor 
is the member from Kindersley apparently ever going to 
provide anything in the nature of an explanation. The 
negotiations may never have been in good faith. It’s quite 
possible the member from Kindersley never intended to see this 
matter settled in a proper fashion. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say members opposite are 
hurting. They’ve had a catastrophic spring — some bad luck, 
but a very, very generous measure of bad management mixed in 
with it. I think perhaps the best explanation for the member 
from Kindersley’s behaviour is that he was angry, frustrated, 
and he was petty, and I think that’s not an unfair comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said in 
his remarks . . . he read a fairly long recitation of some 
comments made by the member from Riversdale, the Leader of 
the Opposition. It is not clear what, precisely, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg thought he was doing by reading those 
comments. Those comments, it does appear that he 
misunderstood them. 
 
Whatever sense one can make of the member from “really glad 
and really proud” — whatever sense one can make of his 
comments, one would have to assume that he felt that the 
Leader of the Opposition, when the Leader of the Opposition 
said, that’s an interesting offer and we’ll consider it over a day 
or two, one has to assume that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg felt that the Leader of the Opposition 
was responding to the member from Kindersley’s motion that 
the bell-ringing be terminated. That’s the only sense I can make 
of those comments . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Is that what 
he would say? Well, now indeed, indeed . . . We cannot lose the 
member from Wascana. If we lose him the world will descend 
into darkness again, and it was so useful to have his views 
enlightening the world. 
 
The member from Wascana says he thought the member from 
Riversdale was a man of his word. The member from 
Riversdale, in those comments, because I was here and I heard 
him, was not responding to the member from Kindersley’s 
motion to stop the bell-ringing. He was responding to 
something different. He was responding, as I know some 
members opposite realize, he was responding to the member 
from Kindersley’s offer, made on that Friday afternoon, to send 
the whole thing to a rules committee. That’s what those 
comments were made in response to. He said, that’s a useful 
offer, and I’ll consider it over a day or two. 
 
Well I note that the member from Thunder Creek is looking it 
up. When he looks it up, I hope he will continue to shout from 
his seat and give me the page number, because I don’t have the 
page number, but I am virtually  

certain that’s what the comments were made in response to. 
 
You see, I’ve irritated the member from Maple Creek, my 
heavens. It’s a tragedy, Mr. Speaker. A person of such good 
will, I don’t know how it could happen. She’ll . . . Like the 
member from Wascana, she’s . . . Perhaps I had better not be 
too descriptive, Mr. Speaker. If I were too accurate I might be 
unparliamentary. I have to strike a balance here between 
accuracy and being parliamentary, so I will not attempt at any 
more detail to describe the behaviour of the member from 
Maple Creek. 
 
The member from Riversdale responded in a positive fashion on 
that Friday. He said, it’s a good, interesting offer; we’ll think 
about it and get back to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right. That’s right. Over the weekend we’ll think about it 
and get back to you, and he said he was thinking about the offer 
to send it to the rules committee. This is what has escaped you 
people about those comments. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You guys don’t understand anything 
that’s not knee-jerk. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, they don’t understand it. They also 
never listen. Their work here would be immeasurably easier and 
immeasurably more effective if they’d listen to at least a part of 
what was said. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many times do you think the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg . . . (inaudible) . . . and 
how many times it makes him listen? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I think it was about . . . the ratio is 
one of infinity, because he mentioned speaking often, and never 
mentioned listening. It goes to illustrate again the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who really misrepresented what the 
member from Riversdale said, it just goes to illustrate again to 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that listening is much 
more important than speaking. 
 
(1915) 
 
I always believe, Mr. Speaker, that politicians get re-elected, 
not for their ability to speak but for their ability to listen. I have 
known members who have lasted a fair while. All of them were 
good listeners. Only some of them were good speakers. I think 
of Auburn Pepper, former member from Weyburn, a good 
speaker, but he didn’t get elected for that. He got elected for his 
ability to listen. 
 
I would say to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that if 
he wants to get re-elected, he should learn to listen . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the hon. member’s 
getting off into an area that really isn’t related to the topic under 
discussion at all. The electoral chances of the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg are really not related to this incident 
directly, as the member’s putting it, and therefore I just bring 
that to his attention. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I entirely agree. It probably isn’t  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1649 
 

relevant. It certainly isn’t very compassionate to talk about the 
electoral chances of the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
He did, however, quite clearly quote the comments of the 
member from Riversdale. The member from Riversdale, the 
Leader of the Opposition, said with clarity, when the Minister 
of Justice said, we’ll send it . . . The Minister of Justice from his 
seat and not in any official capacity, and I guess he had said it 
privately across the . . . behind the bar, he had said, we will 
send this whole problem to a committee. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a good idea, good idea. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And that’s exactly what the member from 
Riversdale said: that’s a good idea, we’ll consider it. Well over 
the next couple of days — that was on a Friday — we did 
consider it over a couple of days. We responded positively. We 
felt there were other things that might also be considered, but 
we . . . And we had a deal; it was ready to go. At the eleventh 
hour, not more than an hour from the opening of the sitting in 
which the motion was to be moved to send it to a committee, 
the Minister of Justice began to back-pedal furiously. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But it’s not too late for them to admit 
they’re wrong. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It is indeed not too late for them to admit 
they’re wrong. I was, Mr. Speaker, mentioning it over the 
supper hour. I received a number of calls, most of them 
congratulatory but some rather thought-provoking. One in 
particular asked me what ought to be done that’s different. One 
of the things that ought to be done that is different is that 
members opposite should stop proceeding unilaterally. You 
should begin to work with the opposition. 
 
This place, Mr. Speaker, has always operated on a basis of trust 
and understanding. It has never been an institution in which the 
government can do whatever it likes, behave as it sees fit. There 
has always had to be a degree of accommodation between the 
government and the opposition. No effort whatsoever, Mr. 
Speaker, was made this year, in this session, to achieve any 
kind of rapport with the opposition. 
 
I want to, if I could find it quickly . . . I refer to an article — I’ll 
only refer to it briefly — by Ron Petrie, who wrote on May 13 
edition of the Leader-Post: 
 

In this (session), the third session of the 21st Saskatchewan 
legislature, fair play is for wienies. 
 

He went on to say that the government had started the problems 
when the session was only days old, and I read again: 
 

The new session was only days old when the Conservatives 
dumped on the NDP a washtub-sized load of long-overdue 
documents containing details about past government 
activities and spending. Some of the information had been 
ordered by the NDP as long ago as the autumn of 1987. 
 

He goes on, Mr. Speaker, to describe the fashion in which the 
government has proceeded with this session. They really need, 
Mr. Speaker . . . and I’m amazed that some of the members — I 
guess there’s just one left — has spent as long in this Assembly 
as I have. 
 
The member from Souris-Cannington, who is, not 
coincidentally, the Government House Leader, has been here 13 
years. I am amazed that in that 13 years he’s learned as little as 
he has about how this institution operates. The member from 
Souris-Cannington and the Government House Leader proceeds 
as if the opposition doesn’t matter, doesn’t have to work for 
them, doesn’t have to consider them, can do whatever he 
pleases. 
 
If I were to describe some of the nicknames, Mr. Speaker, that 
might be considered provocative, and I’m making a studious 
effort not to appear provocative, but the member from 
Souris-Cannington has developed the reputation of driving a big 
truck and letting others get off the road. Well it doesn’t work. 
 
At some time, it’s to be hoped, the member from 
Souris-Cannington will come to some understanding of how 
this place actually operates. It operates on the basis of 
consensus. We must work together. We have a mutual interest 
in doing that, Mr. Speaker. We have a mutual interest in getting 
to those issues — as we have not — which the public of 
Saskatchewan want and expect us to deal with. 
 
To put it mildly, Mr. Speaker, this motion which we’ve dealt 
with now for the last 10 days, I would guess — I’ve forgotten 
exactly how many — is not on anybody’s list of priorities 
except members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, all the members of this side 
of the House have spent a goodly amount of time out in the 
public. Members opposite, I suspect, don’t feel very 
comfortable out in public. I suspect that members opposite hear 
a good deal more than they want to about these activities. 
Members on this side have spent a good deal of time in the 
public; certainly I have. I haven’t had anyone, not anyone, say, 
gee I’m sure glad you people are dealing with the bell-ringing. 
Nobody thinks this has to be dealt with. I don’t know of 
anybody, Mr. Speaker, who feels that the bell-ringing and the 
abolition of the bell-ringing is germane to the province’s 
business. 
 
This motion, Mr. Speaker, should be abandoned. It should be 
set aside and we should deal with some of the other issues 
which are not trifling in nature. Mr. Speaker, we have a . . . 
okay, I . . . some assistance now, we have a good research 
department. This is what Mr. Andrew’s . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m glad to see the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is back. I was saying at an earlier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. The hon. member knows 
he’s breaking the rule about mentioning member’s absence or 
presence, and I would ask him to adhere to it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, of course you’re right. Of course  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1650 
 

you’re right. I want the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
who read Mr. Romanow’s comments into the record as if they 
were a partial agreement . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
it’s very, very germane to the subject. The member opposite, 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, stated that Mr. 
Romanow was a man of honour . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Of course the hon. member 
knows that we don’t refer to other members’ names except in 
certain circumstances, and I’d like to bring that to his attention. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I did, of course, transgress that in an 
unguarded moment. But the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg stated — and I want to clear up the 
record — the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg stated that 
the Leader of the Opposition had indicated that he would likely 
agree to the proposed rule change by the Minister of Justice. 
And he went on in a long recitation to suggest that the Leader of 
the Opposition intended to do this but then broke his word. 
 
Let me read for the member from . . . I said earlier that what the 
Minister of Justice had proposed was not the changing of the 
rule, but a rules committee, and that, of course, is what we seek. 
Let me read for the benefit of members opposite. There seems 
to be some confusion because I note the member from Thunder 
Creek has quit looking through; I assume he’s found the 
passage and has found that in fact my interpretation is accurate. 
 
The Minister of Justice said as follows . . . It is May 11 of 1989. 
It is page 10,083. I’m going to, just by way of background, I’m 
going to read a couple of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Page 1,083. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — 1,083. I’m going to read a couple of . . . 
I’m going to read the Minister of Justice’s comments. By way 
of background, I’m going to read a couple of the preceding 
paragraphs, because what the Minister of Justice said is what 
we are saying. 
 
Let me read for you what the Minister of Justice said about the 
process: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this Assembly runs not only by the rules but 
by the gentlemanly understanding that members have for 
each other. And institutions like parliament, including this 
institution, has done it that way — the unwritten rules, if 
you like. 
 

The member from Kindersley goes on: 
 

Given that environment, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that we 
wait for rule changes until all parties have agreed is 
tantamount to delegating to the opposition the veto power 
of dealing with rules. It’s tantamounting to accept 
instructionism . . . (Well there’s a new contribution to the 
English language.) It’s tantamounting to accept 
instructionism for the duration of this. 
 

Then he goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I still am concerned about 
this concept of the rule changes being introduced in this 
way. And before I take my place, I make this point to the 
hon. members. If the opposition will stand in their place 
and say that the major concern they have is the process; the 
concern that they have with this issue is the process, then I 
ask them to do that. 
 

And he goes on, the member for Kindersley continues, the 
Minister of Justice and the mover of the proponent of the 
motion, although not the technical mover. The Minister of 
Justice says: 
 

And if process is what is wrong with this action today, then 
I invite the hon. member to ask to adjourn the debate, to 
put together two members or three members from the 
opposition and two or three members from the government 
to go and see if we can’t collectively come to a resolve to 
find what would be a fair rule as it relates to bell-ringing. 
 

An explicit, crystal clear offer of a rules committee. 
 
(1930) 
 
The Minister of Justice then said, and I’m going to read this: 
 

I’m not suggesting that today (this is the member from 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition). I’m not 
suggesting that today. What I am suggesting today is that 
we should take the suggestion of the Minister of Justice 
and we should move on to the next phase of seeing how it 
is (that) we can strengthen not only this institution, but 
democracy. And I think we’d be all well-advised — and I 
will include myself in this — all (be) well-advised if we 
attempted to play by, as much as we can, the concepts of 
democracy; namely, questions which are answered, and 
tabling of reports on time, and (of) legislative sessions, a 
legislative session which is vigorous and is reported 
(widely) so that the people can get its work done through 
the government elected. But we should respect always, 
always, that the people, at the end of the day, are right, 
through mandates. That’s what we should respect. 
 
I think therefore (that) the suggestion of the Minister of 
Justice bears further, (very) serious consideration. And I’ll 
undertake to him, as Leader of the Opposition, that we will 
get back to him within the next . . . I would hope the 
government would at least give us over the weekend — 
tomorrow is Friday . . . to caucus and to consider what he 
(had) said — I missed part of his remarks; (I wish to) read 
the written transcript; and (to) get back to him by, say, 
Monday at the latest as to what we would suggest in 
response to his suggestion which, if I may so say so and I 
don’t mean to be argumentative here, I would have liked 
the government to have done before it introduced the 
motion unilaterally. But that’s water under the bridge. 
Let’s not look at the past;  

  



 
June 5, 1989 

1651 
 

let’s look at the future. 
 
I think we’ll take up that suggestion and take an example 
of it for the next two or three days and consider it carefully, 
and get back to the government proponent of the mover, 
the Minister of Justice. 
 
With those few remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 

That was a direct quote from the Minister of Justice. That, Mr. 
Speaker, contrary to the interpretation put on that by the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that is precisely how 
this matter should have proceeded. The Minister of Justice 
extended an olive branch; the Leader of the Opposition 
accepted the olive branch. 
 
We might, Mr. Speaker, have been doing estimates now. We 
might have been considering the estimates of the Department of 
Education or the department of privatization — piratization, as I 
think it’s more aptly called. We might have been considering 
the estimates of the Minister of Environment, and should be. 
We have some questions that we’d like to ask the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well let’s get on with it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the member from Wilkie says, as 
usual only half listening, the member from Wilkie says, well 
let’s get on with it. My point precisely — let’s get on with it. It 
is not us, Mr. Speaker, who every day calls this silly, 
unnecessary motion — this motion that nobody but members 
opposite feel is necessary. 
 
We’d like to . . . Mr. Speaker, we think this Assembly should be 
dealing with education and schools. We get complaints from 
school boards, Mr. Speaker, that they’re having to borrow 
money. This government is using this motion as a pretext for 
denying them their money, and it is just a pretext. This motion 
is nothing more. 
 
The Minister of Education and this comment of his with respect 
to the current motion bears some response. The Minister of 
Education stated that he hadn’t been able to get the schools their 
money because this motion was a stall. That, Mr. Speaker, was 
simply not accurate. I could describe the member from 
Weyburn, the Minister of Education’s comments much more 
completely than that except it wouldn’t be parliamentary. 
 
The Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker . . . the Minister of 
Education stated the school boards haven’t got their money 
because of this. The Minister of Justice knows full well that we 
pass interim supply. The estimates have not for some time been 
the key which unlocks the funds. It hasn’t worked that way for 
many, many years. The estimates do not unlock the cash 
drawer; the estimates do not make the money available to the 
school board. The estimates, indeed, are an opportunity by 
which we exercise the first of the functions I mentioned earlier 
— by which we exercise our right to hold the government to 
account. 
 
The cash drawer is unlocked through appropriation Bills,  

interim supply. The Minister of Education knows that full well. 
So when the Minister of Education said that this has to be 
passed because the school boards haven’t got their money, I 
have difficulty believing that the Minister of Education knows 
as little as about this legislature as that. It has not ever during 
his time, nor during mine for that matter, ever been a case that 
the estimates give the key to the cash drawer; that’s not the 
purpose the estimates serves. The Appropriation Bill does that, 
and there are several appropriation Bills. There’s generally one 
a month while this House is in session. 
 
And I suppose before the Minister of Education again starts to 
complain that this current motion which we’re debating is 
holding up the funds of the school board, I would invite the 
government members to bring forth another Appropriation Bill, 
an interim supply as it’s called. Bring forth another interim 
supply . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This time the member 
from the . . . the minister of privatization says, we will, we will. 
It’s to be hoped . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Could I get leave from the Assembly to 
introduce some guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you, and through 
you and to the members of the legislature, I would like to 
introduce 16 students from Saulteaux School. They’re grades 5 
and 6; they’re accompanied by their teacher, Diane Lappan, and 
chaperon, Audrey Night. I will be visiting with them after in the 
members’ dining lounge downstairs. I would like to ask the 
members to please welcome my guests to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Athabasca correctly 
points out that, so familiar with his riding that he doesn’t know 
how to pronounce the name. It’s Saulteaux not . . . Apart from 
the fact that the member does not know how to pronounce the 
name of that community, I’m sure his welcome was sincere and 
intended. 
 
I want to join in welcoming the members and the students to 
this institution. We are considering a change in the way this 
place works, and it’s a debate which will have far-reaching 
consequences. Some day one of you students will no doubt — 
perhaps one or more of you will no doubt be sitting down here. 
What we are discussing today may well affect the way that you 
operate this institution when you get elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before, indeed I was dealing with the  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1652 
 

minister of piratization. I was talking about the minister of 
piratization. I was suggesting that we need to get off . . . we 
need to adjourn this Bill and not call it and deal with something 
else. The government’s obstinacy in continuing to call this Bill 
has meant that other problems which need attention have not 
been dealt with. I just picked the ministers who are here. It 
could be any one of them. 
 
We have some questions we’d like to ask the Minister of the 
Environment about the process in which this government got 
themselves into the $250 million mess at Rafferty. We think 
there’s evidence that the Department of the Environment did 
not do its job. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m afraid the hon. member is wandering off 
the topic. We’re discussing the process of a change to rule 
33(1). And it really isn’t a forum for a debate on a wide-ranging 
list of grievances even though, perhaps, the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley did make a comment from his seat, but I 
don’t think that’s a pretext for a wide-ranging discussion of 
some grievance that somebody raised. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won’t get into a 
wide-ranging discussion of the Rafferty dam. Suffice it to say 
that this Bill should be stood. This motion, rather, should not be 
called again; we should be dealing with some of these other 
things. We should . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I would 
do that except that I’ve already adjourned it once, so I cannot 
adjourn it a second time. I think those are the rules. 
 
So I say to members opposite, when I take my seat I invite the 
Government House Leader to deal with something which is of 
importance to the public — agriculture, environment, 
privatization — to call those problems. Let us deal with the 
estimates of the Department of Agriculture where there are 
some serious problems in the agricultural industry, the rain 
notwithstanding. Those need to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nobody except the front bench opposite, I think, believes that 
the bell-ringing needs to be dealt with. They’ve got stubborn, 
completely lack any public support, and don’t want to admit it 
by standing the motion tomorrow. But the person who called 
me, asked me what needed to be done differently, what the 
government needed to do differently. One of the things you 
need to do is to not call this Bill and get on to something else. 
 
There’s nothing to prevent . . . I see the members opposite 
sitting looking at me crossly as if I were being mischievous. I 
am being quite sincere. There’s nothing to prevent you from 
passing this Bill when you get some of the other work done. 
There’s nothing to prevent members from dealing with this Bill 
in July or August, or any other day. 
 
I assume that we aren’t going to see the SPC (Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation) privatization back again until after the 
charade that passes for the Barber Commission is past, is done 
with. So at least until then, and I say to members opposite I 
don’t . . . cannot imagine — cannot imagine, I say — I cannot 
imagine us ringing the bells on any other subject. Other subjects 
will be  

discussed at length, and members had better come prepared to 
stay awhile, but nothing as outrageous as . . . it would take 
something as outrageous as SPC, I think, to pry another 
bell-ringing incident out of us. So there’s no reason why this 
has to be dealt with. 
 
If the government wants a different atmosphere, then I say to 
members opposite, let’s deal with something else. It’s hard to 
believe it, but there actually are things I think members might 
agree with. I did not take violent exception to the Minister of 
Finance and his comments about the events in Beijing. Like 
him, I deplored those events. 
 
Let us go to some of those things that we might agree upon and 
deal with those issues. Let us at least deal with issues which are 
of substantive importance to the Saskatchewan public, and let’s 
get off this thing which has proved to be not just divisive but 
corrosive as well. It’s high time, Mr. Speaker, this government 
got over its pique. It’s high time they started to behave like 
adults. It’s high time, Mr. Speaker, that this item was stood and 
we got on to other business. There’s a good deal of it that needs 
to be done. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bell-ringing incident which took place in the 
latter part of March . . . in the latter part of April and early part 
of May, I’ve said earlier that it was inspired not by the members 
but by the public. We were really reacting to the public’s 
outrage. We were conduits through which the public made their 
anger felt. I say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I’m giving away any 
secrets when I say that we didn’t ring the bells with any 
long-range plan in mind. We intended to ring them for five 
minutes. We got some supportive calls which said, don’t let 
them away with it; keep fighting. That five minutes became an 
hour that Friday morning, an hour became two and a half, and 
then it became 17 days . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Wilkie who is such a sparkling . . . making such a 
sparkling contribution here — the member from Wolseley says 
that the radicals took over. Actually, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t the 
radicals who took over; it was the public who took over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If the member from Wilkie spent some 
time in his riding, he might well realize the truth of that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I was there all weekend. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’ve learned something new, because 
if the member from Wilkie went to his riding for the weekend, I 
didn’t know there were any caves in Wilkie. But if he went to 
Wilkie for the weekend, you must have spent it in a cave. 
 
Mr. Speaker — not to be provocative though — I must say I 
bordered on it with that last comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before the member from Wilkie 
began to assist me with putting together this speech 
. . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Am I going to be up all night? 
Well I don’t know; it depends. The member from Rosthern 
wants to know if I’m going to be on my feet  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1653 
 

all night. It depends on whether or not you people begin to take 
a more sensible approach. 
 
We think that, subjected to enough rational argument, you’ll see 
the light and mend your ways. And we intend to continue this 
for a good while further to see if, indeed, there isn’t some hope 
that you people will adopt a more sensible approach to 
governing this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So am I going to be on my feet all night? 
the member from Rosthern asks. That depends very much on 
you. That depends very much on members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying when . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The member from Rosthern now assists me in putting this 
speech together. As I was saying, the public took over. The 
member from Wilkie said the radicals took over. The radicals 
didn’t; the public took over. 
 
I must admit I left at 1 o’clock on Friday with . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, indeed I do like the sound of that, and I 
wished you people liked the sound of that. I wished you people 
liked the sound of the comment, “and the people took over.” 
 
This government’s agenda, Mr. Speaker, is so far removed from 
what the public really want. This government’s agenda badly 
needs to be taken over by the people. 
 
Given your intransigence, your arrogance, the fact that you are 
so badly out of touch, it doesn’t seem likely that the public ever 
is going to have any impact on your agenda, much less take it 
over, but that’s really what this government needs. This 
government needs to have some impact made on its agenda by 
the public. 
 
I see I’m having scant effect on the member from Wilkie. I 
don’t seem to have persuaded him yet. I’m sure, however, given 
enough time, we can convert the member from Wilkie. He is 
not beyond the pale. I don’t believe that for a moment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I must say that, Mr. Speaker, when we adjourned on Friday, 
when we left Friday with the bells ringing, I left with some 
trepidation. One doesn’t lightly do such a thing. We had only 
done it once before in the history of this legislature, and the 
circumstances under which that arose were very different . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Wilkie is insistent 
he’s going to save the opposition caucus from the radicals. If 
only the member from Wilkie had some understanding of how a 
real caucus works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Some day if the member from Wilkie goes 
back to his riding, if he ever darkens . . . if his shadow ever falls 
across the boundary of that riding, there’s a chance that he 
might get re-elected, but I think scant chance . . . the scant 
chance that he might get elected to a government caucus. You 
may sit in a different caucus, and you may understand how a 
caucus operates when . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order. I think that 
the hon. member is . . . I don’t think that, but I know he is once 
again wandering off the topic, and I ask him to come back to it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Fair enough. The member from Wilkie was 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Distracting him. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, was distracting me. That’s right. I will 
try and ignore the member from Wilkie who’s been . . . 
 
But I say to the member from Wilkie: some day you may 
understand how a caucus should operate; obviously yours isn’t 
operating in that fashion. If your caucus operated as a 
government caucus should, you’d never be in this pickle. If 
your caucus operated as it should, the members of the treasury 
bench would be listening to people in the back bench, and they 
would know that this is unpopular. They would know that the 
public don’t want this. This would never have happened, Mr. 
Speaker, if caucus was operating as it should. 
 
Nevertheless we left on Friday . . . I left with some trepidation. I 
was astounded at the public reaction to the events of Friday. 
Having spent 14 years in the same riding, one gets to know the 
people. I know a goodly number of those whom are my 
supporters. I know, respect, and have a good relationship with a 
number who aren’t. 
 
All of them, of every political complexion, felt that the 
government’s behaviour was outrageous. All of them 
commented on it. It wasn’t possible to go into Safeway for a 
loaf or for a quart of milk without having a dozen people stop 
you, comment upon the government’s behaviour, and inevitably 
. . . Well the Speaker’s going to sit me down again if I continue 
to administer advice to the member from Wilkie. 
 
It wasn’t possible to go out in public without people stopping 
you, without people saying to you, keep up the good work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I went shopping with my family. They 
eventually just abandoned me and went on, because it simply 
wasn’t possible to buy the groceries. People wanted to talk 
about this, and they all commented adversely on what the 
government was doing. They all commented adversely. 
 
We then decided to collect names on a petition, and that was 
indeed a rewarding experience. As I said, Mr. Speaker, it was 
the bell-ringing which allowed the voice of the public to be 
brought to bear on this government’s activities. If we had not 
rung the bell, this would have been what it so often is, a 
debating society. We would have made our comments. Our 
government would have not listened and would have gone on 
their merrily way, and their merrily way so far has been a path 
of destruction. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1654 
 

The bell-ringing, in some ways, restored this institution’s 
reputation as a safeguard of the rights of the public. In many 
ways I think that’s true. In many ways I think the public had 
come to regard the House of Commons in Ottawa and these 
legislatures as somewhat irrelevant to the whole process. The 
government did what they wanted. The members debated. But 
what the members here did, did not seem to have any real effect 
on the affairs of government. And I think many people had seen 
the House of Commons in Ottawa and this legislature as 
progressively less relevant. Its relevance was simply as a 
training ground for a new government when the public got tired 
of the existing one, something that . . . a purpose it is going to 
be serving fairly shortly, I might add. 
 
This bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, in a fashion which I haven’t 
seen, allowed the views of the public to be brought to bear on 
what the government was doing. It turned the legislature into a 
body which exercised some real control and restraint over 
government. 
 
I sat in front of the Cornwall Centre — it’s in the centre of my 
riding — during this 17-day period with a petition. Others were 
happy to do it for me, but I wanted to do it myself. I wanted to 
meet them and listen to them, both the yeas and the nays. Mr. 
Speaker, there were very few nays. 
 
On Saturday, there were a number of people who joined me; I 
was at the Cornwall Centre; it was this last Saturday we were 
out. It was a very cold, March day, and I took the door which 
was the coldest, in a sense, the north-east door. 
 
I did not realize it, but across the street was a young 
Conservative rally. A number of young Conservatives, about 10 
in the morning, came across to hassle me, in fact. They soon 
found themselves so badly hassled, and the crowd surrounded 
them. They had no friends. I finally left the corner; it was 
impossible to do any sensible business on the corner because 
everybody was intent on beating up on these kids. 
 
When I left, two people who were getting a master’s in 
commerce . . . Now these are not . . . people who will get a 
master’s in business administration . . . When I left after 20 
minutes, the two business administration students were having 
at the young Tories. The young Tories could not get . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s this got to do with it? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the member from Lloydminster 
doesn’t want to hear this. If the member from Lloydminster 
were listening continuously, you’d know that what I am saying 
is that the public wanted us out; they wanted to do something to 
put the brakes on this government. They wanted to do 
something to stop the government and to stop the privatization 
of SPC. 
 
The member from Lloydminster says this was nothing but your 
NDP radicals. I don’t know whether it alarms the member from 
Lloydminster to think that some four-fifths of the people of 
Saskatchewan agreed with those NDP radicals. I don’t know 
whether that makes any impression on you. But the public did 
— nearly four-fifths, nearly . . .  

there was just 22 per cent, 22 per cent of the public supported 
your position. That’s almost eight out of ten . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Lloydminster making again 
a marvellous contribution, marvellous contribution, one of his 
typical. 
 
The member for Lloydminster states that this was the radicals 
taking over. Well I think, Mr. Member, you may give some 
pause to think that only one out of four people felt so . . . one 
out of five. The other four out of five either had no opinion — 
the vast majority, they were with us. So, Mr. Member, if this is 
the NDP radicals taking over, you must be a little alarmed to 
think that you’re describing 80 per cent of the Saskatchewan 
public. That’s about the number which agree with us. 
 
(2000) 
 
One would have thought . . . And Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe 
that the public were tougher on the young Conservatives than 
they were on the members. I think when the members opposite 
walked down the streets of their ridings, I think they got exactly 
the same reaction as those young Tories did. I think they were 
treated in exactly the same fashion during those 17 days. I don’t 
think for a moment — to the extent I guess that they were in 
their riding during those 17 days, I don’t think for a moment 
they hassled young Tories and left members alone; that’s not 
the way the public react in this province. I think members 
opposite got exactly the same reaction. 
 
So what did we do during the 17 days? We accomplished a 
good deal. We restored . . . I’m going to deal in a moment with 
the cost of it. 
 
The member from Kinistino, who has a fair head for business 
and figures, I believe, knows better than that. I believe he 
doesn’t believe that $30,000 figure, because I know the member 
from Kinistino, not well, but I know that you have a head for 
both business and figures. I believe you can do a little better 
than that, sir, and I will get to that in a moment. 
 
What did we accomplish? We restored the . . . I think, Mr. 
Speaker, to some extent we restored the confidence of the 
public in this institution. I think they felt that this institution 
was relevant, was serving a useful purpose, and I think they felt 
good about this institution. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We gave the people of the province 
some hope that somebody cared about what these guys are 
doing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s right. That’s right. One of the 
members adds that we gave the public some hope that 
somebody cared about them. I think that’s right. I think the 
public felt that a government was going blindly down a road to 
destruction, that they weren’t listening to the public, and that 
nobody could do anything to stop them. 
 
That 17-day period, Mr. Speaker, proved that something could 
be done to stop them, something in a sense was done to stop 
them. Before we had . . . Unfortunately not quite enough was 
done to stop them. One would have thought that, given the 
scalding which they must have got when they went to their 
ridings, and I assume they did at  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1655 
 

least on the weekend, one must have thought that they would 
have said to themselves: gee, I wonder if it’s wise to be flying 
in the face of public opinion in the fashion in which we are. 
 
One would have thought there would’ve been some doubts in 
members opposite. One would have thought there would’ve 
been some . . . There’s always some hotheads in any group of 
people, but one would have expected there to be some cool 
heads, some people who say: we can’t do this; we cannot 
behave in such a fashion and expect the public to elect us. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m afraid I must once more draw the 
member’s attention to the fact that we aren’t in the process of 
debating another Bill, or implications to another Bill, or actions 
of the opposition’s relating to it. We’re debating rule 33(1) and 
the amendments to it and the process involved in that and the 
implications in that. We’re not really debating government 
policy per se on a wide scale. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Now if I left that impression, then that was 
in error. I wasn’t intending to debate the full range of 
government business. 
 
I was just commenting on the fact that I would have expected 
members opposite to arrive at the same conclusion we did about 
the bell-ringing, and that is that the public judged the 
bell-ringing by the issue. They did not like privatization, and 
therefore they were prepared to accept bell-ringing in those 
circumstances. 
 
I would have thought that members opposite would have come 
back a somewhat chastened lot, would have thought they would 
have realized, hey, maybe there are some things after all that are 
sacrosanct; maybe there are some things which shouldn’t be 
privatized, and perhaps there are some things which shouldn’t 
be done. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And that Saskatchewan is different than 
Great Britain. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And that Saskatchewan is different than 
Great Britain. It’s also different than . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Britton over there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Both great Britains are quite different, I 
may say. 
 
But members didn’t. Members appeared to have learned very, 
very little from that period. They must have . . . Public opinion 
polls suggested there was very, very little, very, very little 
support for them. 
 
Yes, I think it’s worthwhile drawing to members’ attention 
what the polls did show. The polls, Mr. Deputy Speaker, found 
that 22 per cent supported the idea of privatizing SPC — a 
relatively small number . . . a relatively large number, actually. 
 
It goes on to provide one other rather interesting fact. Even 
among people who said they would vote Conservative, 30 per 
cent of people who said they would vote Conservative are 
opposed to the plan. And don’t  

forget at this point in time there was only a small percentage of 
the Saskatchewan people saying, I’ll vote Conservative. By this 
point in time they were down to their rock-ribbed Conservative 
support. Even in that rock-ribbed Conservative support, only 30 
per cent said they would . . . 30 per cent said they would vote 
against the plan to privatize SPC. 
 
The response of the government is interesting — no suggestion 
that there was anything to be learned from the bell-ringing. The 
real lesson from the bell-ringing to members opposite should 
have been, there is massive public opposition to the 
privatization of SPC. That, for the benefit of members opposite, 
should have been the lesson. It should have been what you 
learned. And if you had drawn that conclusion from the 
bell-ringing, all would not have been lost. 
 
This government has in the past, has not always been this 
obstinate, Mr. Speaker. The government in the past has learned 
from its mistakes. I remember the North East by-election in 
Regina North East, when a seat held by the government, the 
NDP won by 70 some per cent of the vote. What was the 
Premier’s response? Maybe there’s been some mistakes and 
maybe we need to change something. And, whether we like it or 
not, he went on to win the 1986 election. 
 
That might have been what the Premier . . . the conclusion that 
the Premier drew from the bell-ringing. The lesson was surely 
not that the NDP had hijacked the legislature. The lesson in all 
of this, surely, was to be drawn from the fact it was truly 
remarkable that a party could walk out of the legislature for 17 
days and enjoy overwhelming public support in so doing. That 
is what is truly remarkable about it. 
 
I would never, ever have believed it were possible to do so. If 
someone had said . . . the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 
operate in this fashion; he operates by consensus. And that, I 
think, is one of the reasons why this caucus has been as 
effective as it has. But if, on that Friday morning when we left, 
the Leader of the Opposition had said, now I’ve thought about 
this matter and we’re going to be gone for 17 days because 
that’s one way to dramatize the public issue, I’d have thought 
he’d gone absolutely stark, raving mad. I would have thought 
the public opinion would have been massively against such a 
move, but it didn’t. 
 
This poll, taken in the second week, showed overwhelming 
support, and fully 67 per cent of those questioned opposed it, 22 
per cent were in favour of it, and 11 per cent didn’t know. 
 
Another remarkable feature is the very small number of people 
who had no opinion. That is truly unusual to have an item of 
this nature, which blows up very suddenly, and to have such a 
small number of people in the “don’t know” column. I suspect 
that when you get down to 11 per cent, the people who say they 
don’t know are the people who are: (a) too busy to answer the 
phone; (b) too hard of hearing to understand what’s being said 
to them; or (c) truly uninterested. But there were very few in the 
latter, truly uninterested. I suspect that most of the “don’t 
knows” were in too much of a hurry to respond to what  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1656 
 

takes 15 or 20 minutes, or were hard of hearing or something. 
 
So I say to members opposite, surely the lesson to be drawn 
from the bell-ringing is the remarkable fact that we’ve gone for 
17 days — enjoyed more support when we come back than we 
did when we left. That’s a fact. 
 
We left with very large public support, which I didn’t trust, I 
may say. Unlike members opposite, we don’t have tax dollars 
with which to do our polling. Members opposite do their polling 
with tax dollars. It’s obviously very sophisticated; ours is not. It 
has proved to be reliable, but it isn’t very sophisticated. 
 
But when we left we did some polling; they gave us figures 
which were a little lower than this but still showed a fair degree 
. . . an overwhelming degree of public support. What is 
remarkable — if all the polls are accurate, what is remarkable is 
that . . . Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I dropped a paper. What is 
remarkable is that we came back with more support than we had 
when we left. 
 
I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 
would have drawn a lesson from that. I would have thought, at a 
very minimum, members opposite would have concluded that 
the public don’t want SPC privatized. I would have thought that 
members opposite would have urged the Premier — Guy 
Montpetit states that it’s Mr. Berntson who is the real head of 
government. Perhaps then they should — I apologize for that. I 
should not have called him by his first name. It was the Deputy 
Premier who is really Premier. 
 
I would have thought members opposite would be urging the 
front bench to abandon SPC. If they did, this problem might 
resolve itself. You see, what the public are saying is, don’t let 
them do it; whatever it costs, don’t let them privatize SPC. This 
is the one sure weapon we have to prevent the privatization of 
SPC. That is the only one. 
 
I have been impressed, Mr. Speaker, with the resources in this 
caucus and their ability to deliver good speeches, which 
thoroughly canvass a subject, and the emphasis is on the 
thoroughness of it. The member from Rosemont went on for, 
spoke for, I think it was eight hours in total — a good speech. 
I’ve had any number of people over the weekend who said it 
was a very good speech, very interesting. 
 
(2015) 
 
Got a neighbour who’s . . . I’ve got a number of neighbours, 
some of them have not pretended to be New Democrat. Some of 
them mentioned, quite a number of them mentioned it to me 
over the weekend, got a goodly number of compliments on the 
speech of the member from Rosemont, and universally they 
want there to be no doubt but what the privatization of SPC is 
stopped. That they want to be sure. 
 
This bell-ringing is the only sure weapon we have. There is 
nothing to prevent the government, and I had a Dave Traynor, a 
reporter from Star-Phoenix put the following question to me, 
and not in a rhetorical fashion. It may sound like that when I 
repeat the question, but it was not  

rhetorical. He said to me: do you believe that the Conservatives 
want to get this through so that they can use closure on SPC? I 
said, well, you have to admit that that is a very real danger. 
There is a form of closure in this legislature; it’s never been 
used. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the hon. member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, the member has been, that’s 
speaking here, has been talking basically about a closure on 
SPC and a closure on any . . . it’s just hypothetical, and I’d like 
you to basically overrule him on his basis and on his points that 
he’s risen here, brought forth today. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, in with the point of order, a lot of what 
he’s been saying here has been irrelevant and has been very 
repetitious. And the filibustering tactics are basically preventing 
people from the government side to stand and speak on behalf 
of this Bill. And he had already indicated about 45 minutes ago 
that he was going to sit down. And he hasn’t yet. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, on the same point of order. Mr. 
Speaker, the member knows very well that’s not a point of 
order. It’s not in his judgement as to whether or not the speech 
is on the topic; that’s entirely your judgement. And when the 
member did stray somewhat earlier this evening, you, in fact, 
drew to his attention that he was off the topic, and we honoured 
your ruling at that point in time. 
 
The member opposite, the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster cannot even quote the citation from 
Beauchesne’s. Whenever he seems to disagree with what a 
member is saying, he springs to his feet in great enthusiasm to 
draw to your attention an issue that he doesn’t even know of 
which he speaks. If he could quote Erskine May’s or the rules 
of the legislature, or if he could quote from Beauchesne’s Fifth 
Edition, there may be some validity. 
 
We are tiring very quickly of his interruptions. The member had 
a good flow going here this evening, and we’d like you to 
consider that, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I’ve listened to both sides of the issue. 
The hon. member’s point of order, if I may say, came in two 
parts. The initial portion where the issue is the alleged 
hypothetical nature of the hon. member’s argument, of course, 
is dispute between two members, and it is not a point of order. 
 
The issue of relevancy, of course, is a point of order. And we 
have been talking about this periodically tonight, and certainly I 
wish to remind the hon. member, as far as relevancy is 
concerned, that hon. members should be relevant to the topic 
under discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I will admit, Mr. Speaker, tonight on 
occasion I’ve strayed from the strict bounds of the rule,  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1657 
 

particularly in my efforts to assist the member from Wilkie. I 
did not think, however, when interrupted by the member from 
Lloydminster, that I had strayed. I thought I was directly on the 
subject. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we use the 17-day period for more than just 
sitting. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order, order. 
Order. Order, order. I’ll just recognize the member for Regina 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There is a rumour, really as yet untrue, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member from Saltcoats can’t speak on his feet, 
but there is no evidence of that matter one way or the other; we 
don’t know. Some day he may prove that right or wrong by 
actually getting on his feet and trying to speak. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe that perhaps the best I could say is 
that we’re having a number of sub-debates taking place. I know 
some plays have been written with a sub-plot, but I don’t know 
if the legislature is normally a place for sub-debates to be taking 
place. Would the hon. members stick to rule 33(1). 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The member’s 
been repeating and repeating and repeating here for two and a 
half hours. And is there a point, Mr. Speaker, where if a 
member keeps on repeating and repeating that you can rule to 
move on to a new speaker? The member has been talking and 
talking, Mr. Speaker, about money being spent and money 
being wasted. We just had 50 days wasted with only one 
estimate passed, which is a million and a half spent and wasted 
by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — On the same point, Mr. Speaker, being we 
have a member from the government side of the House, just 
because he does not like what our member has to say who has 
the floor, he can’t quote a citation from Beauchesne’s or 
Erskine May or from the rules of the Assembly, stands on his 
feet and says the member’s been repetitive. 
 
We trust and respect your Chair, Mr. Speaker. We know that 
you’ll rule when a member is being repetitive. 
 
And I think it’s just absolutely out of order, Mr. Speaker, for a 
member to be continually interrupting our speaker while he has 
the floor on a very important item, the motion here in which the 
government wishes to change the amount of time that bells can 
ring in the legislature. And I would point out to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and as you will well know, the member has no point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — The issue of tedious repetition, of course, is a 
part of parliamentary rules, and when the member speaks for a 
long time, of course, there is a danger of that happening. I 
would like to just remind the hon. member that in his remarks 
not to go over the same issue over and over. I think he’s been 
trying to do that. I ask him to continue to try to do that and 
continue with his remarks on rule 33(1). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Before the member from Arm River and 
the member from Lloydminster decided to make their 
contribution, I was saying — and I will summarize it and leave 
it by saying, the members opposite say of the 17-day 
bell-ringing: you hijacked the legislature; you cost us a lot of 
money; that’s anti-democratic; it’s childish; you’re on strike. 
The remarkable thing, the truly remarkable thing is that nobody 
agrees with you. And that’s truly remarkable. I would never 
have believed that would actually have occurred. 
 
That ought to give members opposite some pause to think, and 
perhaps members opposite should abandon the SPC 
privatization and perhaps you should at least set this thing aside 
for the moment, proceed with something else. I would think that 
the remarkable chain of events in that 17-day period would 
have given you some pause for thought. 
 
I tried to pay the Premier a compliment and say that he had 
reacted in the fashion I suggested after an earlier set-back in the 
Regina North East by-election in 1985. He said, I guess we 
made some mistakes, and he got re-elected. He’s not doing that 
this time. He’s saying there were no mistakes made. We stand 
on hallowed ground. We defend our actions as if we were 
defending the land of our birth and the bones of our fathers. As 
long as that intransigence continues, members opposite and this 
government can have some very serious problems. If you’re not 
prepared to learn when you make a mistake, and if you’re not 
prepared to change your ways, you’re not going to last much 
beyond the next election. I would have thought members 
opposite would have thought of that. 
 
During the 17-day bell-ringing session we did more than . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I invite the member to ask 
himself why none of the public have ever used that term . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Haven’t. Yes, you wished we had 
phrased the question differently. Members opposite wished we 
had asked, don’t you want your power rates lowered? That’s 
just patent nonsense. 
 
As I said, you can sell a quarter section and subsidize the 
operating costs for a while, but you can’t do it for very long. 
You may be able to subsidize power rates for a while, but you 
can’t do it for very long. And it is just patent nonsense to 
suggest that, as the Premier did, the question should have been, 
do you want lower power rates? That’s just nonsense, just 
absolute nonsense. And if members opposite, after this length of 
time, still partake of that foolishness, then you want to rid 
yourselves of it, because you aren’t going to be able to come to 
terms with the problems that you face, and you must be aware 
of them. 
 
So long as you continue to live in this never, never land; so long 
as you pretend that the ordinary rules of business — the 
ordinary rules of mathematics, never mind good business 
administration, don’t apply to you . . . They apply to everybody. 
The law of gravity applies to us as well as to you. The 
principles of sound public administration, the principles of 
sound business administration apply to everybody, you as well. 
It’s high time you began to take note of reality. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1658 
 

Mr. Speaker, we did more than just let the bells ring. It did in a 
fashion . . . I have not, I don’t think, in 14 years ever seen any 
single event which so galvanized public opinion. He just 
electrified public opinion in this province. People talked about 
nothing else from one end of the province to the other. 
 
Perhaps medicare was as dramatic — traumatic, I guess, would 
be just as good a word. Perhaps medicare was as traumatic. The 
death of John F. Kennedy was. But in the life of this province, 
those are the sort of events you have to compare it to, to think 
of a similar instances which so caught public opinion as that 
bell-ringing session. 
 
The public, all within a very short period of time, knew what 
was going on, had a remarkably good grasp of the issue. They 
had understood that a part of SPC, and only a part of SPC, was 
going to privatized. They understood that the government was 
privatizing the profitable portion, natural gas, and retaining the 
unprofitable portion. And so they understood it remarkably 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we didn’t just let the bells ring for 17 days, we 
went further than that. We made every conceivable effort to 
communicate with the public during that period of time. We 
took petitions around, and a petition is a two-way 
communication. It is true that a petition in its formal sense is a 
communication to the government. But in a much more real 
sense, a petition allows you to communicate with the public, 
because you get a chance to talk to them while they’re signing 
it. They get a chance to ask you some questions, and of course, 
we respond, as we did. 
 
(2030) 
 
So we communicated through the petitions. There are, I think, 
about a hundred thousand signatures on those petitions. That’s a 
tenth of the population of the province. That means a truly 
remarkable feat; that means that one out of every 10 people was 
met by someone who cared a good deal about this issue. It may 
have been an elected member; it might not have been. But one 
out of every 10 people was contacted by someone who cared 
about it, presumably someone who was prepared to answer 
questions and someone who was prepared to listen to them. 
 
That is really what the public of Saskatchewan wanted: they 
wanted someone to listen. What the public were saying when 
they signed the petition is, please listen to us. 
 
The Speaker: — I don’t like to interrupt the hon. member; 
however, I have been listening to him carefully, and for some 
time now he has been talking about the effects of the 
bell-ringing. He hasn’t been talking about the specifics of the 
changing of the rule on bell-ringing. He’s been going on at 
great length on the effects, and I’ve allowed him to do that. 
 
He’s certainly going over the same territory again, and I would 
like to ask him to speak more directly to the rule, to the debate, 
and I’m sure he’s able to do that. He’s able, he’s been in the 
House for a long time, and I would like him to speak more to 
the debate itself. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to move to a slightly different portion of my comments. I want 
to talk about the fashion in which this was brought forward — 
in some ways its most unfortunate aspect. In some ways that’s 
one of the reasons why we find the motion so objectionable. It 
is partially its content. We don’t think there is any evidence that 
has been abused, and I will get to that in due course. We don’t 
think there is any evidence that the rule has been abused, but it 
is partially the process. 
 
We have a very valuable tradition in this Assembly. The 
tradition is that rules are not changed without a consensus of all 
parties. That’s how it has always been done, and the changes 
have been very successful. 
 
I’ve seen a number of such rule changes. It has been done — I 
am told there’s no instance in Saskatchewan’s history when rule 
changes have not been done by consensus. They’ve all been 
done with a committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first one I remember was . . . There are, of 
course, exceptions to that. Not all changes have been brought in 
on the recommendation of the committee, but they’ve all been 
done by consensus. 
 
When I was first elected, the legislature sat on Friday afternoon, 
sat the same hours Friday as it did, in fact, Wednesday. That 
was changed, on a simple motion of the House, permanently, 
but it was done with the consensus of the opposition, who were 
then Liberals. 
 
But no major changes have taken place without all members 
being involved, and this is a major change. This is, as I have 
said, our last effective means of stopping the government. It is 
patently obvious that all the rational arguments in the world 
with respect to this government are like water coming off a 
duck’s back — just have no effect at all. 
 
This is our opportunity to bring the government to a halt. We 
don’t do so lightly; in fact, I think any opposition would use 
such a thing with the greatest of reluctance. But it is there and it 
is our weapon when need be. 
 
I can recall at least two rules committees, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
one of which you served on, I believe, if I’m not mistaken. 
They usually sat intersessionally, usually did some travelling to 
see how rules that were considered were working elsewhere — 
always done by consensus. Some of them were things the 
government wanted, and quite frankly, some of them were 
things that were not necessarily in the government’s best 
interest. 
 
I recall, Mr. Speaker, the rules committee which, if my memory 
serves me correctly, you sat on, which recommended the 
introduction of television into this Assembly. Television 
obviously is going to broadcast the work of this Assembly over 
a much, much greater audience. It was not self-evident that it 
was in the interests of government to broadcast these 
proceedings. These proceedings are an opportunity for the 
opposition to hold the government to account. By its nature, the 
opposition is on the offensive, the government’s on the 
defensive. It’s a difficult position to maintain. It was not in any 
sense self-evident that the introduction of television was in the  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1659 
 

interest of the government. 
 
The government of the day could have put a kibosh on it, but it 
didn’t. They went along with the change, and I think it’s 
worked very well. One of the reasons I think it worked well is 
because all of the members . . . all parties were represented. 
Everyone participated. The needs of the government were 
considered, as were the needs of the opposition. And we 
introduced television in a fashion which worked, I think, to the 
advantage of all concerned, again because it was done by 
consensus. 
 
There were other options, one of which was not to have brought 
in television at all. There were other ways of bringing it in . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Kindersley tells 
me I missed a good ball game. It may come as some surprise to 
the member of Kindersley, there are other important issues in 
the world besides ball, and this is one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I was so interrupted, I was saying that the 
system of consensus has served us well in a number of ways, 
and when I say our system of consensus, our system by where 
rules are changed only on the agreement of all parties. The rules 
which have been brought in have worked, I think, to the 
satisfaction of all concerned. I don’t know of any exception to 
that. Some change which parties might like has not occurred. 
 
It has also served to protect the rights of members. It’s a very 
dangerous precedent to be changing the rules unilaterally, to be 
saying, I don’t like this rule so I’m going to change it. It’s a 
very dangerous precedent to set. 
 
The members opposite should consider whether or not you 
believe you will always be in government. If you believe that, 
then this is a great precedent. If you believe that this 
administration is going to last to the end of time, then this is a 
very good precedent. 
 
If, however, you believe that what goes around comes around, if 
you believe that all administrations are defeated sooner or later 
— a very, very high percentage of them on their second election 
. . . after their second term, I should have said; only one has 
ever lasted past three terms, and that was the Douglas 
government — then you ought to think about unilateral rule 
changes, of those who live by the sword may well die by it. 
 
What if you are in opposition and something . . . I want 
government members opposite to think about how you’d feel if 
you were in opposition. You used a tactic that was open to you, 
say, petitions. Let us suppose members opposite are in 
opposition. You use a tactic which is open to you, say, petitions 
— you file petitions. The government finds that embarrassing, 
can be time-consuming, and they abolish it. 
 
Imagine as well that you have . . . you enjoy overwhelming 
support with respect to the petitions. What the government’s 
doing is very unpopular. They say, but we’re right, 
nevertheless. You say, but it’s still unpopular. They abolish 
petitions. I want members opposite to ask themselves how 
they’d feel in those circumstances. You would feel as if the 
government in office lacks both a sense of fair play and a sense 
of respect for how this place  

should operate. 
 
As the member from Rosemont pointed out, this place has 
always been a forum for curbing excesses in the executive 
branch of governments. That’s all it has ever been. It was born 
with that deeply-felt need. The nobles at the battle of 
Runnymede in the 11th century were doing what we are doing. 
They were seeking to curb what they felt to be an excessive use 
of power by the executive. The Royalists at the time would 
point out that the use of executive power in England was pale 
by comparison with its use in some European countries. 
Nevertheless, they sought to curb that — they sought to curb 
that. 
 
When parliaments began to be called during the period of the 
Plantagenets, they did so in an attempt to set some boundaries. 
They never, ever . . . Parliament never, ever saw itself as the 
law-making body. It simply set the boundaries and curbed 
excessive action, often excessive taxation. 
 
That is precisely what we were attempting to do with very 
widespread public support. At the end of the Tudor monarchy, 
when the Hanover kings came from Germany and were unable 
to speak English, the power passed from the monarchs, who 
could not speak the language and really could not do it, to a 
cabinet. Once again parliament existed, not to do the work — 
Sir Robert Walpole and his cabinet — parliament existed to 
curb excesses; that remained the overarching. And the most 
important feature of parliamentary government is that 
parliament, while it has the legal power to do so, very, very 
rarely does parliament initiate actions; that comes from 
executive. Parliament is there to curb the excesses of the 
executive. 
 
(2045) 
 
You seek to take that away. It’s very fundamental. And you 
seek to do so unilaterally, and that’s very fundamental. We 
were prepared to meet with a committee. We were prepared to 
put on the table for discussion, bell-ringing. We were prepared 
to go and put that on the table, to make our arguments that we 
have been making here, in an atmosphere in which people can 
listen. We were prepared to hear your arguments, and perhaps 
there is a better way of doing it. 
 
Bell-ringing came into existence, I think, because of a flaw in 
the parliamentary system. I think bell-ringing came into 
existence because of the existence — which really is a feature 
of parliamentary government and not congressional government 
— only in parliamentary government in England and Canada 
and the Commonwealth is there such rigid party discipline as to 
make it impossible to defeat a government. That is a feature 
which is unique to parliament, to the parliament of England, 
and those which have taken that institution. It is different 
elsewhere. 
 
There would be no such problem in France or the United States. 
There is a problem and a need for that kind of tactic because in 
a different form of government, what we call a congressional 
form of government, the legislators are a part of a governmental 
system; they assist in drafting statutes; budgets are dealt with 
and formulated in  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1660 
 

committees. And that is true in North Dakota; it’s true in 
Washington; it’s true in the National Assembly in Paris and 
throughout almost all of Europe. 
 
Only really in the parliamentary form of government, in 
England and the Commonwealth, does the legislature have such 
a restricted role. Only in those countries is the executive given 
such a free rein. That is why parliaments need the powers they 
have. They have no ability to prevent the problems from within. 
If the governor of Nebraska — Nebraska hasn’t got a 
publicly-owned utility, but let’s supposing they did. I can’t, on 
my feet . . . Minnesota. The governor of Minnesota proposed 
that their public utility system be privatized. Let’s assume . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve allowed the member 
far-ranging debate, but the question before the Assembly is the 
changing of rule 33(1), and I ask the member to keep his 
comments relevant to the process of changing the rules or to 
rule 33(1). 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was not 
attempting to delve into the subject too thoroughly, but I was 
attempting to make the point that bell-ringing is very much in 
keeping with what parliaments are. 
 
And I was attempting to point out to those who think otherwise 
— and it’s obvious that most members opposite don’t 
understand how this thing works. Most members opposite say, 
let’s come and debate and discuss it here. What is debated in 
here is irrelevant. There’s no bearing on what goes into the Bill, 
none at all, never has within living memory. 
 
They are thinking of a congressional form of government where 
members, in fact, do play a role in what goes into the legislation 
and what goes into budgets. That is the way their system 
operates. Ours is different. And members opposite who suggest 
that we shouldn’t have rung the bells, we should have come and 
debated it, don’t understand the limits of a parliamentary form 
of government. Coming and debating it doesn’t change 
anything in the legislation, doesn’t change anything in the 
budgets, and has not done so within living memory. 
 
The function of this legislature, partially, to provide an 
alternative to people at elections; to call the government to 
account, but to act as a check and a brake; and to provide the 
boundaries within which the government can operate; and to 
check excessive and excess executive action. That is what we 
were attempting to do. 
 
When the government opposite unilaterally changes those rules, 
as this government has done, you change a fundamental part of 
this institution. This is not a trite problem we’re dealing with. 
We are dealing in many ways with the ability of this legislature 
to serve one of its primary and, indeed, its most ancient 
function, and that is to act as a check and a balance, to curb 
excessive executive action. This government did not invent 
excess and excessive action. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But it practises it well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Saskatoon University 
says it practises it well. It certainly has done  

that, but it didn’t invent it. Parliaments were invented in the 
Middle Ages to prevent it. They were never invented to govern 
themselves. 
 
Unlike virtually every other nation, the British parliament was 
born, not out of revolution but out of a peaceful transition . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Arm River is 
keeping time for me. That’s very generous of him. I always 
knew the member from Arm River to be a man of generous 
spirits, and it’s deeply appreciated. 
 
So when they . . . The point I’m trying to make to members 
opposite, who are perhaps as concerned about watching the 
clock as they are with dealing with the issue . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you sit down. We’ll deal with 
it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s exactly my point. That’s exactly the 
point I’ve been making. The member from Thunder Creek, I 
believe it was, said why don’t you sit down and we’ll deal with 
it. That is exactly my point. My point is that the bell-ringing is 
needed as an effective check where you have an executive arm 
of government which is prepared to ignore everything that is 
said to them, which is prepared to ignore public opinion, and 
which has no sense of responsibility to do what the public . . . to 
provide the kind of government the people want. My very point 
is that if I sat down and no one spoke, like so many sheep, 
members opposite would vote away the bell-ringing, and then 
those who have yet another agenda, the privatization of the 
Crown corporations, would be free to act in a fashion which the 
public of the province have said they don’t want . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
The member from Arm River promises me 15 consecutive 
speakers. That would be truly remarkable. There’s grave doubt 
. . . As I said earlier, there’s grave doubt that some members 
opposite can speak with their knees straight. It has never been 
seen. So it may be possible for some of those members to speak 
with their knees straight, but I have not seen it; I have not seen 
some of them. Fifteen of them might speak, I suppose. But 
given the way this government behaves, they will relentlessly 
pass this motion and then relentlessly deal with the 
privatization, notwithstanding the overwhelming public 
sentiment against it. 
 
So we are not dealing with a trifle. This goes to the very heart 
of what parliaments are all about. This is, I think, the first time 
we have used bell-ringing in this sort of a fashion. There is no 
evidence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the bell-ringing has been 
abused. I think that really is an accurate statement. This 
government . . . and that has caused everyone to wonder why 
this government is so insistent on doing away with it. But there 
really is no evidence that bell-ringing has ever been abused. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I know of . . . I can think of four occasions 
where it has been used. There was the introduction of the 
energy Bill in Ottawa, where the idea was born, where, as I 
said, the Liberal government of the day brought in an omnibus 
Bill which in fact  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1661 
 

encompassed four different Bills. It encompassed amendments 
to the Criminal Code as well as the energy Bill. 
 
The Conservatives said, there is no way we can deal with this 
Bill; break it up. The Liberals said, like it or lump it. The 
Conservatives found a rather . . . what was then a unique way of 
lumping it — they rang the bells. Public opinion was 
overwhelmingly on the side of the Conservatives, and the 
government broke up the Bill, and then the House of Commons 
could deal with it, as it couldn’t deal with the omnibus Bill. 
 
The next incident that I remember of any duration was the 
bell-ringing in Manitoba. One might feel some sympathy for 
what the Pawley government was trying to do as I do. The 
Pawley government in that day was ordered by the Supreme 
Court of Canada to translate its statutes into French, as I recall 
this; so it proceeded to bring in legislation which would have 
allowed French translation. 
 
It was monstrously unpopular in Manitoba. Whatever the merits 
of it, whatever the . . . the fact that the government really had no 
option and was proceeding as responsibly as it could, meant 
little. It was very, very unpopular. The Conservatives rang the 
bells in that case. While I don’t agree with the position the 
Conservatives took on bilingualism, I would readily admit that 
they had overwhelming public support for what they were 
doing. 
 
And with the benefit of hindsight, perhaps the government of 
the day should have found another way of translating the 
statutes. Perhaps they should have stepped back and said, all 
kinds of responsible people are most upset with what we’re 
doing; perhaps we shouldn’t proceed. 
 
I think that is something that this government opposite should 
consider. You should consider some of the people who are 
opposed to you, and you should step back for a moment. At the 
very least you should step back from the whole thing and say, 
something’s very wrong; maybe there’s another way to do it. 
 
The tragedy in this case, of course, Mr. Speaker, is that there is 
another way to do it. It was suggested by the Minister of Justice 
— it was he who first raised the issue of an all-parliamentary 
committee. The Leader of the Opposition responded in a 
positive fashion, and that’s how the matter should have 
proceeded. But of course it didn’t; the government opposite has 
got enormously stubborn. 
 
(2100) 
 
We believe that there’s still room to resolve this matter. We 
still, Mr. Speaker, believe that a committee can and should 
work, and we would like to see members opposite consider 
following up on the suggestion put forth by the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
We would suggest that if the problem were sent to a committee, 
this legislature could get back to a more normal schedule. We 
could deal with the Education estimates; we could deal with the 
Agriculture estimates; we could deal with the hospital from 
Gravelbourg — I  

know that will be something . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Other issues can certainly be dealt 
with in the legislature by other motions put forward. If the 
member wants to put motions on the floor, it can certainly deal 
with other issues. The issue we’re dealing with now is rule 
33(1), and I would ask the member to keep relevant to the 
process of dealing with this motion or with the motion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I did stray a bit, Mr. Speaker. I must 
admit I strayed a bit when I got into the soft underbelly of the 
Gravelbourg hospital. That probably is somewhat outside the 
boundaries of rule 33 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
members invite me to talk about the hospital at Lafleche. I don’t 
suppose the Deputy Speaker will invite me to talk about the 
hospital at Lafleche, and that’s the only reason I don’t. I would 
indeed like to discuss the hospital situation in the province. I 
say to the members opposite, if you would call something other 
than this silly motion, we could indeed get to discussing the 
hospital in Gravelbourg versus the hospital in Lafleche. 
 
Members from that area think they’ve got a story to tell. The 
problem with this government’s relentless pursuit of this motion 
is that they have no opportunity to tell the story. And that’s why 
we have been inviting members opposite to move to some other 
item of business. You can always come back to it. 
 
I cannot imagine you bringing back the SPC privatization 
before the Barber Commission reports, and I therefore think 
that you won’t need the rule, and I therefore think you could 
safely withdraw this . . . not withdraw it, let it stand, at least for 
the time being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, we object to the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I will not make the obvious comment that 
comes to mind. I have always shown respect for the Speaker, 
and I will do so on all occasions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to see this government abandon the 
motion, not just because we are opposed to abolishing the 
bell-ringing, but very fundamentally we’re opposed to this 
government unilaterally changing the rules as they have been 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a history of proceeding in a 
fashion which is anti-democratic. I want to briefly refer to some 
of those instances . . . I think what is bothering the child in the 
gallery is the very bad behaviour of members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And I say to the couple, there’s no need to 
take the child out of the Legislative Assembly. The child is a lot 
better behaved than most members who are sitting on the floor, 
actually. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A good deal . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
and probably has a better understanding of what’s going on — 
that’s right! — than most members  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1662 
 

opposite. 
 
I think it most unfair, Mr. Speaker, to remove that small child 
when he’s behaving better and probably has a better 
understanding of what’s happening, and makes every bit as 
much sense as the members opposite, too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has behaved in a fashion which is 
not democratic — done so on a number of occasions. We think 
this rule strikes at the democratic institutions. We think this 
rule, Mr. Speaker, is an attempt to chip away at our democratic 
institutions which, as I have attempted to point out, are and 
always have been an institution which provides a curb on 
excessive executive action. That’s what this place . . . That is 
how parliaments began. There were those, Mr. Speaker, who 
felt that parliaments no longer served that function. We have 
found out, Mr. Speaker, that parliaments still serve that 
function. Legislatures still serve as a check. 
 
If this is done away with, this institution will lose some of its 
ability to function. We think members know that. We think they 
are proceeding, knowing that this institution will be a less 
effective check. We think they’re proceeding, in fact wanting to 
achieve that result. 
 
This is not the first time this government opposite has 
proceeded in a fashion which makes it more difficult for public 
opinion to be felt. This is not the first time this government’s 
tangled with public opinion, lost, and after it loses, changed the 
rules. This government has done this before. They have a 
history of so doing. 
 
Their unilateral change of the rules and unilateral abolition of 
bell-ringing, when it did nothing more than serve to focus 
public opinion and give public opinion some ability to be 
effective, reminds me of this government’s approach to the 
ward system. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The ward system isn’t up on debate 
now. I’ve asked the member previously to keep his comments 
relevant to process or rule 33(1). I can read out of the members’ 
handbook: 
 

The Speaker, or the Chairman, after having called the 
attention of the Assembly, or of the committee, to the 
conduct of a Member who persists in irrelevance, or 
tedious repetition, either of his own arguments or the 
arguments used by other members in debate, may direct 
him to discontinue . . . 
 

So I would ask the member to keep his remarks relevant to the 
motion before the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I ask you to review the 
member’s comments and to look at the fact that he was simply 
making a comparison between bell-ringing and another closely 
related . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. That is not a point of order. 
There’s no point of order on the ruling of the Chair. 
 

Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
reiterate what my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
University was saying about the member from Regina Centre’s 
comments when speaking on . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There’s no point of order. I 
have been listening very closely to the member’s comments, 
from Regina Centre. I have ruled on it, and there is no point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well we’re certainly staying very closely 
within the limits of the subject under debate when we cannot 
make comparisons. I have certainly been allowed, Mr. Speaker, 
to make comparisons on other subjects. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you challenging the Chair now? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, I’m not. I said I would obey the ruling. 
 
I was just saying that we are maintaining a very narrow focus 
on a subject when we cannot make a comparison. I had not, in 
fact, when interrupted, ever got into the . . . even got into the 
subject. I just said that they had showed a disdain for public 
opinion on the issue of the ward system. They had found the 
exercise of public opinion to be inconvenient, to put it mildly, 
and so they simply disregarded it, changed the rules, brought 
back the ward system. 
 
That, in fact, is what you’ve done here. You didn’t find the 
bell-ringing as inconvenient as you found public opinion. It is 
public opinion which has . . . It is the expression of public 
opinion which has bothered you, not the bell-ringing in itself. 
What is bothering you people, what is bothering you people is 
not that we are opposed to the introduction of SPC. That isn’t 
what . . . The privatization of SPC . . . That isn’t what inspired 
this motion. What inspired this motion was, and what has 
brought it on and what has made members opposite so stubborn 
and bull-headed is, the fact that the public opinion also are 
opposed to the privatization of SPC, and they’re also in favour 
of retaining bell-ringing. 
 
I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that there’s no instance that I know 
of where bell-ringing has actually been abused, in the sense that 
it has been used to thwart public opinion. Any time it’s been 
used, it has been used with fairly solid support of public 
opinion. That was true in Ottawa; it was true in Manitoba. It 
was used once here; the bells rang for four days. I remember 
that because I was, in a sense, I was at the centre of the thing. 
 
It’s worth going over that previous bell-ringing incident to 
illustrate how ringing the bells is a safeguard and a protection. 
While there was not as much at stake there, what occurred was 
an outrageous violation of the rights of members. 
 
I had made a comment in this Assembly . . . I, in fact, had asked 
some questions, probably in a rhetorical fashion, about an 
individual with whom the government had  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1663 
 

dealings, by the name of Mark Silver. He owned a company, 
Silver Developments. I asked some questions and suggested 
that he had made an improper use of a government employee 
and had induced that government employee to see that he got 
the building, and then he came to work for him. 
 
That brought about . . . the comments were made in the 
Assembly. I was never, in fact, asked to say it outside of the 
Assembly, so the comments were made in the Assembly and 
nowhere else. 
 
They sued; I was sued for some $2 million . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Paid it out of petty cash. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And couldn’t be paid out of petty cash, and 
came back. The then Speaker ruled that there had been a prima 
facie, we called a point of personal privilege. The then Speaker, 
the current Minister of the Environment, ruled that there had, in 
fact, been a violation of my privileges as a member, and 
suggested that the House should deal with it. 
 
There was an obvious and appropriate way for the House to 
deal with it; that was to insist that the action be withdrawn. 
 
But the member from Lumsden didn’t do that. Instead, the then 
minister of Justice, the member from Lumsden, in effect gave 
those who were suing me free rein; did so in the face of all the 
authorities; did so because he simply wished to make life as 
difficult for me as he could; did so because he didn’t care about 
the rules of the Assembly. He was quite prepared to overlook 
the rules because the action did, in fact, make my work 
difficult. It also made the work of any opposition member 
difficult. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, what could you have done if you 
couldn’t ring the bells? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And the member quite rightly asked the 
question I was going to ask: what could we have done if we 
hadn’t been able to ring the bells on that occasion? We did ring 
the bells. They rang for four days. Then, as now, there was 
absolutely no support for the government’s position. And 
eventually after four days the government asked the lawyer in 
charge to withdraw the action, and he did. 
 
In effect, the government resolved the matter, as they should 
have done initially when the member from Rosetown, the then 
Speaker, ruled that it had been a violation of my rights. 
 
But ask yourself what you do in such a situation if you can’t 
ring the bells. You cannot function as a . . . And very shortly, if 
you people keep on your present ways, some of you are going 
to find out what the role of an opposition member is. Some of 
you will not, but probably some of you will survive. You will 
find that you ask questions; you ask questions about people’s 
relationship with the government. It matters not whether or not 
GigaText have wasted $39 million . . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The member keeps 
bringing other issues into the debate which are not relevant to 
the debate before the Assembly. Other specific issues are not 
being debated. They can be brought forward to the floor by 
motion and can be debated. The question before the Assembly 
is the process of changing the rules and rule 33(1), so I’d ask 
the member, again, to keep his comments relevant to those 
issues. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I wonder if you would review the comments of 
the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It’s no point of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, let me clarify my comments. 
I was not getting into the subject of GigaText. I did not raise the 
specifics of the issue. I was simply making . . . and you didn’t 
let me finish making the argument, just for openers. I was 
making the argument with respect to GigaText. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. That is another issue . . . 
Order. Order. Order. The Speaker’s on his feet. 
 
No one can deny that the Chair, in the debate, has given 
members very wide latitude. The member is now speaking 
about different specific issues, and he’s bringing other specific 
issues into the debate. The debate here is on the changing of the 
rules, the process, and rule 33(1). I would ask the member to 
keep his comments relevant to that, and I’ve already read into 
the record out of the member’s handbook, rule 25(2), which . . . 
If the member continues to stray from the debate that’s before 
this Assembly, we can call the next speaker. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Could I just 
ask a question, Mr. Speaker? In the debate in this House . . . I 
want to ask a question of you and not of the members opposite. 
I want to ask a question. Can a member not make an argument 
before a Speaker interferes and makes the assumption for him 
what his argument is going to be? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member is bringing other 
specific issues and detail into his speech. Order. When a 
member is straying . . . If a member is straying and you allow 
him to finish his point, it could last for a long time before he 
comes to the nub of the issue. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Order. The member was straying from the 
debate before the Assembly. I ask the member to get back on 
the issue. I ask the member to get back on the issue that’s 
before the Assembly. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I wonder if you could review the comments of the 
Minister of Justice and the Minister of  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1664 
 

Highways . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to rule 25(2) which states that a member 
should not persist “in irrelevance, or tedious repetition.” Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask you to review the comments of the 
member from Regina Centre . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The Chair has already ruled on 
relevance. I would ask . . . There is no point of order. The 
debate continues. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’d like to raise a point of order. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. Again I would ask you to examine the 
remarks of the Minister of Highways . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There’s no point of order on 
the ruling of the Chair. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Point of order. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
want to question the ruling of the Chair, but I would ask you to 
review the remarks of the Minister of Highways, as distinct 
from the member from Regina Centre . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. That is not a point of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The comment that would’ve been made by 
the member for Regina Victoria, had he been allowed to make 
his comment, I think, is that I, in making the argument I was 
about to make, it was simply the converse of an argument used 
by the Minister of Highways when he introduced the motion. 
My argument was simply the converse of his. If his is relevant, 
so is mine. I was not attempting to get into any other area. The 
area I mentioned — and I guess I cannot use the name . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — GigaText. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. The area that I was going to 
mention is apparently a word I can’t use. 
 
I was going to make the argument though, with respect to it, we 
couldn’t have raised the issue if we hadn’t had bell-ringing. 
Members of this . . . And that was the only argument I was 
going to make. I was not going to get in to discuss the aspects 
of . . . whatever. I was simply going to make the argument that 
if we hadn’t had bell-ringing, we never could have raised the 
issue. And that was the only argument I was going to make. The 
point I was trying to make to you was that I didn’t want to 
discuss the details of it — that’s not relevant. But our ability to 
raise the subject is very, very relevant — very, very relevant. 
 
Remember that this side cannot function if we are subject to 
legal suits. It is in the nature of the democratic process that most 
people who are elected to this Assembly are people of average 
means. There are some wealthy people elected, but they are 
rare. Most people elected are people  

of average means. 
 
Most of the people with respect to whom we raise issues are 
people not of average means. Most of the people we raise issues 
with respect to, be they be the Mark Silvers or the — as I say, I 
guess I can’t say it, but the company from Montreal — most of 
those people are not of average means. We cannot deal with 
those issues, we cannot raise them, we cannot ask pointed 
questions if we’re going to be subject to legal suits. 
 
Our protection from that is central to our ability to function. 
The point I was going to make is that these people — if it 
hadn’t been for bell-ringing — these people would have taken 
that away from me in 1984. They sought to do so, and the only 
reason that they didn’t take away from me my protection from 
legal suits was because we had a bell-ringing, and that was the 
point I was going to make. I was not getting into that issue. That 
issue is doing just fine without me getting into it. It’s developed 
a life of its own. 
 
It is an illustration of the point I began to make before all this 
broke loose, that I don’t think we could have functioned if we 
hadn’t have had the bell-ringing. It protected us on an important 
issue. Sounds trivial; for members opposite who may never 
have sat in opposition, it may seem to you as if a protection 
from a defamation suit is a trivial thing — it’s not; very 
expensive. 
 
Defence of a defamation suit will cost 5 to $10,000. For people 
of average means — and as I say, most people who get elected 
are people of average means — that is a prohibitive cost. You 
must defend yourself from defamation suits; you must not say 
it. These people in 1984 would have taken that protection away 
from me. The only reason it didn’t was because we had that 
ultimate weapon which you only use when you have to, 
bell-ringing. We used it and we won the day. 
 
I say to the members opposite, whether it is with respect to the 
federal use of the bell-ringing, whether it’s in Manitoba, 
whether it’s in Saskatchewan, or whether it’s in . . . I’m not 
aware of it that bell-ringing has been used anywhere else for 
this length of time. The bells have always been rung with solid 
public support, and there is no evidence that bell-ringing has 
ever been abused. 
 
Bell-ringing in Saskatchewan in 1984, bell-ringing protected 
the rights of a member. I know that vividly because I was that 
member at the centre of it. Bell-ringing protected the rights of 
members in Ottawa in 19 . . . mid-1970’s, I don’t remember the 
year with precision. The people in Manitoba rang the bells. 
Whether or not one agrees with the position the Conservatives 
took, they did so with solid public support. 
 
We did it in 1989 to try to prevent what we felt would have 
been a tragedy. We think there is reason to believe that if you 
privatize these Crown corporations, they may be difficult to 
ever recapture. We think that to some extent this damage is 
irrevocable. We think we may not be able to undo it. Therefore, 
we felt very strongly that you should not be taking such a 
drastic step in the face of, as I said, overwhelming public 
opposition. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1665 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal for a moment with this 
government’s motive in bringing forth the bell-ringing and, I 
suppose, our motive for opposing it. One has to ask themselves 
why they feel so strongly; why have they flown in the face of 
public opinion; why have they incurred the public outrage as 
they have; what goal does this government seek to achieve. I 
can’t believe that they believe that an abolition of the 
bell-ringing is necessary for the proper functioning of this 
legislature. 
 
(2130) 
 
I think the member from Kindersley knew full well that the 
proper and normal functioning of this legislature did not require 
an abolition of the bells. When he proposed as he did — I just 
read it — when he proposed that the matter be sent to a 
committee, there was in there a recognition that it was nothing 
urgent, nothing that needed to be dealt with forthwith, and that 
the traditions of this Assembly which have served us so well, as 
I stated earlier, the traditions of this Assembly could be 
respected. 
 
What was it then that causes the government to be so 
intransigent? What is there that causes the government to stand 
so firm? We think it relates directly to privatization. We think 
that if the government had abandoned . . . If the government 
were to abandon privatization, it would soon abandon this thing 
and get on with the business of the session. 
 
We think the government wants the bell-ringing motion passed 
so that they may have a free hand to do whatever they wish with 
respect to the potash corporation, with respect to SPC, and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), with the magnificent 
$75,000 annual report. We think that’s why the government 
wants to move with it. All the more reason then for us to stand 
firm. 
 
The member from Kindersley said earlier: why does it work in 
other areas? It works in other areas because you don’t have 
governments with temperaments like this one. We don’t have 
governments that proceed from a sort of base motions and base 
motives that this government is. 
 
There is a very useful editorial to which I want to refer ever so 
briefly. It was printed in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on May 
11. The editorial, in summary, begins by saying: 
 

The Saskatchewan Tories may end up shooting themselves 
in the foot by trying to limit legislative bell-ringing to one 
hour. (The move . . . I guess I’ve got to read the 
intervening paragraph. It doesn’t make sense.) 
 
If the government changed, they would likely be the first to 
bear the full punitive brunt of the new measure. 
 

I said that earlier to members opposite. Members should think 
carefully about what will happen when you are in opposition, as 
you inevitably will be unless you disappear entirely as the last 
Conservative government did in 1934. But unless the province 
is so blessed, some of you are going to be here. You should 
think very carefully about how you’re going to be treated. You 
should think very  

carefully about whether you would want to be the subject of this 
kind of treatment. 
 
I used the example of the petitions. How would you like it if 
you were using them with full public support, albeit at great 
inconvenience to the government, and the government 
abolished them? You should think about that. The editorial in 
the Star-Phoenix on March 11, in fact, invites you to think 
about it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — May 11. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — May 11, right you are. The member from 
Saskatoon is no doubt familiar with the article. It’s too bad he 
didn’t take it to heart. 
 
The editorial then goes on, for the benefit of those who aren’t so 
familiar with it: “The move also makes Tories look thirsty for 
revenge.” It makes the members opposite look thirsty for 
revenge because there really isn’t any other reason why this Bill 
would . . . why this government would move so relentlessly to 
pass a Bill that you really don’t need. 
 
I made the argument earlier, and I won’t repeat it, that you do 
not need this at least until after the Barber Commission reports. 
And we were told when it was set up, it wasn’t going to report 
until the fall. We were told by the Premier that the SaskEnergy 
would not be back before then. You must know that we would 
not use such a drastic . . . we would not take such a drastic step 
on anything but SaskEnergy, so you don’t need it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Wascana, I’ll do him a 
favour; I will not repeat that remark. The . . . and perhaps do the 
public of Saskatchewan a favour as well. 
 
The move makes you people look thirsty for revenge because 
there isn’t any other motive. There isn’t any other reason why 
you would be so stubborn about passing it. You don’t need it. It 
is your insistence on proceeding with the unthinkable has meant 
that the government is morally bound. Important issues which 
should be dealt with are not being dealt with. Why are you 
doing it? It would seem that revenge should be a part of it. The 
editorial then goes on to retrace briefly the history of how this 
got before the legislature. 
 

Justice Minister Bob Andrew filed notice of his plans to 
introduce the motion only hours after the NDP returned to 
the House. In doing so, he circumvented an established 
process for changing House rules. Andrew had to admit he 
couldn’t remember a time a rule change hadn’t come from 
the legislature’s all-party rules committee. 
 

Then they go on to say, and this is the very point I was trying to 
make to the members: 
 

The government could at least have waited for the issue to 
cool down a bit, then introduced the measure through 
accepted channels. This heavy-handed tactic isn’t likely to 
win public favour, considering the significant level of 
support for the bell-ringing move. 
 

One would ask members opposite, and I do ask members,  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1666 
 

to consider how you must appear to the public. I haven’t seen 
any recent polls, but your standing must be very, very low. 
 
There are a number of factors going into that, but one of them is 
your high-handed, arrogant approach to government. Members 
opposite insist on proceeding with their agenda even if there is a 
significant level of public opposition, as there is in this case. 
Members should give some thought to try and do something 
about your public image. 
 
One of the things you could do is to try to appear a little more 
flexible, a little readier to accept public opinion, to work with 
the opposition. If members were to set aside this motion, 
proceed with other business, at least pretend they want to 
govern — governing includes working with an opposition. 
 
This is not . . . For the benefit of members opposite, this is not 
some banana republic. This is a province with deeply ingrained 
democratic institutions, a province which has operated by 
consensus, more so than many other provinces. And it’s 
something members opposite ought to take into account. This 
public is not . . . The public of Saskatchewan are not used to 
seeing governments proceed in an arbitrary and high-handed 
fashion. 
 
This is a province with a co-operative background. I’m not 
going to get into that in great detail, but one should remember 
that the people of this province are different than they are in 
other provinces. We have a different history. 
 
As the former member from Elphinstone, Allan Blakeney, used 
to say, more than half of the people in Saskatchewan are neither 
of French or British origin, and Saskatchewan’s the only 
province in which that’s true. We have a very co-operative 
history. 
 
People expect, in this province, expect to work with other 
people; they expect governments to work with oppositions. 
They do not expect governments to proceed in a high-handed, 
arbitrary, dictatorial fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a guest, a number of guests at our house 
over the weekend; one of them was an American, actually grew 
up in California. She made a comment that Canadians are very, 
very polite; they also will go to extraordinary lengths to reach a 
consensus. 
 
She said that . . . often sees at organizational meetings — she’s 
involved in, as it happens, the Open Door Society. She said they 
go to extraordinary lengths to reach a consensus. The views of 
minorities attempt to work it into the total mix. So very 
different from California. In California, a decision is made, 51 
per cent carry the day, and very little attempt is made to 
incorporate the views of the minorities. 
 
But the single, most striking thing about the Canadian 
experience was, she put it, was how polite we are. I think, while 
her observation is accurate, I think she has not described it very 
well. I think Saskatchewan people believe in consensus 
building, they believe that society operates the best when we 
operate with a consensus. That  

has certainly been a part and parcel of the history of this 
legislature. 
 
One of the reasons why members . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . that really escapes me. The member from 
Souris-Cannington says I am making the case for the 
government. It is really hard to understand how one could say 
that you’re building a consensus when you’re proceeding in a 
fashion opposed by 67 per cent of the Saskatchewan people. 
That’s not ignoring the views of a minority, that’s ignoring the 
views of a majority. So the views of the member from 
Souris-Cannington are rather hard to understand. No doubt the 
member from Souris-Cannington will want to get on his feet at 
an appropriate time and to speak in this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to members opposite, and I will leave it, that 
your high-handed approach has lost you the few friends you 
have. And I’m going to read again: 
 

This heavy-handed tactic isn’t likely to win public favour, 
considering the significant level of support for the 
bell-ringing move. 
 

Then it goes on: 
 

The government claimed the NDP would have refused any 
change. But both sides may well have come to a 
compromise, if change is indeed necessary. (The editorial 
goes on.) There does not appear to be any pressing need for 
a rule change. 
 

The next sentence is the point that must be bitter gall in the 
mouths of members opposite: 
 

Saskatchewan is no worse off because the bells jangled for 
a record 17 days over the SaskEnergy issue. In fact, the 
public is probably better informed. People were spurred to 
take up the argument — the discussion took place 
everywhere, around kitchen tables and in taxicabs. 
 

What must be bitter gall to members opposite is that that, in 
fact, is a universal view in Saskatchewan, is that the 
bell-ringing didn’t do any harm. The vast majority of people 
think it did a lot of good. 
 
I say to members opposite, you ought to think about what that 
means. What it means is, for you people, that you need to 
change tacks, you need to change courses . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Shellbrook-Torch River 
says, sit down. We’ll do that. 
 
Once members on this side are finished making their comments 
as thoroughly and completely as they are able to do so, then this 
government has every intention of passing the bell-ringing and 
then getting on to their real agenda, which is the privatization of 
SPC and SaskEnergy and SGI. Members have learned nothing 
and, I guess, have forgotten nothing as well. 
 
(2145) 
 
The editorial then goes on: 
 

  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1667 
 

The stand-off also got political action — the government 
will delay legislative debate while a panel it appointed 
travels the province. 
 

I may say, Mr. Speaker, that the panel which is travelling the 
province, I doubt will make a major contribution to the 
discussion. Certainly the panel of bureaucrats which travelled 
the province did not contribute very much to the discussion. 
They failed to attract . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — At least they told the truth. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — They did, but they told it in a vacuum. If 
they told the . . . The member from Saskatoon says they told the 
truth. If they did, they told it in a vacuum because there was 
nobody there listening. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nobody knows whether they did or not. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Nobody knows whether they did or not. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member for Saskatoon Mayfair. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Saskatoon Mayfair will 
no doubt be interested in considering whether or not anything 
that’s said in a vacuum is of any relevance. 
 

The Opposition was also able to accurately measure the 
acceptance of the bell-ringing tactic, returning to the 
legislature when the people felt the point had been made. 
 

Again, members opposite asked me why we returned. We 
returned because we felt the point had been made. Public 
opinion had expressed itself in the clearest possible fashion. 
This government had to be aware of it, and we think the 
government is aware of it, but is simply choosing to ignore it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You knew you weren’t winning out 
there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Lloydminster says we 
weren’t winning. Indeed we were. I said earlier — the member 
may not have been listening — I said earlier that the polls 
showed . . . if all of the polls are accurate, then we enjoyed 
more public support when we came back then we did when we 
left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll conclude this . . . and it is just about 
concluded: 
 

In this case, a legislative rule allowed the public to become 
more directly involved in democracy. 
 

Comments of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 
 

The government needs to make a much stronger case for 
changing this rule. 
 

What is the motive for this government’s behaviour? Either 
they are completely irrational — gone mad, in a  

word — either they’re flouting public opinion and behaving in a 
high-handed and arrogant fashion because they are suicidal, or 
they want to change this rule so that they can return full bore 
with the privatization of SPC, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and SGI. 
 
The public have said, we don’t want it. They continue to say, 
we don’t want it. Mr. Speaker, we had some people over . . . 
with the constituencies boundaries legislation, if it’s passed, the 
riding of Regina Centre will disappear from the electoral map if 
it’s passed. Mr. Speaker, we had what may well be our last 
function together. 
 
We met on Saturday evening. I went into the Safeway store to 
get some supplies for the barbecue. It took me a good half-hour, 
and I only got two items — carried one in each hand. It took me 
a good half-hour to get to the till, because I had people coming 
to me whom I didn’t know at all. I don’t have any reason to 
believe that they’re in my riding — the store serves a wide area. 
People would say, keep up the good work; don’t let the people 
away with it; keep at them. They were clearly, in the most 
unmistakable terms, urging us to continue to oppose this. 
 
They share the same fear. Those people that I met on Saturday 
afternoon share the same fear that I share, and that I think 
members here share, and that is that the government’s motive 
for doing away with the bell-ringing is a desire to move the 
potash legislation through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, in seeking to do away with the 
bell-ringing, this government seeks to stymie the full and free 
expression of public opinion. That’s really what they’re doing. 
The bell-ringing in this case, in the previous case in 1984, in the 
’70s in Manitoba, and in the late ’70s in Ottawa, bell-ringing 
gave expression to public frustration — gave effective 
expression to public frustration. 
 
When these people seek to do away with bell-ringing, you seek 
to limit the full and free expression of public opinion, and what 
is far more important, you seek to stymie the effective 
expression of public opinion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This isn’t the first time that this 
government is . . . and if this were an isolated incident, I think I 
would be a great deal more generous to members opposite. If 
this government behaved as other governments behave, I would 
say, anybody can make a mistake once. This isn’t the first time 
this government has gone out of its way to stymie the free 
expression of public opinion. You have a history of it. And as 
you do it again and again, we become more determined in our 
opposition, and the public become more determined in their 
support of us and their attempt to ensure that we will not let this 
pass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are any number of examples of it. I know 
that you do not want us discussing other issues in detail, and I 
will not do so. But I will list, relatively quickly, a couple of 
other instances where this government has shown a disdain for 
the democratic process. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1668 
 

Mr. Speaker, I — and this is sort of working backwards in time, 
the Provincial Auditor’s report. The Provincial Auditor filed a 
report in something less than complimentary terms. What 
happened? It was the subject of a vicious personal attack, again 
an attempt to thwart public opinion, an attempt to ensure that it 
is not accountable . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It does 
indeed. It does indeed. Oh, it does indeed, I say to the member 
from . . . If the member from Lloydminster would listen, I 
would explain . . . If the member from Lloydminster would 
explain . . . 
 
I say to you that when you abolish the bell-ringing you seek to 
make this place less effective. You seek to make it to be a less 
effective institution. When you attack its legislative officers, 
you are doing the same thing. You’re making it less effective. 
 
I’m not going to get into the Provincial Auditor’s report in 
detail. I simply say to members opposite, there is a pattern of 
behaviour here. There’s a pattern of behaviour in your seeking 
to limit the effectiveness of this institution. You did it with the 
Provincial Auditor’s report when you subjected him to a vicious 
personal attack. You’ve done . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I must draw your 
attention to citation 316 (i) which says that members must not: 
 

reflect upon the past acts and proceedings of the House; 
 

The hon. member knows that we dealt with that recently. It’s a 
proceeding which we’ve dealt with, and therefore we cannot 
allow you to reflect upon it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if you would give 
that very careful consideration. I think there is a new 
interpretation being put on that particular rule, and I simply ask 
you to consider the following comment — I simply ask you to 
consider the following comment. Heretofore, that rule has 
meant that you cannot call into question a decision of this 
Assembly. What you’re saying is we cannot discuss . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve ruled on it, and I don’t want 
to debate with the hon. member, but I just draw that to his 
attention. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wasn’t particularly quarrelling. I wasn’t, I 
may say, quarrelling with the Speaker. I simply invited the . . . I 
invite you to consider the breadth of that particular section if 
you carry it to an extreme. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What does the cartoon say, Ned? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It has heretofore been . . . I think that might 
be violating the injunction which the Speaker has just placed 
upon me, not to discuss other issues. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’ll leave it at that. That section 
should be given a very narrow interpretation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite, who have been assisting me all 
night with a variety of comments, are fairly silent when I say to 
them that the motive of this government is to, in pushing the 
bell-ringing, is to pass the privatization. Member opposite say 
very little. No one says, nonsense, no one says, it’s not true. 
There isn’t the usual cacophony of calls describing both my 
intelligence and integrity and ancestry. All of that is lacking. 
 
The members opposite are fairly quiet. I say that provides some 
evidence that in fact members opposite know what I say is true, 
that your motive for bringing in this must be so that you will 
have a free hand with privatization. The member says there are 
other factors involved, including the limited understanding of 
members opposite of the politics. I think that’s probably true as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as that editorial pointed out . . . The member from 
Maple Creek has missed a great deal of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A dazzling speech. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A dazzling speech and a great deal of 
amount of wisdom. Well I think, you know, for the benefit of 
the member from Maple Creek, who’s been absent, I think I 
should start this speech again where I left off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member has referred to the absence 
of a member. I’d like him to apologize. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I didn’t hear you. I didn’t hear the 
comment. 
 
The Speaker: — The member referred to the absence of the 
member from Maple Creek. Would he apologize now? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll apologize to the member of Maple 
Creek for making that comment. It was made not intending to 
be critical. There are good reasons why members are sometimes 
out of the House, especially . . . particularly . . . Well I wasn’t in 
any sense . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Let’s just calm down and 
not make a mountain out of a molehill. Would the member 
continue his remarks on rule 33(1). 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Sometimes it just goes to 
show, sometimes by complaining about a problem you can, in 
fact, draw a great deal of attention to it. I’m not sure the 
member from Maple Creek accomplished a good deal with that 
interjection. 
 
I wanted to say to members . . . I want to make the point to 
members . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hey your shirt tail’s hanging out. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is it really? Isn’t that important. The 
member from Kindersley is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It’s almost 10. If the hon. 
members would just kind of take a deep breath for a minute or 
two, we’ll get through the evening. 
 



 
June 5, 1989 

1669 
 

Order, order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying that . . . The 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, want to call it 10 o’clock. I 
have not yet begun; I have not yet got through the introduction 
to my comments. I’m only nicely getting started and they wish 
to cut me off in midstream. The unmitigated gall of members 
opposite to deny me . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Being 10 o’clock, the House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 2. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


