


















































April 7, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 7, 1989 
 

623 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Environmental Concerns With NewGrade Upgrader 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you. I refer a question 
to the Minister of the Environment, and my question is about 
further evidence of yet another threat to the environment from 
the Co-op refinery because of this government’s lack of 
commitment to the protection of the environment. 
 
And I refer, Mr. Minister, to today’s Leader-Post, in which it is 
said that the plant manager of Twinpak Inc. has said that an 
incident happened almost a year ago where a noxious gas 
enveloped his plastics manufacturing firm on Henderson Drive, 
sickening many of his hundred employees. 
 
It goes further to state, Mr. Minister, “. . . so I contacted 
Saskatchewan Environment, and I think I contacted the federal 
Environment people, and nobody could do anything.” 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Minister, your department officials couldn’t be 
reached for comment. It’s shocking, it’s shocking, Mr. Minister, 
when a Department of Environment cannot provide a public 
explanation on an issue as important as this, in an immediate 
sense. And so I ask you, Mr. Minister: can you confirm in this 
House today that this incidence was reported to your department 
and that you failed to act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, the incident that the member 
refers to, that happened about a year ago, was investigated by the 
staff from the department. They were not able to, at that time, 
identify that the problem occurred from anything happening at 
the refinery. 
 
Now when a gas drifts across a city, it’s very hard to tell where 
it comes from. My department has followed it as far as they 
could, and they were not able to identify. By the time they were 
called, the gas was not in that particular facility any longer. So 
what caused it, we’re not sure. It could have been caused by the 
facility itself. We have done the investigation and they were not 
able to follow it. I guess that’s a normal thing in environment, 
that you can’t always trace every individual spill that occurs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- New question to the minister. Mr. Speaker, 
we have had a business place with 100 employees that’s been hit, 
a school that’s been hit. We have had residences and property 
that’s been hit, and the minister says he’s not sure. Why do we 
have a Minister of the Environment, and why do we have a 
Department of the Environment? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question deals with exactly that question, 
my new question, and it concerns the 

government’s failure to adequately monitor air quality and air 
pollution caused by the NewGrade upgrader and by the refinery 
since it began its operation. 
 
On Wednesday you presented in this House what you referred to 
as a report on the gas leaks from the upgrader, and I submit that 
that report shows that you, as the Minister of Environment, have 
not been doing your job. I quote from that report, from Mr. Perras 
of your quality section branch in the Department of Environment, 
when he said: 
 

Hydrogen sulphide monitoring commenced at this location 
(meaning the SaskTel location) on March 22 of 1989. 
 

That’s after children at Henry Braun School were affected by the 
spill and by the leak. 
 
The other day I brought to your attention the environmental 
impact study of 1985, which said that: 
 

The Consumer Co-op Refinery will continue to monitor 
hydrogen sulphide and sulphur dioxide at both stations on a 
continuing basis. 
 

The upgrader, Mr. Minister, has been operating for over six 
months; why have you not made sure that this monitoring has 
been going on as required by the EIS (environmental impact 
study)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, when you refer to the 
monitoring, that monitoring is done by the refinery itself, not by 
the department. They have had monitors in place. The 
department has put a monitor in place because they felt they 
wanted one of their own. I think we’re talking about two entirely 
different matters here. The refinery’s monitors are in place and 
have been followed by the department. They’ve been checked by 
the department fairly regularly. 
 
So the member makes a big issue out of something that I don’t 
think is as big as he is trying to make it. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
department is available at all times. For somebody to say that 
they can’t reach the department, is very unusual. You can phone 
that department any time after 8 o’clock in the morning until five 
in the evening, and the spill line is available on a 24-hour basis. 
So if the member hasn’t contacted that line, then I would suggest 
to him that he needs to upgrade his information base. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, the problem here is that 
you’re not providing any information. That’s the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If you would provide the information, it 
may allay the fears that many people have, or if you would take 
action, they wouldn’t have any reason for those fears. So, Mr. 
Minister, your question therefore has been very useful -- your 
answer has been very useful, because now I want to ask you this 
question:   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

624 
 

if you have got and received those monitoring results from the 
Co-op refinery, why have you not tabled them in the House, but 
only tabled selective information, which you did on Wednesday, 
which did not provide all of the information that’s required here? 
What are you hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, we’re not hiding anything. I 
indicated to the member before, that when the hydrogen sulphide 
spill occurred, that it blew out of the site and was not caught by 
the monitors. So that information is not available. It was not 
available by the refinery and it’s not available by us. 
 
The information that I tabled was good information. If the 
member would take time to read it, he would find that for the 
most part the refinery has operated at a very excellent air quality 
level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, why do you deny this information of the 
monitoring which you were to get regularly from the NewGrade 
upgrader? Why do you deny that to this House and to the public 
of Saskatchewan? Is it because there’s something you’re trying 
to hide, Mr. Minister? Why do you not table it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, the information that’s available 
on the Co-op refinery’s own equipment is their information, it’s 
not ours. We have a chance to review it, but that information is 
not our information, and if the member wants it he can ask the 
refinery for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Conflict of Interest in Soliciting for Political 
Contributions 

 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I’d like to 
address a question to you. Yesterday I addressed it and we were 
unable to get an answer from you. 
 
I have a letter, as I indicated to you yesterday, from a Mr. Alf 
Bentley, which identifies himself as the bagman and the finance 
chairman for the Progressive Conservative Party. What we want 
to know, Mr. Premier, whether this bagman for the Conservative 
Party, Mr. Alf Bentley, whether that’s the same Alf Bentley that 
held down the $95,000-a-year job with Cameco? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member wanted to 
say Cameco (Canadian Mining Energy Corporation) rather than 
Cominco. I’ll say, Mr. Speaker, that in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, in the democracy we have, we know that 

public employees do get involved with political parties. I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that we employ Miss Barb Byers; had employed 
Mr. Larry Brown; had employed Rick August, John Weldon, 
George Rosenau, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not so sure that it isn’t 
fair to say that perhaps they have attended the odd NDP meeting, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if that’s the case, I can go back and I can find the salaries 
that we pay our public employees, but I don’t think it’s fair, Mr. 
Speaker, to take every public employee and go through and start 
to pick their salaries out and say, well, that public employee is an 
NDP-er, Mr. Speaker, or that public employee is a Liberal. 
 
Obviously public employees have the right to participate in 
democracy, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure Mr. Bentley will be 
treated the same as any other employee, Mr. Speaker, whether 
they’re with the NDP or whether they’re with the PCs or any 
other political party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well I’m glad I came back with this question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I have a supplement. I was a little afraid to come 
back to the return of the battle, but I’m glad I did. Anyway, I have 
a supplement, Mr. Premier. I wonder whether you have satisfied 
yourself in respect to the activities of Mr. Bentley acting as the 
bagman for the Progressive Conservative Party at the same time 
as he’s holding down a $95,000 job. And I’m asking you whether 
or not you satisfied yourself that he is not in breach of any of the 
conditions under The Public Service Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not acknowledge the 
salary. I don’t know what the salary is. But I’m quite prepared to 
examine salaries, if he wants to look at them, of people that are 
employed in government that actively work and go to 
conventions for the NDP. 
 
Now he said, is this a conflict? Well if it’s a conflict, Mr. Speaker, 
then all the employees, whether they work for the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) or whether they 
work for the government or whether they work for any particular 
municipal government are going to have to have their salaries 
labelled here, publicly put out, Mr. Speaker, and are going to 
have to have their political party put down. 
 
Now I don’t know what country he thinks he’s in, Mr. Speaker, 
but this is Saskatchewan and this is Canada and we have an open 
democracy. And people who work in universities or work in the 
public service can participate in democracy, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re encouraged to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I have a new question for the Premier. I’m 
wondering whether Mr. Premier could indicate, in view of the 
fact that I agree with part of what the letter from   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

625 
 

your bagman says . . . It says: 
 

Since the government of Premier (blank blank) was 
re-elected (this is what he says), the economy of 
Saskatchewan has been somewhat . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Having difficulty hearing his question, I’ll give him a 
chance to rephrase it. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- New question, and I hope that all members of the 
House would give me the decency to address the Premier with a 
very serious question. You might want to laugh, but the taxpayers 
are not laughing any more. 
 
My question to the Premier is: is the bagman, Alf Bentley, still 
the bagman for the Progressive Conservative Party, in view of 
the fact in this letter he states: 
 

Since the government of the Premier (blank blank) was 
re-elected (that’s you), the economy of Saskatchewan has 
been somewhat precarious, (he said.) 
 

To say the least, I agree with that. It has been very precarious, to 
say the least. I wonder if you agree with your bagman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, for the record, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I believe that hon. members on 
both sides of the House should be given the opportunity to put 
their case and to answer it. So I ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, for the record, just so that the 
hon. members that are sitting in their seats can know that politics 
and government and democracy are all healthy in the province of 
Saskatchewan in the public service, we know that the member 
from Nutana was the past provincial NDP vice-president, Mr. 
Speaker, and appointed as an investigator, Rentalsman office in 
Saskatoon, for $2,000 a month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can go on and say the member from Moose Jaw North, NDP 
candidate, April ’82 election, received an honorarium for $5,700 
from the Department of Education, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP 
administration. 
 
We find out that the member from Regina Centre . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order! The answer, I should like 
to remind the hon. member, should be related to the question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Another question to the Premier. I wonder, Mr. 
Premier, whether you could confirm whether or not Mr. Bentley, 
the bagman, has been let go, dismissed, or retired. Could you 
indicate when this happened and can you tell us the kind of 
severance that he received from Cameco? 

Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm any of the 
public employees at a moment’s notice in the legislature. I can 
confirm, Mr. Speaker, that Ted Koskie worked for the 
government, Mr. Speaker; that Deanna Koskie worked for the 
government Mr. Speaker; that Linda Koskie worked for the 
government, Mr. Speaker; that Morley Koskie worked for the 
government, Mr. Speaker; that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I have a further question to the Premier. You 
might want to skip around this, Mr. Premier, but you’re not going 
to. I ask you specifically: has Alf Bentley, the bagman for the PC 
Party, been dismissed, and what were the terms and conditions 
of his dismissal? What was his severance package that the 
taxpayers are paying yet to another Tory bagman? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we have, I think, in 
neighbourhood of 25 or 30,000 employees in Crown corporations 
and the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and you can 
inquire, Mr. Speaker, at the minister’s level, or you can go to the 
president of the Crown corporations. I believe that Cameco is a 
private company, Mr. Speaker, so I’m sure that the hon. member 
can go to the company -- the chairman of the board -- or the 
president of the company and find out that information. I don’t 
have that information, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that the hon. 
member knows of where he can get information on whether 
people are fired, or released, or what the conditions are. 
 

Study Into Costs of Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Health. The minister may be familiar with a book that 
has been published recently entitled, Second Opinion: What’s 
Wrong with Canada’s Health Care System, written by 
Michael Rachlis, M.D. and Carol Kushner. And I refer right now, 
Mr. Speaker, to page 249 in that book where it talks about 
community clinics, and where it says, and I quote: 
 

A careful evaluation done in the early 1980s showed that 
overall costs were 17 per cent lower for patients attending 
the Saskatoon clinic than for those treated in the 
fee-for-service system. The clinic’s patients had 24 per cent 
fewer hospital admissions, and those who were hospitalized 
stayed on average 9 per cent fewer days. Drug costs at the 
clinic were 21 per cent lower. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s at page 249 of the book. 
 
Now I would like to ask the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, 
whether or not he has seen this study and whether he’s aware of 
it, the community clinic study. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, yes, I’m very 
aware of the book that the member refers to and   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

626 
 

quotes from and has read from this morning. 
 
I would say to the hon. member and to the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that within the health care community across Canada, certainly 
all across this country, there is a significant debate, and a good 
healthy debate, if I might say so, regarding the whole area of fee 
for service. That debate goes on within the medical profession, 
as well as outside the medical profession, as all of us struggle 
with the significant problems, frankly, that face health care and 
the delivery of health care across the country. 
 
The member quotes from a book that I would frankly suggest to 
all members of the House and anyone listening that they should 
read. It is an excellent book and an excellent . . . So here we have 
a little bit of a promo here for this particular book. 
 
The study, the specific study that the member refers to, I am 
aware of its existence; I’m aware of what the study says. I am 
also aware that there is a significant diversity of opinion as it 
relates to that study. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 
aware of the study. Dr. Rachlis also indicates that the study was 
the most scientifically rigorous investigation ever conducted on 
community health centres, was initiated by the NDP while they 
were still in power. We obtained its results unofficially because 
Grant . . . pardon me, because blankety blank’s Conservative 
government has refused, has refused to make them public, Mr. 
Speaker. Now I ask the minister: will he table this study, and why 
hasn’t he made it public before if there is such a significant 
savings in cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, in 
describing and how the study was commissioned, has reiterated 
the point I made earlier, and that is that there’s a significant 
diversity of opinion as it relates to that study. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister 
make that study public and table it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, there are many . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Once again we hear from the 
bellowing member from Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker. Allow me to 
attempt to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of any year, under any administration, 
there are many investigations of certain aspects, narrow aspects, 
very broad aspects of health care and the delivery of health care. 
That’s not just the case here; that’s the case across this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have many studies. Some of them are 
appropriate to table; some of them are not. I won’t say one way 
or the other today whether we will table the study, and I won’t 
give the member that assurance. 
 

Closure of Pipe Manufacturing Plant in Regina 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, you may recall a firm called Nardei 
Fabricators of Calgary which set up a 

pipe manufacturing plant here in Regina. And I’m sure you’ll 
remember it because on October 14 in ’86, less than a week 
before election day, you staged an official opening at the plant. 
And that’s a classic example of how your government is building 
and diversifying the economy. And I want to say, on this side, we 
couldn’t agree more with that example. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you aware that Nardei Manufacturing closed its 
operation in Regina at the end of March? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of a particular 
closing date, and I’d have to take notice. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- New question. Mr. Premier, I wasn’t asking 
if you were aware of the date; I was asking if you were aware that 
the operation closed. New question. Mr. Premier, you announced 
at that time that Nardei had applied for assistance under the 
Saskatchewan industrial incentives program and that it was 
eligible for up to $150,000. 
 
My question is this: how much money did it receive? Will your 
government be taking steps to recover it? And could you tell us 
if SEDCO or any other government agency had money in this 
operation. And while you’re at it, Mr. Premier, with your 
diversification, you might be able to tell us when the bandage 
factory at Swift Current came onstream that you announced by 
around the election time as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
I took notice, Mr. Speaker, and I will take notice again. I will say 
at the same . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well look, you had 
the opportunity to speak. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order. I think when the hon. 
member takes notice and ask another question, rather than 
seeking information, then you’re inviting a response. 
 

Notwithstanding Clause in Constitution 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Premier. I’ve got my tie straight. 
 
I’ve a question for the Premier. Today’s Globe and Mail has a 
front-page story dealing with the constitution, and on the front 
page the Globe and Mail reports that the Prime Minister of 
Canada, Mr. Mulroney, says that one of his next and major 
objectives on constitutional reform is to do away with the 
notwithstanding clause, section 33. I’d like to ask the hon. 
Premier whether or not he agrees with the Prime Minister, Mr. 
Mulroney, on that issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, what I agree with in terms of 
the Prime Minister’s view is, in fact, in 1981 the prime minister, 
Mr. Trudeau, and with the help of the hon. member sitting 
opposite, brought home a constitution that left out a major 
province in Canada --   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

627 
 

left it out entirely. I say to the hon. member, if they’d have left 
out Saskatchewan, would have you signed it? If they’d have left 
out Ontario, would they have brought the constitution home? I 
don’t think so. But you were part and parcel of that, that said, 
we’ll all have a nice party and bring home the constitution and 
we will leave out a major province in the country of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now every time since that that you try to knit this together, 
people can stand up and say that they’re against Meech Lake or 
they’re against the constitutional accord or against something 
else, but, Mr. Speaker, it always goes back to 1981 -- 1981, Mr. 
Speaker, that left out a major province in this constitution. And I 
think that was a mistake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Last evening the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana rose on what in fact was a point of order. She 
invoked rule 26 and claimed the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster had used insulting language while speaking 
in the budget debate. She said that at several points during his 
remarks he referred to an hon. member as a “little woman” or a 
“little lady.” 
 
I have had a chance to review the verbatim transcript and I find 
the point of order is well taken. I agree that expressions, however 
mild, which are patronizing, can be offensive and ought to be 
avoided in this Assembly. 
 
When this matter was originally raised, the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster attempted to apologize and withdraw the 
offensive remarks. Unfortunately his apology proved not to be 
satisfactory. When a member tries to qualify a withdrawal, it is 
not acceptable to the House, and often the situation unfortunately 
becomes worse. 
 
Therefore I now ask the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster to 
withdraw the offensive remark so that the House can get on with 
. . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated last 
night, I will withdraw those remarks unequivocally. 
 
The Speaker: -- Thank you. The withdrawal is accepted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
would seek leave of the Assembly to move a condolence motion 
regarding Robert Alexander Walker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 
Assembly, I move the following motion, seconded by the Leader 
of the Opposition: 
 

Robert Alexander Walker, who died in Victoria, British 
Columbia on March 28, 1989, was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly representing the constituency of 
Hanley from 1948 to 1967. Born March 16, 1916 in Regina, 
Mr. Walker was raised on the family farm near Mazenod. 
 
Mr. Walker went to normal school in Moose Jaw, and after 
graduating he taught school at Assiniboia, Abbey, and 
Killdeer. In Killdeer, Mr. Walker met Rosa Nagel, also a 
school teacher whom he married in 1941. In 1942 he joined 
the Royal Canadian Air Force and served as a wireless 
operator. After the war he studied law at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and in 1951 was admitted to the 
Saskatchewan bar. 
 
Mr. Walker practised law in Sutherland, but not before 
winning a seat in the 1948 provincial general election. At 
the time he was still a law student, Mr. Speaker, and except 
for a brief period in 1964, Mr. Walker held the Hanley seat 
continuously until 1967. 
 
Mr. Walker had certainly a distinguished political career. 
Between 1956 and 1964 he held the positions of Attorney 
General and Provincial Secretary. 
 
After leaving politics, Mr. Walker returned to practising 
law. He served on the board of governors at the University 
of Saskatchewan for five years. In 1984 he retired and 
moved from Saskatoon to Victoria. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That in recording its own deep sense of loss and 
bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me some sadness to second this motion, especially since Bob 
Walker was my former law partner, political comrade, and 
political mentor, and I would also say, my friend. 
 
I’ve missed him all these years that he’s been out of 
Saskatchewan, when he took his retirement and moved to British 
Columbia. And I definitely am going to miss him now that he has 
passed on. 
 
I have many recollections on a personal basis, of Bob Walker. I 
guess my first earliest recollection, Mr. Speaker, relates to this 
Chamber. I was a young student in the early 1960s and came to 
the Chamber as part of a University of Saskatchewan tour to see 
what politics was like in Regina, and I couldn’t get over the sight 
of this tall, lean, thin man seated to the right of Tommy Douglas 
with his legs out in the aisle-way. He was so long that they 
stretched right beyond the aisle way and onto the floor, actually, 
of the Chamber before us. I think he had difficulty knowing what 
to do with his legs, and invariably they would either be in one 
position or the other if his desk mate wasn’t around. 
  



 
April 7, 1989 

 

628 
 

This is a person who, in that one day that I was at the legislature, 
was obviously of high intelligence who was able to, with witty 
repartee in the legislature, make light of an opponent’s political 
argument. Those were the days when debate in the Assembly 
was, in fact, something which was very cherished, and the 
interjections which were made by members, while not always 
perfectly on, were basically intended to be a part of the cut and 
thrust of eloquence and oratory and advancement, or defeat, of 
political ideas and political policies. 
 
Bob Walker was a master of that; he took as much as he gave. 
And this visual image of this big man, this tall man, was the thing 
that struck me the most that day, although I also, of course, came 
there expecting to be impressed -- as I was -- with the people like 
Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and others. Somehow the 
image of Bob is one which has stuck with me all this while. 
 
And later in the cabinet room when we were taken as students to 
meet with Mr. Douglas and others, the size of this big man, Bob 
Walker, really was struck home. A very tall, imposing, almost 
stern, but in some ways very gentle person, was introduced to us. 
I didn’t know it at the time -- and it’s funny how life takes us on 
various courses -- that our paths would cross as frequently as they 
did in subsequent years. 
 
Bob Walker, in everything that he did, was a man of principle, a 
man of determination, dedication, and high-minded eloquence. 
Bob was truly the committed civil servant for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, whether you agreed or disagreed with 
his views. 
 
He was committed to a number of programs, such as the reform 
of the judicial system. In fact I think that he was the first attorney 
general who made the first major attempt at modernization of the 
court-house and judicial system in the late 1950s and early ’60s. 
To this day, former employees in the department of the attorney 
general will tell me -- in fact did so on the occasion of his 
passing -- that those were exciting, halcyon days in the AG’s 
department, as they embarked on what now perhaps might seem 
to be the routine question of reform, but in those days really was 
a major change in the way that the court systems and the way the 
legal systems were being processed and being handled. 
 
But I think that Bob’s biggest contribution was more his 
commitment to people. In a kind of a strange way, this man was 
austere and imposing and almost forbidding, foreboding. You, at 
first blush, didn’t get the feeling that there was a warm person, 
but in reality there was. 
 
I guess to be a successful politician you have to have that 
essential spark of love for people and of people with all of our 
weaknesses and failings, and Bob Walker had that. And I 
subsequently, in many of our conversations, would discuss with 
him what it was he really felt were the big accomplishments. He 
would tell me the times -- talking about the constitution -- when 
back in the days of the Fulton-Favreau formula, Saskatchewan 
virtually stood alone on an amending formula. He would talk 
about the judicial and court-house reforms that I’ve alluded to. 
He 

would reminisce and tell me stories about Tommy Douglas and 
Toby Nollet and Woodrow Lloyd and Ross Thatcher, Alex 
Cameron. These were political giants, Mr. Speaker, political 
giants of their day, in some ways -- without denigrating for a 
moment my colleagues of today, even giants of today. 
 
But he really relished his role of the medicare crisis and the 
medicare legislation of 1961, 1962, and through that period 
which I would argue ultimately cost him his seat in 1964, and 
ultimately cost the government of Woodrow Lloyd in 1964. Bob 
passionately spoke about people programs, and medicare was a 
people program of the highest order, of the highest goal. 
 
I’ve taken some time to go through some of the speeches during 
that time about the debates on medicare. Mr. Speaker, if you have 
time -- I know that you don’t -- but it’s interesting to go back to 
some of the debates and see the exchanges. And I say that 
because I know how difficult your job is, sir -- and I mean this 
very genuinely, especially in the Chamber of 1989 with respect 
to order -- there, if you look at the transcripts, there seems to be 
a sense of debate but not a sense of disorderliness, if I may put it 
that way. And this particular transcript which I had involved a 
very typical Bob Walker hard-hitting speech, not on personalities 
but on the issues of medicare and the role of the medical 
profession and the role of medicare and the role of the medical 
profession in the implementations plan. 
 
And as you might expect, Mr. Speaker, during that time there 
were interjections much like there are today. This is an aside, but 
there was an extended series of interjections, as I came across 
quite accidentally, involving the late premier Ross Thatcher, 
between Mr. Walker and Mr. Thatcher. And this was witty stuff 
in my books. It was not personal but it was an exchange on 
concepts of taxes, and concepts and visions of the legislation, 
competing visions. Well I say that parenthetically. 
 
What I really want to say about this is that Bob Walker hit hard 
and very straightforwardly about his first love, and that love was 
program for people. And I’d like to just quote, as a sample of 
how hard-hitting he was, the high-minded tone, as I see it, of this 
particular speech, volume 11, page 10. 
 
Bob Walker got up -- this is after now several pages of a 
debate -- and said the following: 
 

The province of Saskatchewan has long been proud of the 
fact that we believe in what we follow and uphold, the 
principle of devoting an even larger proportion of our 
physical and material wealth to meeting the real and basic 
needs of all of the people of our province. 
 

This is 1964, actually 1962. Mr. Walker continued: 
 

I think that you can judge a society or an individual and 
assess his social conscience, his sense of human progress, 
by examining his real attitudes towards spending material 
wealth, what he proposes to spend it on. 
  



 
April 7, 1989 

 

629 
 

Then he said this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

On this side of the House we have long taken pride in the 
fact that an ever-increasing proportion of the wealth 
produced in this province is going to meet the basic human 
needs of the people of this province. While this represents 
an additional public burden of some 20 or $22 million . . . 
 

I note the Minister of Health is in the House this morning, and I 
had to smile at those figures -- 20 to $22 million for medicare in 
1962. In the debates we know the expenses and the costs today. 
But Mr. Walker said: 
 

While this represents an additional public burden of some 
20 or $22 million, we think that this is offset by money 
saved by individual taxpayers. It is money which is put into 
a special account to be used for medical care. I, and other 
citizens, undoubtedly find frivolities on our budget drains, 
on our income, our wasteful and frivolous expenses. I think 
that I for one will appreciate knowing that my health needs 
are being provided, that every man, woman, and child in our 
province is entitled and has a right, as a result of being born 
into the progressive province of Saskatchewan, is entitled to 
have these services, and we ought to welcome the 
opportunity of providing them and providing the funds for 
them. 
 

Sometimes I think things haven’t changed very much from 1962 
to 1989 as we debate in the legislature today about those concepts 
and the adequacy of the funding. I say that that passage, not 
because it deals with medicare but because it exemplifies what I 
remember about Bob Walker’s real first love and that is to be a 
good politician, the first love is people and doing good for people 
and thinking of them and being decent toward them. 
 
He lost the election in 1964. And I was a young lawyer at that 
time, or about to enter into law, and we were, in those days, 
idealistic, really idealistic. We felt the loss of the government was 
something we couldn’t do anything about. The numbers were 
against us. But in Bob Walker’s case, there was a very narrow, 
slim margin of defeat between him and another very 
distinguished Canadian and Saskatchewanian called Mr. Herb 
Pinder, Sr. 
 
(1045) 
 
Herb Pinder had defeated Bob Walker in the Hanley constituency 
in that general election in 1964 which produced Ross Thatcher 
as the premier of the province of Saskatchewan. But it was such 
a narrow victory that Mr. Pinder had over Bob Walker that a 
number of us immediately went to the task of trying to see if we 
could unseat the seat and get a by-election and a controvert. And 
I think you’ll agree with me, Mr. Speaker, and other members 
will, that that’s virtually an impossibility, but as luck was have 
it, or would not have it, Bob Walker succeeded. 
 
And I saw another aspect about the man. Here, to me, in any 
event, was an attorney general, a former attorney general. I 
thought this was a man of high position and 

high stature. This is the great thing about democracy, it’s a 
leveller, and all of a sudden he was out. 
 
He had no help except volunteer help of young men and women, 
but basically he did it all himself. He went around from voter to 
voter to voter, where the discrepancies were on the voter’s lists, 
to try to get the sufficient number of voters to get the controvert 
in effect established, and before the court of law. And in a sense, 
it was humiliating. 
 
The euphoria of the new government of 1964 -- I’m sure my 
friends opposite would know what that’s like in 1982; I suffered 
defeat in 1982 -- it was very, very difficult. And in that kind of 
atmosphere, in this euphoric atmosphere, Bob Walker was so 
dedicated and so determined, and the party was in disarray, our 
party was in disarray, that he virtually did this alone with the help 
of several of us. That’s when I really got to know this person that 
I saw a few years before in this Chamber, and he got the number 
of names and the affidavits, and lo and behold! as fate would 
have it, the seat was declared vacant. A by-election was declared 
by the premier, Ross Thatcher, immediately, and we had a 
by-election in December of 1964 -- the general election came in 
1964 April -- eight or nine months later, in a blinding snowstorm. 
I’ll remember this to my dying day. 
 
Bob Walker was re-elected back to the legislature as the member 
for Hanley in a by-election, and Herb Pinder actually never took 
a seat. I don’t say this disparagingly of Mr. Pinder. It so worked 
that the transition change in government didn’t permit him, 
although he was minister of industry and commerce, a 
distinguished Saskatchewanian -- I have a great deal of 
admiration for Herb Pinder -- he never took a seat in the 
legislature. Bob Walker had the love and the support and the 
admiration of his constituents, notwithstanding the defeat that we 
took in ’64, to be back in with his political comrades fighting for 
these passionate goals that he believed in, in that particular period 
of time. 
 
Oh, there were many other interesting sides to this man’s history. 
I won’t mention names because I think best these should be left 
now into history books. But there were a series of very 
controversial lawsuits and court cases involving stock 
promotions and stock issues. Bob Walker and prominent 
Saskatchewan people were at the centre of that. 
 
I often urged Bob to tell his story by way of a book. I never could 
get him to do it. He told me about the history as he saw it This is 
now some many years later. He told me about the process of the 
AG’s department when these investigations and charges were 
being processed. Those unfortunately, so far as I know, those 
great stories, not because they’re stories but they’re great stories 
about how an AG should act -- with integrity and honesty and 
fearlessness, even to political colleagues -- set a standard to 
which I, as now I’d gotten to know him in that ’64 period, decided 
that I would try to strive for, but I’m sure I’ve never achieved. 
 
At about that time, I left my association with a law firm called 
Goldenberg, Taylor, Tallis because I had been nominated in 
1967. I got the bug. 
  



 
April 7, 1989 

 

630 
 

Bob Walker met me and he said, Roy, I think you should be in 
politics. I said, Bob, my interest is federal politics. And I’ll never 
forget this conversation to my dying day. He said, no, what you 
do, Roy, is you come in, contribute a few years to the provincial 
politics, and then if you’re interested in federal politics I’m sure 
the voters would permit you, if you get their blessing, to go on to 
the House of Commons in Ottawa and try federally. As life works 
out, four years later we were the government in 1971 and, for 
good or for bad, the rest is history as far as my position is 
concerned. 
 
He was a mentor, an adviser, a person who said, you have 
something to contribute to provincial politics. Whether I did or 
not, certainly I got involved. And as part of the involvement, we 
structured a new law firm together and we practised law, and we 
practised politics more than we practised law, and we met people 
and we travelled endlessly, hours and miles over this great 
province, meeting thousands of people. 
 
In 1967, Mr. Speaker, again as fate would have it, I was elected 
for the first time to the legislature. Bob Walker was defeated. 
After all of that effort of getting in, he lost, and again by a very 
distinguished Saskatchewan person, Bob Heggie. 
 
In 1971 Bob Walker made another attempt to come back to 
political life, and this is another recollection. I hope I’m not 
boring you too much about this, but I’m reminding myself of the 
man. In 1970-71 there was another election approaching. This 
time Ross Thatcher had been in office for seven or eight years. 
 
Bob had a nominating convention at the Grasswood Esso service 
station in Saskatoon, just outside of Saskatoon. I was invited to 
be his guest speaker, and as always happens in politics, Mr. 
Speaker, Bob was challenged for the nomination by a young man 
who I didn’t think stood a hope in heck of getting that nomination 
against this giant, physically and otherwise -- a man called Paul 
Mostoway. 
 
The first ballot was held and the vote was dead even -- 110 and 
110 for Walker and Mostoway. I am the guest speaker. The 
organizers didn’t know what to do. Somebody said, well Roy, 
you’ve got to cast the deciding ballot. How could I cast the 
deciding ballot? He was my law partner and my friend. All I had 
come there was to say a few words as guest speaker. 
 
Well they thought maybe we should go to the president to cast 
the deciding ballot. That didn’t work. And after about an hour of 
heated back-room deliberation, something which may be 
symptomatic of the PC Party as well, but certainly symptomatic 
of the CCF-NDP, we decided that what we should do is what we 
should have decided to do right then and there; that is, to have 
another vote, which we did. And Bob Walker lost the nomination 
by one vote, and the end of his political career. 
 
And that taught me something too. What it taught me -- apart 
from trying to organize nominations -- what it taught me was that 
at the end of our political careers -- for that is the one certainty 
of this business, there is an end -- that that end can take place 
anywhere. After a great big 

provincial campaign, or on the floor of your constituency office 
on election night if you’re the nominated candidate, or in a small 
Grasswood Esso in Dundurn, having served for all these years 
from 1944 to 1971 as Attorney General and distinguished leader 
in Canada, it can end in a nomination. 
 
The power of the people is really all-knowing, all-consuming, 
all-effective, and, thank goodness in our democracy, to be 
respected by all. 
 
And I learned that because I thought Bob would be bitter and 
disappointed. He wasn’t. He plunged in to help Paul Mostoway 
get elected. Mostoway got elected. When Blakeney took over as 
the premier in 1971, my association with the law practice ceased 
totally, and my relationship with Bob on a friendship basis 
continued, but no longer had we had the close interplay and 
intercourse of two people who were concerned about improving, 
in our own small way, the quality of life for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say he was a giant physically. I don’t know how tall he was -- 6 
ft. 4 or 5 in., at least. He was a giant in an era of giants. Douglas; 
Jack Corman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an attorney general that some 
historians should write, really, about; Fines -- Clarence Fines; 
and Douglas. Cameron, as I mentioned, Alex Cameron -- now 
there was debater; Ross Thatcher. When we saw a debate in this 
Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you were in the heavyweights. It 
was debate, and it was debate among heavyweights because we 
debated policies and issues and programs, not personalities. 
 
Well let me say one last word before I take my place. All of this 
could not have happened, I don’t think -- Bob Walker’s 
contributions, the details of which I purposefully avoided today 
because I want to reminisce on a personal basis in memory of this 
great person -- it would not have happened if it had not been for 
the constant support of his partner, Rosa Walker, and his family, 
Joan, Doug, Ken. 
 
Rosa Walker was and is really an intriguing and fascinating 
person. She was a helpmate in the broadest sense of the word, not 
only in terms of the emotional sustenance which any politician 
has to receive, but she was an adviser and she was a worker and 
she shunned public profile. It wasn’t because of any, as one might 
think 25 years ago, belief that politics was for men and not for 
women -- although I think that was generally the case 25 years 
ago or so -- it was more than anything the belief that her 
contribution could be most effective in giving the advice and 
giving the nurturing and the sustenance which would be required 
to help this man do his job for all the province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think of wives, when I think of Rosa, 
in politics, with amazement and regret -- amazement of their 
capacity to do what they have done and continue to do in running 
the families, supporting the children; and regrets that we don’t 
understand or acknowledge their contribution nearly enough. 
 
If you stop to think of it, the number of times that wives have to 
meet their husbands, or the other way around in   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

631 
 

today’s world of politics -- the helpmate -- the number of times 
spouses meet with the political spouse and have that spouse come 
home after a day of public humiliation or public attack or 
criticism; or endless of hours, I repeat, on the road in this great 
province of ours; or all of the intrigues, most of which are petty; 
of all the insecurity; people trying to build a family -- male or 
female spouses are politicians; the insecurity of this job. 
 
How those people, male or female spouses, can keep the family 
together and provide the sustenance and nurturing and support, 
I’m in amazement. And I’m in regret that we don’t acknowledge 
enough of that role. 
 
Rosa Walker was that kind of a person to the fullest extent. And 
when Bob was out of politics, Rosa came to the law office and 
worked there full time. She was a working, equal partner in the 
1960s and beyond when it was long before it was fashionable and 
proper about equality. She was an equal partner in that 
relationship. 
 
All that I can say is that we pay tribute, I pay tribute to Rosa and 
the family for their contribution. Well, Mr. Speaker, this has been 
an inadequate tribute. I thought I would try to put something 
down in writing to make my thoughts more coherent and perhaps 
a little more deep -- couldn’t do it. And so it’s a bit of a rambling 
recollection. 
 
(1100) 
 
But I hope I’m conveying to you, sir, and to the members of the 
House, my sense of loss, great loss; my sense of joy and 
happiness at having known this person; my thanks to him, to 
Rosa and the family for what I learned. And on behalf of Eleanor, 
my wife, and the members of this side of the House, I’m sure, I 
want to express to Rosa, the family, our deepest, deepest, most 
heartfelt sympathies, and thanks for a job very well done. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I did want to say a few words 
on behalf of people that have known R.A. (Bob) Walker. He was 
a man of stature in all its best aspects, from whatever direction 
you looked at the person. I suspect that very few of the people in 
this Chamber had the opportunity to serve with Bob Walker. I 
think I could count them on one hand if I had three fingers 
amputated. 
 
I have a slight advantage over my leader in this aspect because I 
had the opportunity to serve with Bob Walker in this Chamber. 
And I found in that period of time that I served with Bob Walker, 
that he had a cutting debating skill, acerbic wit, generous humour 
when necessary, and I found him to be a teacher of sort, because 
as I recall, Mr. Speaker, I sat back about there, and Bob Walker 
sat up there, and when he was speaking I could keep an eye on 
him and the Speaker and the leader of the government all at the 
same time. And it was a great learning experience to be here in 
this legislative Chamber with Bob Walker. 
 
When it was difficult to be in the legislative Chamber having 
suffered a defeat as a government, which we had, and being here 
to hold the operation together until we could reorganize ourselves 
and have another opportunity to become the Government of 
Saskatchewan, Bob Walker served us well in that period of time. 

Bob Walker’s career paralleled the latter part of my father’s 
career in the Assembly as well, and in government. Bob Walker 
served in the government of Tommy Douglas with my father. As 
a consequence, I knew him outside of this Chamber because of 
family connections and relationships and friends. 
 
I recall the by-election that my leader referred to. The Hanley 
by-election was rather an interesting one, and I can add a few 
aspects to that by-election, although the recounting of it by the 
member from Riversdale pretty well covered the waterfront. 
 
I recall that by-election. It was mentioned that it occurred in 
December; it was December 8 was the day of the by-election. 
And for people who are aware of the constituency boundaries in 
those days, Hanley constituency, while it was a rural 
constituency, accepted the overflow from the city of Saskatoon. 
And actually the greater number of people in Hanley 
constituency were residents of the city of Saskatoon. People who 
are familiar with the city of Saskatoon will know where Avenue 
W is. At that time Avenue W and everything west of there, the 
west side of Avenue W and west, was in the constituency of 
Hanley. 
 
And I recall canvassing door to door on Avenue W, the west side, 
on behalf of Bob Walker in an attempt to have him reclaim his 
seat in the legislature. And I do not know of any colder election 
or by-election that I’ve operated in. It just happened to be very 
cold in the beginning of December and right around election day. 
 
But the victory was sweet, and let it be known that we needed a 
victory at that time, having suffered defeat in the general election. 
I recall the victory party. It occurred at a restaurant on 8th Street 
in Saskatoon which was also at that time in Hanley constituency. 
 
I recall that at the climax of the evening when Mr. Walker was 
declared elected, he was in the centre of the room. And it seemed 
unnecessary, but in order to speak to the crowd which was 
completely surrounding Bob Walker -- friends, well-wishers, 
workers, family -- Bob Walker took a chair and stood on the 
chair. And it must have appealed to the Canadian section of Time 
magazine, because the by-election was reported in Time 
magazine showing Bob Walker, a giant -- 6 ft. 5 in., maybe 6 ft. 
6 in. -- standing on a kitchen chair in the middle of a crowd of 
admirers, making an acceptance speech and thanking them all for 
working for him. It was a sight to behold, and I still have the 
picture from Time magazine. 
 
In legislative and parliamentary terms, there’s quite often that 
you have . . . well occasionally you have father and son teams, 
mother and son, other combinations, family combinations. Bob 
Walker had in his family a combination of that nature. His 
brother Ed Walker was the member, I believe, for Gravelbourg 
in the period 1951 to ’56, and served with Bob Walker in the 
legislature. 
 
I think of . . . they served on the same side of the Chamber, and 
it sometimes brings to mind some of the other brother teams that 
have served: the Whelans, for example, one in one party in the 
House of Commons, another in a   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

632 
 

different party in Saskatchewan; or the Winch brothers, or a 
number of other brother combinations that served in various 
parliaments in Canada. But it is rather rare to have two brothers 
serving in this Legislative Chamber, and Bob Walker and his 
brother Ed were part of that unusual occurrence. 
 
The contribution that Bob Walker made to the province of 
Saskatchewan, as I have said earlier, was of great stature, no 
matter from what angle you look at it. He served the people of 
Saskatchewan and partook in the activities of Saskatchewan as a 
farmer, a teacher, in the armed forces, a lawyer, and a 
parliamentarian. 
 
And I can only echo the words of my leader in saying to his wife 
Rosa, who I knew well, and to his sons and daughters, that we 
celebrate the fact that Bob Walker was part of our team, was part 
of the legislative and parliamentary procedure of this province 
where he made an outstanding contribution which will be 
equalled by few in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to just intervene 
briefly and pay tribute to the hon. Robert Walker. I might say in 
doing so that it was, I think, entirely appropriate that the member 
from Saskatoon Westmount entered this discussion today. 
 
His father was a man who was well known to me, the hon. J.H. 
Brockelbank, also referred to commonly as “Brock,” which is a 
familiar name to people in this House, and who was one of the 
people who had a great influence on my life as I was young. And 
is quite appropriate that his son would stand today to pay tribute 
to a contemporary giant of the political scene in this province 
during those years, as we pay tribute to Mr. Walker today. 
 
I simply want to contribute to this tribute, my own experience as 
it relates to Mr. Walker and the effect that he had upon my career 
and my life. I first met him when I was a young, practising lawyer 
in Swift Current at the very beginning of my career. And I first 
met Mr. Walker at the first meeting of the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan which I attended. I attended many of those in my 
life, and while Mr. Walker was the Attorney General, he 
religiously attended every minute of every meeting of the law 
society. 
 
And I recall he would be sitting up in the front row with his 
deputy by his side, Roy Meldrum, and they would be listening 
intently to all of the discussion and making extensive notes on 
what was said in order to more properly do their jobs. 
Incidentally, that same Mr. Meldrum was one of the most 
distinguished and selfless civil servants of his day or of any day. 
Yes, he faithfully served Mr. Walker during all of his years as the 
Attorney General. 
 
And what impressed me, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that Mr. 
Walker, who was a relatively austere man, went out of his way 
to pay attention to the younger members of the bar, and 
particularly to the younger members of the bar from outside of 
the large cities of Regina and Saskatoon. And you’ll recall I said 
I was from Swift Current. It made a 

deep impression on me that this man whom my leader has 
described as a giant, physically, and a giant in terms of his 
political reputation at the time, would pay attention to us young 
lawyers. And I will never forget that, and I just can’t possibly 
express in adequate terms the impression that it made upon me 
and the influence that it’s had in my life. 
 
The other image that I have of Mr. Walker which has persisted, 
which has lasted over all the intervening years, is the high level 
of integrity and principle that he brought to a very difficult job 
within the government of this province or any province. 
 
He was the Attorney General. He was the man responsible for the 
administration of justice in this province, and it is a job which 
requires the highest level of integrity. We all know that. I would 
remind the Assembly that, perhaps more than any other man up 
to the time that he took the office, he set the tone. He is the man 
who provided the model of integrity and high-mindedness and 
dedication to principle which lived on after his terms to cover 
people like Mr. Heald and my leader and subsequent holders of 
the position. 
 
And Mr. Walker’s contribution in that respect, while not known 
broadly around Saskatchewan, is of the highest importance so far 
as the administration of justice in this province is concerned. He 
made an enormous contribution to his province in that way, as 
well as in many other ways. He also brought to this House, as my 
leader has observed, a level of civility and honour in debate and 
in discussions which we in this House today would do well to 
reflect upon, to research, and to emulate. 
 
I knew Mr. Walker also in recent years in the practice of law in 
Saskatoon, where he brought to his law practice the same 
qualities that he brought to his public service, and he will be long 
remembered by many people in Saskatoon, including his fellow 
practitioners. He was the head of a very strong, very close family, 
very supportive of each other. I knew his son Ken, who practised 
law with him and who has since moved to British Columbia, but 
very much a lawyer in the model of his father and guided by the 
same high principles that governed his father’s life. 
 
So I want to extend to him, and to all members of the Walker 
family, my deepest sympathy and my eternal admiration of their 
father, the late Robert Walker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
simply wish to very briefly pay tribute to Bob Walker and 
recognize his contribution to the political process of this beautiful 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
After having learned of Mr. Walker’s passing, and bringing that 
information to the Legislative Assembly last week, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I believe that I have had the opportunity to learn 
something of the spirit of Bob Walker. It was never my privilege 
to have known him personally, but in talking with several of my 
colleagues in the Legislative Assembly today and reflecting upon 
the   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

633 
 

words of those who have spoken before me here today, I would 
have to say with sincerity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Bob Walker 
truly is a man who provides inspiration, political inspiration for 
those of us who prefer to serve the people of our province within 
this Chamber. 
 
It is reassuring to know that there have been men and women, in 
this case, with Bob Walker, a person who is recognized as a man 
of honour, honest, a man of compassion and integrity, a man who 
was totally committed to serving the people of Saskatchewan, 
and serving them well and with distinction. And that he did, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I rise today simply to express condolences to the family and to 
recognize that Bob Walker’s brother Ed, and sister Marion, live 
today in the city of Moose Jaw, and to recognize the grieving of 
both Ed and Marion and their families, and to say simply that I 
share more in a spiritual, political sense, because I did not know 
Bob personally, but to simply recognize his contributions, his 
contributions to the history in our province and his contributions 
to fairness and to justice, and to say simply, that for someone like 
myself who is a relative novice in this service to the people of 
Saskatchewan through the Legislative Assembly, that he serves 
as an inspiration for me and, I know, for many others within the 
Assembly as well. 
 
Let me conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by extending my personal 
sympathies to the family, and in particular to Ed Walker and 
Marion Pokiak and their families at this sad time, having lost the 
family member, while at the same time Saskatchewan has lost 
the man who has served us with distinction and with honour, a 
man whose record for the people of Saskatchewan is certainly 
one to be emulated. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to move 
a motion, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 
that with leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript of 
oral tribute to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

So I’d ask for leave first, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- . . . (inaudible) . . . Minister of 
Highways. Maybe have a seconder from someone in the House, 
if possible, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I will 
change the seconder to the member for Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 -- An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I adjourned 
debate I was explaining something of the historical development 
of this province and how that development leads us to this 
legislation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Some attentiveness in the House, 
please, and allow the member from Canora to proceed. 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
having a problem with my voice, and I appreciate that. 
 
I indicated to the House that it was the Progressive Conservatives 
who invented Crown corporations, who worked to establish the 
co-operative movement, who have forwarded the interests of this 
province in the areas of trade, diversification, and economic 
development. I indicated also that the public participation 
program is another historic step forward for the province, and I 
encourage members opposite to join with the people of this 
province in this great and important work. 
 
I then went on, Mr. Speaker, to quote the advice of members 
opposite. And I quoted from two distinguished gentlemen, 
Professor Morton, and Gerald Kaplan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there’s another New Democrat that I think should have his views 
reflected in the record, and I know that the members opposite are 
also familiar with him. He’s a former MLA under Allan 
Blakeney, and is now a professor of public administration. 
Professor John Richards of Simon Fraser has this advice to offer 
our Assembly and which are germane to our discussions here, 
and I quote: 
 

The NDP has not really begun to respond to the many valid 
criticisms coming from the right, that the interests of 
organized labour are often opposed to the general public’s, 
that government intervention has often led to monopoly 
pricing which hurts the consumer, and that bloated 
government bureaucracies are inefficient. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are three pretty powerful assessments 
by some reasonably and respected advocates of the New 
Democratic Party, and each of them has pointed out that the time 
has come to abandon government ownership as a vehicle of 
economic development and even as a vehicle of consumer 
protection. 
 
These are New Democrats who have fought for that party, who 
believe in the history and tradition of that party, and they are 
telling that the party, that it is important for them to support 
public participation initiatives such as are presented by the 
legislation we are dealing with here today. Mr. Speaker, after the 
previous days of acrimony in this House, it is important for us all 
to try and come   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

634 
 

together and work for the good of this province. And that is what 
this place is about. It is not only about obtaining power or 
retaining power, it is quite simply about doing good. 
 
And I feel that this Bill does good, and I invite members opposite 
to reflect on the Blakeney plan of January 1982 to initiate his own 
public participation program, and to accept that this is a 
non-partisan issue. They can and they should join with the 
government on this one for the good of the province. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, is it good for the province? Because public 
participation means diversification; it means diversification. For 
almost a century, Mr. Speaker, the good people of this province 
have struggled to diversify their economy. They have employed 
every method that has been available. It is a desirable and 
necessary goal and public participation will help immensely in 
achieving that goal. 
 
We already have examples of how that is happening. I look to the 
community of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, and as a citizen of 
Saskatchewan I am proud of that community. They took a small 
saw mill -- and “they” are the employees and the local Indian 
bands -- they took a small saw mill and they invested in the future 
of their community and their families. And the result of that 
investment, of that public participation initiative, Mr. Speaker, 
has already been the attraction of a quarter of a billion dollars of 
investment to that community, a quarter billion dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, to a community the size of Meadow Lake. 
 
That is a result that simply cannot be argued with. It means jobs; 
it means security for the future of that community; it means 
protection for the small businesses in that community against the 
ravages of such things as drought; it means opportunities for their 
young people; it means revenues for the government to pay for 
health care and social programs and schools and highways. It 
means success, Mr. Speaker, success through public 
participation -- a pulp mill and a chopsticks factory. 
 
And just as this province began with trade, so too it continues 
with trade. And for Meadow Lake to have won a chopsticks 
factory, as small a thing as that may seem to some members 
across the way, it means trade for Meadow Lake and trade for 
Saskatchewan. It also means Saskatchewan will not have to 
import chopsticks for its restaurants and its retail stores. And a 
small thing or no, Mr. Speaker, that is how we are diversifying. 
 
One business at a time; one success at a time. And it won’t work 
and has never worked with a grandiose scheme of government 
ownership. Public participation means diversification. 
 
I look, Mr. Speaker, to the sale of SaskPower bonds to our 
people. I see that instead of paying interest to New York banks, 
that that money will stay in Saskatchewan. I hear economists tell 
me that the result of those interest payments remaining in the 
Saskatchewan economy is directly going to be more jobs, more 
growth, and more business here. 
 

And I watched the minister responsible for SaskPower take the 
dollars raised through those public participation bonds and build 
the biggest project for rural Saskatchewan since electrification. 
And I am talking about rural natural gas distribution, Mr. 
Speaker. And that program is an example of what public 
participation is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that public participation is inviting all 
Saskatchewan people to invest in the development of the 
infrastructure of this province. And the result is real savings and 
significant savings to our farm families. 
 
And I do want to take a moment in this discussion, Mr. Speaker, 
to chastise the member for Riversdale and show how public 
participation should change his mind. I know he has just been 
upset with the criticism, and I’m not trying to be overly partisan 
in my remarks, but I think in this case the record shows that the 
Leader of the Opposition stands opposed to the rural natural gas 
distribution program. He said in this House that it was a 
ridiculous idea that would cost hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, if the member for Riversdale had told 
Tommy Douglas that when he decided to bring in the electric 
power to rural Saskatchewan. Well the point here, Mr. Speaker, 
is that our Premier’s desire to bring natural gas to rural 
Saskatchewan can be done, is being done, because the minister 
responsible for SaskPower is able and willing to use public 
participation to issue bonds to Saskatchewan people and use the 
proceeds to continue building this province. And I ask the Leader 
of the Opposition to reconsider his position and join with us in 
this building and in this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly public participation means direct benefits 
for consumers in our province. Clearly it means better services. 
We could not build the natural gas system without it. And the 
rural natural gas system means lower energy costs for farm 
families and better, more reliable service. 
 
We can also examine the way the Minister of Telephones has 
used public participation, Mr. Speaker, to enhance the services 
and create economic activity in this province. The Premier has a 
strong commitment to increasing the quality of services available 
in rural Saskatchewan, and the Premier has made a fundamental 
objective of this government, the enrichment of rural life. 
 
And the Minister of Telephones posed this question himself: how 
will I, as minister, serve this purpose? Rural telephone customers 
have always been relegated to third-class telephone service. They 
have had to deal with party lines, and they’ve had to accept the 
fact that they would not have access to computer 
communications because of the quality of their telephone service. 
 
(1130) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Not any more. 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Not any more, is true. 
 
And the government said it is necessary, it is fair, and it is a   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

635 
 

good thing to bring rural Saskatchewan into the era of modern 
technology. It is fair that they should have the same 
confidentiality in their personal phone communications as urban 
customers. And this means it is necessary to have individual line 
service in rural Saskatchewan. Well that costs a great deal of 
money, Mr. Speaker, an awful lot of money. And the minister 
said he was willing to be part of the public participation initiative. 
He wanted to help in building the province, and here was the 
opportunity. So he issued the SaskTel bonds, Mr. Speaker, and 
the result of that offering is that the money is available to 
continue the program of individual line service for our farm 
families. 
 
Public participation means better service for Saskatchewan, more 
service for Saskatchewan, and more jobs for Saskatchewan. And 
you know, Mr. Speaker, the laying of cable represents 
diversification for Saskatchewan, because that cable is being 
made in Saskatchewan. And that is more jobs and more revenues 
for government and for small business, and on and on it goes. 
Public participation means Saskatchewan will be able to compete 
internationally and win more trade and more technology and 
more jobs. 
 
Look, Mr. Speaker, at the uranium company. When Eldorado and 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) were 
merged, they formed the largest uranium company in the world, 
the largest in the world, Mr. Speaker, bigger than anything the 
Americans have, anything the Soviets have, anything the French 
or Germans or anyone else has for that matter. It is the largest 
uranium company in the globe. 
 
And it has its head office in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, and it is a competitor. With that kind of 
international strength it can attract the largest . . . or the brightest 
and the best young people in the world. And they’ll bring with 
them and invent right here the newest technologies and the most 
successful marketing and mining and production practices in the 
world, and that is here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Public 
participation is employee participation, employee ownership. 
 
I now look at the Saskatchewan Government Printing Company, 
Mr. Speaker. And first I ask, why is the government trying to take 
business away from my local printer? Because if we are to 
believe the opposition, any government-owned business should 
compete like any business owned by the people, and I know that 
the different private printing companies are sure trying to take 
business away from one another. And it is just a little strange that 
it is my local printer that has to pay taxes to the same people who 
are trying to take customers away from him. 
 
But perhaps more important than that, the employees of 
government printers have a lot of skills and talents that they 
would like to apply to their business. They have an interest in 
their business, Mr. Speaker, and when the Minister of Public 
Participation receives a proposal that the employees be given the 
opportunity to own and operate their own company, I have to ask, 
why on earth would anyone oppose that? Why not let these 
workers build this company up? Let them get out there and 

compete against everyone else. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that before a few years are past, that 
these employees will be selling their service into the U.S. market 
and bringing in trade dollars to this province and succeeding like 
there is no tomorrow. And do you know why? Because they want 
to build this province, and they want to diversify the economy, 
and they want to create more jobs. And that is public 
participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, approximately a year ago I remember the member 
for Rosthern standing in this House and relating a conversation 
that he had had with three employees of SaskCOMP, the 
government computer company. He told us that those employees 
had really impressed him because they were so excited and 
optimistic about the future if they were given a shot at ownership 
in this company. And the government went ahead with their 
advice and the advice of many like them, and the 
government-owned computer company became an 
employee-owned computer company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those employees have been true to their words. That 
new company, WESTBRIDGE, is now not only working for the 
government but is out in the world aggressively seeking new 
business. Already, Mr. Speaker, they have won millions in 
out-of-province contracts, and they have barely begun. New 
contracts, new jobs, new wealth and technology for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And on jobs, Mr. Speaker, that company has already increased 
the number of workers on its staff by 25 per cent. That is a 
significant number, Mr. Speaker, because it represents real 
opportunities for real Saskatchewan families -- 25 per cent more 
jobs than before. So public participation is new jobs, and it is new 
opportunities, and it is new wealth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, second reading on this Bill represents a historic 
occasion and a historic opportunity, and I have reviewed very 
briefly why it is a historic occasion. But the historic opportunity 
is there for members opposite. They have an opportunity to show 
the people of this province that politics does not always have to 
be a matter of quarrelling and bickering and filibuster. Politics 
does not have to be a case of my way or no way. 
 
The opposition has a chance in this debate to claim their own 
heritage as a force in Saskatchewan, and promote the ideas they 
were putting forward in 1982; rise above politics and see that the 
fact that this government has developed those ideas, and is 
willing to put them into effect, is a chance for us both to work in 
this House and to work for the good of all the people. 
 
It is the tradition of this province to work together, to participate 
together, and this is a chance for the parties and the House to 
show that tradition can live in this place. The members opposite 
can stand up and support this Bill, Mr. Speaker; they can support 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I reflect on the thrust and parry of the debates in 
this place, I’ve seen one common theme, and it is a theme that 
deserves reinforcing in the second reading debate. And I make 
these remarks in the context of my   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

636 
 

invitation to members opposite to join with the members on this 
side in building the province through public participation, 
because I do not believe that the members opposite can bring 
themselves to that. 
 
It is a sad commentary on the decline of the New Democratic 
Party, but it is apparent that it has lost the commitment of a 
famous man like Allan Blakeney, lost the vigour and fire of 
Douglas, and has lost its will to communicate with the people of 
this province. I say to members opposite, if you cannot find it in 
yourselves to support this Bill and the bipartisan spirit that it 
deserves, then that can be accepted, but then you must . . . you 
have an obligation to tell this Assembly and the people of this 
province what you propose as an alternative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the day is long past since Saskatchewan will accept 
from a would-be leader simple opposition to everything. The 
people of this province expect and deserve to hear, from those 
who oppose, some explanation of the policy and program that 
they would offer in place of that of which they oppose. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, it is your right to oppose this 
Bill if you cannot find the strength to exercise 
bipartnership -- bipartisanship. But if you oppose, then tell us 
clearly what your alternative plan of action is. Do not simply 
invoke the memories of past leaders and try to draw their 
character to yourselves through mystical osmosis. Do not simply 
make emotional pleas about how terrible the plan proposed is in 
your eyes. Do those things if you must, as we have come to 
expect of you, but also tell the people what you would do. 
Enough about what you would not do; tell us what you would do. 
Enough about the fact that you do not like this legislation. Now 
is the time for the people to be told what options you offer and 
how you would accomplish the goals you set out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Public Participation Act is an employment Act; 
it is an economic diversification Act; it is an Act respecting the 
increase of technology in this province; it is an Act of the 
enhancement of social policy; it is an employee ownership Act; 
it is an Act respecting the increased quality of services; it is an 
accessibility to service Act; it is a rural development Act. This 
Public Participation Act is all of these and more, and I’ve 
explained in some brief detail how it accomplishes these goals. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I feel the opposition has two options. They can 
simply oppose the Act, and by that opposition state that they are 
opposed to increased technology, more jobs, better service, 
economic diversification, rural development, and all the other 
prime objectives of this Act, or they can tell us how they would 
do it differently, tell us and tell the people how. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak more to this Bill because it is 
truly an historic Bill in the history of this province, and I would 
like to try further to bring members opposite through this 
historical progression of this province from the Ice Age to the 
year 2000, but they will not leave the Stone Age, Mr. Speaker, 
and for that I am sad. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I get the clear signal from members 

opposite, from their reactions and comments, that it is clear that 
any further pleas on them are a waste of time. 
 
And I therefore will end by saying only this, that I am proud, 
prouder perhaps than in any Act of this government ever before, 
and I am proud to have had the honour to speak on this 
legislation. And I want to tell you that I will be supporting this 
legislation on behalf of the people of my constituency and the 
people of Saskatchewan with complete determination and clarity 
of purpose, and I invite all members of this House to also take 
their privileged place in the history of this place by supporting 
this Bill. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I’d like leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure 
that I want to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 
my member of parliament and the member for Maple Creek, the 
member for Shaunavon, the member for Swift Current and the 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and his name is Mr. Geoff 
Wilson. And I appreciate him being here and we want to 
welcome you, sir, and I hope you appreciate the proceedings as 
they go along here. 
 
You will also notice that we have seconded a member of the 
Clerk from Ottawa, and so far he’s been doing a good job too. 
 
We want to have the members of the Assembly welcome you 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it is with a sense of gravity or grave 
concern, and at the same time a love for this beautiful province 
of Saskatchewan, that I enter into this debate on this piratization 
Bill No. 1. 
 
As I listened carefully to the remarks of the member from 
Canora, I find that in many ways I would agree he focused his 
attention on a number of concerns, issues of concern to many, 
many Saskatchewan people. And it is, I guess, in a sense, Mr. 
Speaker, characteristic of this Assembly and the fact that we 
come with different views as to how solutions are found, that I 
find myself disagreeing with his reference to this Bill as being 
the source to the problems that ails us. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, the reason I say that is because it is my 
view, very simply and very clearly, that in many ways it is the 
process of piratization that has been the cause of   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

637 
 

many of the ills that ail us. And so it is with grave concern for the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan and love for this province 
and concern for the future of the people of Saskatchewan, that I 
rise to enter into the debate on what I will agree with the member 
from Canora, is an historic debate. 
 
This Bill puts into place a social structure, an approach to the 
responsibility of governing and providing leadership to the 
solution of problems that affect the real people, the most 
important people in this province. And that’s those who sent us 
here. 
 
And so I think we will find ourselves in many ways looking as 
we enter into this debate, at the core of what it is that brings us 
here. What is the political driving force; what motivates us to 
want to enter into the arena of political service, to come to this 
Legislative Assembly, and all of us, I believe, in the best interests 
of those who sent us to bring the messages and the quality of 
debate to decision making that we believe they are entitled to 
receive. 
 
When we look at this piratization Bill we must recall that it is not 
in fact setting a new trend; it is merely putting into legislation the 
authorization for the Minister of Public Participation to continue 
a trend that has begun some time ago, some time ago. 
 
(1145) 
 
And so if we want to measure the predicted success of this Bill 
for the people of Saskatchewan, then it is extremely valid, Mr. 
Speaker, to look at the track record of the implications of 
piratization that the people of Saskatchewan have seen so far. 
 
Let me make just a brief reference, Mr. Speaker, to the term 
piratization, because I don’t use that term to be facetious. I use 
that term, Mr. Speaker, because I believe it aptly describes one 
of the differences, the political differences between the members 
who sit on that side of the Assembly and the members who serve 
on this side of the Assembly. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, when we look at government 
decisions that are being made that affect not only, not only the 
day-to-day functioning of Saskatchewan people, but the very 
futures and the opportunities that our children and our children’s 
children will experience in this beautiful province of ours, it 
seems to me that when we look at those sorts of things, that it is 
not accurate to describe the process as -- clearly not public 
participation. That’s not where the majority of the debate lies. 
 
It’s a nice sounding term that the government likes to use, and 
many of the members will kind of choke and snort and cough a 
little bit when they use it. And in fact it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’s not even totally accurate to call it privatization, because 
when the PC Party is plundering the very future of Saskatchewan 
people, that’s piratization -- piratization, pure and simple. 
 
And I say, and I will continue it in my remarks today, Mr. 
Speaker, to use that term piratization because I think it is 

an apt and descriptive term of the consequences of this agenda, 
this political agenda that has been before us for some years and 
will continue with this omnibus Bill, Bill No. 1, that is before us 
in this Assembly today. 
 
This is an omnibus Bill that allows the process of piratization to 
continue, that places in the hands of the minister the authorization 
to piratize anything, anywhere, any time, anyhow, he wants. 
That’s what this Bill authorizes the Minister of Public 
Participation, the minister of piratization, to do. 
 
And that’s the kinds of legislation, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that is dangerous in the hands of any government. It is dangerous 
to have in the hands of any government legislation which allows 
a single minister of the Executive Council, of cabinet, to make 
sweeping decisions which can impact on hundreds or thousands, 
or in fact sometimes hundreds of thousands of our citizens 
without setting foot in the Legislative Assembly, in the people’s 
Chamber in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if this Bill is carried, what we are doing in effect is 
authorizing a single man in the province of Saskatchewan to 
make any decision about piratization affecting anything, 
anywhere, any time, anyhow he chooses, without having to come 
before this Assembly to defend his actions and to give people of 
Saskatchewan what they deserve, an explanation as to what is 
happening and why, and to spell out for the people of our 
province the consequences that he sees in hand. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s with a sense of gravity, of concern 
not only for the future of Saskatchewan, but for the respect for 
the democratic process, that I rise to oppose this Bill before us 
here. A dangerous Bill in the hands of any government, 
particularly dangerous in the hands of a desperate government, 
of a government that feels that its political fortunes are shallow 
and are fragile, and is willing to do darn near anything to get itself 
re-elected, to maintain the strings of power. 
 
And I would add as well, Mr. Speaker, that it is my view that it 
is particularly dangerous in the hands of a dishonest government 
that has proven, for which the track record has already proven 
that piratization is a failure for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t make those statements rashly, Mr. Speaker. I intend to 
defend them in debate on this Bill before us here today. 
 
Let me give some examples of the dishonesty that has been a part 
of the character of the Government of Saskatchewan that we have 
in the province today. And let me begin, first of all, specifically 
with the dishonesty about piratization, about the very process, the 
philosophical, ideological agenda of the government that’s 
before us. 
 
And let’s go back, let’s go back, Mr. Speaker, to the fall of 1986. 
Every one of us in this room will have very clear memories about 
the fall of 1986, because it was in the fall of 1986 of course that 
all of us stood before the people of our own constituency and 
offered our services to come to this Assembly, and all of us who 
are here today were   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

638 
 

those who were successful in earning the right to do that. 
 
And we will all have very clear memories of what went on in 
those days. And one of the things that I remember very clearly 
taking place in October of 1986 was an accusation made by those 
who were contesting for the New Democratic Party for the right 
to serve as the Government of Saskatchewan, an accusation made 
that this government, if elected, would privatize SaskTel. It was 
an accusation that was made and it was supported with evidence 
about how government officials had trotted off to Great Britain 
to sit down with Maggie Thatcher and some of her advisers to 
see how the telephone system could be privatized Great Britain 
style. 
 
And I recall very clearly in the course of that campaign, the PC 
Party in that campaign saying in response, there is no way; 
SaskTel will never be privatized. In fact we’ve heard members in 
this Assembly say that they didn’t even know that officials from 
the province of Saskatchewan were going to Great Britain to look 
at the privatization of SaskTel. 
 
And not only did they say that, Mr. Speaker, they said, we will 
not privatize utilities; you can count on us for that. That’s what 
they said -- no privatization of utilities. And then when the 
minister of piratization stood in this Assembly about two weeks 
ago now, to enter him comments on the record in support of Bill 
No. 1, what did he tell us? 
 
Well he told us that there would be a plan coming from this 
government, possibly in the form of a Bill, to privatize the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, one of the Crown corporations of 
this province that contributes to the economic well-being of our 
province. 
 
But what else did he say? He said there will be a privatization 
Bill on Saskatchewan Government Insurance. Now some will 
say, is that a utility or is it not? And I suppose we could debate 
that, but he clearly said that’s coming. 
 
And then he said as well that there will be a Bill coming to 
privatize, to piratize the natural gas side of SaskPower. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I would contend and I would put forth for the 
consideration of all the people of Saskatchewan that there would 
be no one in this province, no one who would contend that 
SaskPower, the natural gas side of SaskPower, is not a utility. 
Clearly it is. 
 
And then what did the Premier of our province have to say in my 
fair city of Moose Jaw, as reported in the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald on March 4 -- a report from a speech that he had 
given to a party gathering in Moose Jaw. He said some very 
telling statements. Perhaps the Premier is clearer when speaking 
to his own partisans about the plans for the government than he 
is when he speaks in public to reporters or in the Legislative 
Assembly. But he said, and I quote from the Times-Herald of 
March 4: 
 

Asian entrepreneurs hoping to cash in on the Canada-U.S. 
free trade pact could be lured to Saskatchewan with 
promises of cheap land and cheap labour, Premier Grant 
Devine said Friday. 
 

Well that’s an interesting statement to make in summarizing the 
essence of the economic strategy of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Then he went on in the article, Mr. Speaker, and I come back to 
the . . . again I remind the Assembly of the promise made, the 
commitment made by the PC Party in the election of 1986 -- we 
will not privatize SaskTel. And what does it say? 
 
And it says in quotation marks, and I quote, and this is quoting 
the Premier: 
 

“We’re creating a new partnership between the people and 
the government” by offering shares in Crown corporations, 
the Premier said. 
 

And then it goes on to say, in quotes again: 
 

And what could be safer than investing in a monopoly like 
SaskTel? Shares in Crown corporations are as good as gold 
and we’re not going to back off one inch from privatization, 
(the Premier said.) 
 

Well it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that that is a blatant 
contradiction of a statement made in the campaign to earn the 
right to govern, which indicates either this government doesn’t 
know what it’s doing or didn’t know then, or it knew then and 
was being dishonest. Either of those alternatives, Mr. Speaker, I 
would suggest, are not acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a government, Mr. Speaker, that has demonstrated its 
desperation in a number of ways and is willing to do anything to 
get elected. The Minister of Finance has proven that -- the billion 
dollar man. We recalled in the presentation of the 1986 provincial 
budget, the Minister of Finance said that the deficit is coming 
under control, the economy’s not in bad shape, but that in this 
election year of 1986 he told the people of Saskatchewan, when 
standing in his seat in the Assembly, there would be a $389 
million deficit. 
 
Well about seven or eight months later, after the election was 
over, and it was repeated over and over again during the course 
of that campaign that the deficit would be only $389 million 
because this government was getting control of the economy, so 
it claimed, the Minister of Finance revealed that in fact, in the 
election year of 1986, the deficit would not be $389 million, but 
in fact $1.235 billion. And he said, whoops, we just made an $846 
million error; sorry about that folks, but trust me. Same man! 
 
The same man who also then went on to explain, when asked by 
reporters how you could possibly make an $846 million error, he 
said, “What do you expect? We’re politicians.” And even then he 
wasn’t being honest, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, because if he 
had been truly honest, he would have said, what do you expect; 
we’re Tory politicians. 
 
So when you’re desperate to form government, when you’re 
desperate and lunging and lurching for the right to govern the 
province of Saskatchewan, you will promise   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

639 
 

people anything, and you do not feel obliged to honour the 
historic tradition in this province of keeping commitments and 
being honest with the people of Saskatchewan when asking for 
their confidence at election time. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, does privatization or piratization have 
anything to do with benefit to the people of Saskatchewan? I 
suggest not. I suggest not. It doesn’t have to do with the benefit 
to the people of the province; it has a whole lot to do with an 
expression of political ideology. It has a whole lot to do with that, 
but not a whole lot to do with practical solutions to real problems 
being faced by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The history of this province, Mr. Speaker, defies, defies the 
piratization agenda of the Government of Saskatchewan today. 
The people in this province knew piratization, they knew 
privatization, they knew the right-wing, free-market ideology 
that’s being put forth by the Government of Saskatchewan today, 
and they’ve experienced it. And when did they experience it, Mr. 
Speaker? They experienced it through the 1920s and through the 
1930s. It was in the 1920s and 1930s, the system, the economic 
system that the people of Saskatchewan had available to them 
was exactly the system that this government wants to take us 
back to again. 
 
This government wants to, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, to drag the 
people of Saskatchewan back 60 years, to drag the people of this 
province back kicking and screaming into the Dirty Thirties 
again. That’s the history, that’s the history. 
 
But what did the people of Saskatchewan say in the 1930s, and 
eventually expressed through the election of the Tommy Douglas 
CCF government in 1944, to provide government, good 
government for the people of Saskatchewan for 20 years? The 
people of Saskatchewan said: we’re not happy with this system 
that has failed the people of our province; we need a new 
approach; we need a government which is willing to allow us to 
deal with adversity and to solve our own problems in our own 
ways. 
 
(1200) 
 
And how did the people of Saskatchewan decide is the best way 
to solve their problems? Did they decide that it’s this wild-eyed, 
unfettered free enterprise, dog-eat-dog, high competition, every 
man for himself kind of philosophy that brings us the best 
province and the best society with the best opportunity for the 
people of Saskatchewan? No, no, they didn’t say that; they didn’t 
say that. 
 
What the people of this province said was that we recognize we 
live in times of adversity; that the economic structures of the time 
are against us; that the geographical conditions of our province 
and the climatic conditions of the province are against us, and so 
how do we solve that problem? We solve that problem by 
working together, by working together. And so a co-operative 
movement was founded. 
 

You know, it’s kind of interesting that the minister from Maple 
Creek sits in her place and yaps. There was a time -- maybe if 
you’ll just stay and listen, Madam Minister, maybe if you’ll just 
stay and listen -- there was a time in this province, including 
under your government, when you, as a matter of fact, were the 
minister of a department that was responsible for co-operatives, 
and we knew that because it had it in the title. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a telling tale indeed that when you 
look through the list of government departments in 
Saskatchewan today, and you try and find the department of 
co-operation, you can’t find it because it’s not listed. We have 
come so far under this government in contradiction to that spirit 
of co-operation, in building our own structures and our own 
solutions for the people of Saskatchewan, you can’t even find the 
word “co-ops” or “co-operation” in the name of a single 
department in the Government of Saskatchewan today. 
 
And so the minister, who used to be the minister of co-operations 
or co-operatives, yaps in her seat. And I find it kind of interesting, 
and I look forward to her entering into this debate and saying to 
her constituents and the people of Saskatchewan just why it is 
such a good thing for us to move away from that historic tradition 
of people pulling together and building their own structures to 
work in harmony and unity in their common interest to solve our 
problems and to build our futures. I will look forward to the 
minister’s interventions and explanations in that regard. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have before us a plan that has got very 
little to do with solving problems for people of Saskatchewan; 
it’s got a lot to do with lust for power, inspired by that great lady, 
in the minds of some, Maggie Thatcher from Great Britain. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Maggie Thatcher, who will be one of the star 
speakers at Roger Phillips privatization institute next spring. You 
see, Maggie Thatcher, Mr. Speaker -- I think it’s clearly known, 
and it’s been stated by her advisers -- devised the original 
piratization strategy in Great Britain. Was it devised -- and when 
you ask her advisers why it was devised, why this strategy; is it 
because the people of Great Britain were not able to enjoy the 
opportunities or the freedoms to the extent that they could? No, 
it had very little to do with that, and I suggest maybe even 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was a strategy that was devised at the direction of Maggie 
Thatcher of Great Britain in order to get re-elected, pure and 
simple. The objective was lust for power, power at any price, and 
people be damned. That power, the power to govern, is the 
ultimate right of the party. And that was what motivated Maggie 
Thatcher to call in Madsen Pirie and all those related cronies and 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Ollie Letwin. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Ollie Letwin, who comes to Saskatchewan at the 
invitation of the members opposite and gives great oratory to the 
party members of the PC Party and tells them just what a 
wonderful job they’re doing in Great   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

640 
 

Britain. Never mind the fact that their unemployment has risen in 
Great Britain, similar to what we’ve seen in Saskatchewan. 
Never mind that the health care system is in crisis in Great 
Britain, similar to what we’ve seen here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, because it’s been successful for the Conservative 
Party and Maggie Thatcher in Great Britain. Why? Because it got 
her elected; the ultimate objective -- it got her elected. That is 
what we’re up against in the province of Saskatchewan today, an 
agenda that is being put forth by a government that is desperate 
to get re-elected and inspired by the success of Maggie Thatcher 
in Great Britain. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in the province of Saskatchewan 
it will fail. The difference is this: it will fail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Great Britain did not have, and does not have, the 
proud and strong tradition of co-operative problem-solving that 
we have in our province, and there is a difference in the people. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite have 
misread the public of Saskatchewan, and I believe that when 
given the opportunity to exercise judgement on the performance 
of this government and to choose the future plan for the province 
of Saskatchewan, that the people of this province will say no to 
piratization and will say yes to a government that will offer 
co-operative solutions to build the future and the promise for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, has the minister been honest 
about what would be piratized? He said a number of things. Has 
he even been honest about what would be piratized? I recall, Mr. 
Speaker, I recall the minister of piratization having said on a 
number of occasions, there are three things that will never be 
privatized, he said. And what are those three things? He said 
there will never be piratization of health, there will never be 
piratization of social services, and there will never be piratization 
of education. That’s what he said. And has he kept his word, Mr. 
Speaker, on that? The answer is no. 
 
Let’s turn, first of all, to health. Mr. Speaker, it was a day to 
commemorate that turned into a disaster. On July 1 of 1987 the 
people of Saskatchewan had an opportunity to celebrate. On July 
1 of 1987 the people of Saskatchewan were experiencing, to the 
day, the 25th anniversary of the introduction of medicare in the 
province of Saskatchewan -- one of the most beautiful gifts that 
the people of Saskatchewan have been able to pass on to all the 
people across our nation. July 1, 1987, 25th anniversary of 
introduction of medicare. 
 
How did we celebrate July 1, 1987? Mr. Speaker, on July 1, 1987 
the province of Saskatchewan celebrated the 25th anniversary of 
the introduction of medicare by piratizing the children’s 
school-based dental care program. That’s how we celebrated. 
What a shame! 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas inspired many people 
in this province with his vision for the future and his dreams that 
we would be able to work co-operatively 

and together to build security for ourselves and for our futures. 
And the dream for which he’s most recognized is his dream about 
health care. 
 
Tommy had a vision, and his vision came in three stages, Mr. 
Speaker. The first step was hospitalization, hospital care; the 
second step was an introduction of a no-fee-charge medical care 
system for the people of this province; and the third step was a 
preventive health care system. That was Tommy’s vision. 
 
We had in the province of Saskatchewan, bar none, one of the 
best, if not the best in the entire world, preventive health care 
system -- the school-based children’s dental care program. You 
see, Mr. Speaker, up until this government came to power, the 
children of Saskatchewan were growing up with good teeth 
because dental care in Saskatchewan was a preventive health care 
system. That’s what we had. 
 
And in spite of inflation, on a per-child basis it was getting 
cheaper every year because, you see, Mr. Speaker, preventive 
health care works. When you have a system that allows children 
to receive good dental care where they are, in the schools, on a 
regular basis; to be attended to by professionals who are trained 
not only in dental care but in working with children, you have 
children learning to take care of their teeth. And the cheapest way 
of providing dental care, not only the most humane, but the 
cheapest way of providing dental care is preventive dental care, 
because if you prevent the cavities, then you don’t have to treat 
them. 
 
Now that’s not particularly profound; I would think that’s 
obvious to most. But it certainly was not obvious to the 
government opposite. July 1, 1987 we celebrated the 25th 
anniversary of medicare by transferring the school-based 
children’s dental care program to the private sector -- pure and 
simple. And what’s been the consequence since? 
 
The member from Canora referred to services in rural 
Saskatchewan. There is no part of this province that has 
experienced the negative consequences of that more than rural 
Saskatchewan -- none. Children are not getting access to dental 
care that they once had. The participation rate is down and the 
costs are up. It doesn’t make sense financially; it doesn’t make 
sense in terms of a quality preventive health care system. 
 
How else did we celebrate the 25th anniversary of medicare, to 
the day? On July 1, 1987 we saw the annihilation of the 
prescription medicine plan that had been introduced by Allan 
Blakeney and the NDP government. And I submit as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that that too was an initiative towards piratization of 
health care; towards the private insurance system -- and we’re 
beginning to see that more and more. 
 
Never mind the fact the members opposite will say that we’ve 
now imposed $125 deductible fee for all Saskatchewan families; 
never mind that. Never mind the fact that prescription medicine 
is more expensive than it used to be. It’s piratized, and somehow 
that’s supposed to make it better. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1989 

 

641 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t made it better. And I don’t think 
there’s any one of us here in this Assembly who has not heard 
over and over again, and seen for ourselves the sad circumstance 
of seeing a senior or a young mother going into a pharmacy and 
going up to the prescription counter and giving a prescription and 
being told what it would cost, and turn and walk away without 
that prescription filled. What a condemnation of the 
consequences of piratization of health care by the government 
opposite. 
 
So they said no, we won’t piratize the health care. But they did. 
The minister also has said, well, we’re not going to piratize social 
services either. But they did. We saw about a year ago the 
privatization, transferring to the private sector, one of the most 
sensitive and important services provided by the Department of 
Social Services, the processes of transferring a child given up for 
adoption to a new family. 
 
It can be described in no other way, Mr. Speaker, as privatization 
of adoption services, one of the very basic mandates of the 
Department of Social Services. Adoptions transferred to the 
private sector. Minister said, no we’re not going to privatize 
Social Services. But he did. 
 
The minister also said, we’re not going to privatize education. 
But he did that too. We saw with the cut-backs in technical 
education, transfer of office education out of the technical school 
system into the private sector, we saw that very clearly. 
 
Secretarial training now, Mr. Speaker, is very difficult to acquire 
through SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) in the province of Saskatchewan. But I would 
contend as well, Mr. Speaker, and I would submit as well, the 
very formation of the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology, the very formation of that was an initiative 
towards the piratization of technical education in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I was talking to someone just the other day, Mr. Speaker, who’s 
involved in technical education in Saskatchewan and was told 
again for, I don’t know, the n-th time, number of times, that the 
key word in Saskatchewan today when determining whether a 
new program should be offered in our technical education system 
is profit. Will it pay for itself? So we no longer find ourselves 
being dictated and determining our educational priorities based 
on social need, economic opportunity. It’s immediate 
profit -- will it pay for itself today -- without any sense of 
importance for planning for tomorrow. 
 
(1215) 
 
So there we have them, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got the minister of 
privatization, of piratization saying, no piratization of heath care, 
but he did; no piratization of social services, but they did; no 
piratization of education, but they did. And is it any wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that piratization, or privatization, is the p-word -- the 
p-word -- for the members of the government? 
 
You know, I find it kind of amusing sometimes when they 

stand in this Assembly and try and snap out that double “p”, 
public participation. And they have a lot of difficulty getting 
command of that word. It doesn’t flow, and it doesn’t flow 
because not only is it difficult to say but it doesn’t make sense. It 
doesn’t flow mentally either. It doesn’t flow mentally either, Mr. 
Speaker. And so we see this government making reference to 
public participation is their buzz word because they are afraid, 
afraid to use the same word that the people of Saskatchewan 
use -- privatization or piratization, when they get down to the 
essence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- You see what this government sees it as, is a war 
of words. It’s ideology and a war of words. 
 
You know, something struck me just last week, Mr. Speaker, 
when I was watching the news and I saw that Mickhail 
Gorbachev had been to visit Fidel Castro. And you know, I found 
that there was something that Mickhail Gorbachev, Fidel Castro 
and the Premier of Saskatchewan have in common. The Premier 
of Saskatchewan once said Gorbachev was away out ahead of 
him, but I think they have something in common -- Gorbachev, 
Castro and the Premier of Saskatchewan have in common — that 
they get themselves involved in public advertising of political 
ideology. 
 
You know I’ve never seen before in the democracy of Canada 
and in Saskatchewan, I have never before seen a government that 
has felt so compelled to send its political, ideological message 
that it defied all the history and the requirements to keep 
government advertising to information and services, although 
that gets abused, but is now on the air waves of Saskatchewan in 
the province today spending money including taxpayers’ money 
to advertise a political philosophy. Not a mention of a 
government department, not a mention of a service, not a mention 
of information, but pure and simple in the words and the voice 
clips of the Premier of Saskatchewan, advertising a political 
philosophy and a political ideology. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And who pays them? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Who pays? In immediate terms, the people of 
Saskatchewan pay for it, and in the long run, Mr. Speaker, I 
submit that all the people of the province of Saskatchewan pay 
for it with their futures. 
 
So I find it kind of interesting that in Saskatchewan today, we 
have a government which feels it necessary to advertise a 
political philosophy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I started before by saying that this 
government has given us proven failure of their piratization 
agenda. Let’s take a look at their track record. If piratization is 
such a wonderful thing, and it’s been around for about four years 
already, then it should be compellingly obvious to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we ought to jump onto that bandwagon, put 
our heads down and into the wind and go four-score ahead. That 
should be obvious, because this government has had years -- it’s 
had four years already -- to prove that piratization works. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1989 

 

642 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, have they proven that piratization works? I 
suggest not. I’ve already made reference to the dental plan, the 
school-based children’s dental plan, the prescription drug plan. I 
found it kind of curious -- as they say in Alice-in-Wonderland, 
curiouser and curiouser -- when I reflect on what the minister of 
piratization had to say when he stood in this Assembly to defend 
his Bill. 
 
What did he say was one of the Crown jewels as an example of 
piratization that’s working? He stood in his place in this 
Assembly and he says, we got the farmers, we got the farmers 
cutting the grass in the ditches as a result of piratization. Well 
isn’t that wonderful that the minister of piratization, in defence 
of this Bill, will use that as one of the examples of the Crown 
jewels of piratization, that the farmers of this province are now 
out cutting the grass in the ditches. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Westmount points out very 
accurately, Mr. Speaker, that they have to, because they’re going 
broke. What does this government put forth as a plan for the most 
basic of concerns to people on the farm, the hanging on to the 
land? Another share offering alternative, they say. We will let 
foreign owners buy up your land. You can rent back from them, 
for good. 
 
And so we’ve got the minister of piratization saying this program 
is working because we’ve got the farmers of Saskatchewan out 
cutting the ditches, the grass in the ditches. This from the 
government that had the Minister of Highways, who stood in his 
place in this Assembly and spoke very boldly about transferring 
people to the private sector. Transferred 400 dental technicians 
to the private sector when they cancelled the school-based 
children’s dental care program. Transferred 400 highways 
workers to the private sector, in the words of Jim Garner, the 
former minister of Highways, when that process began some 
years ago. 
 
And so what has highways maintenance come down to? What 
has highways maintenance come down to, Mr. Speaker? Well 
highways maintenance has come down to getting farmers out 
cutting the grass in the ditches, and it’s come down to getting 
some guys in the back of a pick-up truck going up and down the 
roads sticking red flags and orange flags in the soft spots and the 
pot-holes and the humps and the hollows. 
 
And is it any doubt . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Blue flags. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Oh, he says blue flags. No. Every now and then 
when they come up with a half a kilometre of road improvement, 
then they put up the big blue signs. 
 
You know, is it any wonder, is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that 
around the province of Saskatchewan people are saying if this 
government believed in honesty in advertising, it would take 
down its signs that say Lights On For Life and put up new ones 
that say, hang on for life if you’re going to ride on the roads of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s the consequence. That’s the 
consequence of the piratization in the Department of Highways. 
 

Well we’ve got another expression of piratization and how well 
it’s working, because we have a Government of Saskatchewan 
that spends $34,000 a day on empty office space. Now maybe 
when you’ve got empty ideas all you need is empty office space. 
I’m not certain. But I don’t think that the people of Saskatchewan 
consider $34,000 a day spent on empty office space because of a 
commitment to deserting space that had been previously 
established by the government and moving to rental of spaces 
from their friends in the private sector, and all the costs to make 
that little move in the interest of piratization is $34,000 a day. I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan do not 
approve of that little example of piratization. 
 
Well we have another example of piratization with SaskPower, 
Mr. Speaker, that took place in my home city of Moose Jaw. Well 
let’s take a look at this because this is a regular dilly, Mr. 
Speaker, and this one really clearly spells out, this one very 
clearly spells out one of the jewels of piratization of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now SaskPower on Main Street -- SaskPower on Main Street in 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, had a building that they owned. They 
put about $100,000 of renovations to improve the building. And 
after putting that $100,000 of renovations into the building, they 
decided it was time to sell because it was now more attractive to 
sell it. And how much did they want to sell it for? Well they 
thought if they could get $280,000 for this building, that cost of 
$100,000 to renovate, that would be not a bad deal. 
 
So being married to the principles of free enterprise, of course, 
did they set out to have that property listed for sale with all the 
realtors in Moose Jaw? No, no, they didn’t; no, they didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. No, because they couldn’t quite control that and make 
happen the benefits of piratization they’d like to happen. 
 
Who got the opportunity to sell that building and make the 
commission of $13,000? Was it any realtor in Moose Jaw? No, it 
wasn’t; it wasn’t multiple listing. There was just one that got to 
list it -- the wife of the man who had nominated the candidate, 
the PC candidate for Moose Jaw North, in 1986. Well she got the 
$13,000 commission to sell the building. 
 
So who did she sell it to? Well many are asking, who did she sell 
it to? Well the answer, very clearly, Mr. Speaker, she sold it to 
her husband, sold it to her husband. Yes, and he just happened to 
be the man who nominated the PC candidate for Moose Jaw 
North in 1986. Keith Parker, who now works in the Liquor Board 
as the assistant to the director, will be familiar with these people. 
 
So we have . . . let’s just take a review here, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a building owned by SaskPower, $100,000 of renovations 
put into it; put on sale for $280,000, no opportunity for multiple 
listing; sold by the wife to the husband, to the man who 
nominated the PC candidate in Moose Jaw North in 1986. 
 
And what was the deal then that followed after that? Was this just 
a straight deal? Were they unloading this building because they 
no longer needed a building and they were going out? No. They 
said, well, we know we sold this   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

643 
 

building, but we still need some space because we’re not 
disappearing entirely off the face of the earth. They said, you 
know, it used to cost us $32,000 a year to operate this building. 
We owned it; it cost us $32,000 a year to operate. But we still 
need some space -- had the whole building. 
 
So then they arrived at an agreement with the new owner, Mr. 
Speaker, and what was the agreement? They arrived at a new 
agreement with the owner to take out a 10-year lease, to take out 
a 10-year lease, Mr. Speaker. And what were the conditions of 
that 10-year lease? Now keeping in mind that this building cost 
$32,000 a year to operate, the conditions were this. We’ll take 
out a lease to rent the whole building back? No, just half the 
building. That’s all we need now, they said. How much are we 
going to pay for 10 years? Well, we’ll pay you 37, we’ll pay you 
$37,000; we’ll pay you $37,000 plus half the operating costs, for 
a grand total of $53,000 for half a building. 
 
So there we have it, piratization PC style. The Deputy Premier 
says it’s not exactly half, it’s 48 per cent of the building was all 
they got. 
 
So the SaskPower building in Moose Jaw once cost the power 
users of this province $32,000 a year to operate, period; now a 
minimum of $53,000 a year for 10 years for half a building. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, if that makes mathematical sense to you, then you 
will be the next Finance minister because that’s the kind of 
person to whom that does make mathematical sense -- the billion 
dollar man. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, is that the end of the sad tales of piratization 
disasters? The list goes on. We had the give-away to 
Weyerhaeuser. The people of Saskatchewan were not good 
enough to operate their own pulp mill so we had to give it away 
to an American owned firm that would come in and run it in their 
own way. Did we get a good price for it? No, we didn’t get 
anything for it, the member for Regina Elphinstone says. But 
even what we pretended we got for it wasn’t fair market value. 
 
Were there shares to the people of Saskatchewan? No, weren’t 
any of those. How about shares to the employees? Well, there 
weren’t any of those either. A pure and simple give-away, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who benefitted then? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Who benefitted, they ask. Well, the list is quite 
short, Mr. Speaker. The shareholders in Weyerhaeuser of 
Tacoma, Washington -- they benefitted. 
 
See, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t really a sale. We took a pulp mill that 
was worth over $300 million, put a $248 million price tag on it, 
but then what did the Government of Saskatchewan say on top of 
that is: well yes, we know it’s worth more than 300 million; we’ll 
give it to you for 248 but you don’t have to pay. That’s what they 
said. You only have to pay . . . and we’ll lend you some money, 
we’ll lend you some money to buy this from us because you’re 
kind of strapped, and we’ll charge you horrendous interest. How 
much interest did they charge? Eight and a 

half per cent. Eight and a half per cent they charged. 
 
They said okay, there’s the money, we kind of guarantee you the 
loan to take if off our hands for less than it’s worth, but you don’t 
have to pay it back because times are tough, unless of course you 
make more than thirteen and a half per cent profit. Any year in 
which you make thirteen and a half per cent profit, you can pay 
us back. Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, you show me an 
accountant who can’t prove that the company is making less than 
thirteen and a half per cent, and I’ll show you an accountant 
who’s looking for a job. 
 
(1230) 
 
And so what do the people of Saskatchewan get for the 
give-away of Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, along with 
12 million acres of forestry, forest land, prime timber land? 
Nothing. PC piratization. 
 
Well we got Sask Minerals; we talked about Sask Minerals in this 
Assembly yesterday. Sask Minerals, just a dandy little 
corporation, over 40 years provided an average income to the 
province of Saskatchewan of $1.2 million, employed people on 
a steady basis, only one loss, one deficit year in all of its years of 
operation, steady little employer, good corporate citizen in the 
communities in which its located. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Any shares in that one? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well again the question is asked: were there any 
shares in that one? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did they offer it to the employees? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well did they offer it to the employees? Again the 
question is asked. The answer to most of those questions, Mr. 
Speaker, is no. The answer is no. 
 
So who benefitted from that one? Well there was a firm from 
Ontario and a firm from Quebec who got that little jewel that was 
sold, and I think it’s agreed by everyone in this Assembly that it 
was sold for less than what it was worth, quite clearly, in which 
the province of Saskatchewan -- get this, Mr. Speaker, get this, 
just pay attention to this one because this will really grab 
you -- we got this corporation that produces an annual rate of 
return of $1.2 million and that every year, year after year for 40 
years -- $1.9 million net return on the sale. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Once. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Once, and now it’s done. Six employees lost, and 
now the control -- is it in the hands of Saskatchewan people; is it 
in the hands of Saskatchewan employees? Not a single share, 
because there aren’t any. It’s in the hands of a firm in Ontario 
and a firm in Quebec. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How many days interest payments is that? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, member asked me how many days interest 
payment is that? Mr. Speaker, clearly this is not the breakthrough 
we’ve been looking for because that $1.9 million gets us about 
38 or 39 hours of interest   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

644 
 

payment on the debt in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 
what it gets us. 
 
Well, they piratize Saskoil. Was that the breakthrough the people 
of Saskatchewan were looking for? Well, not unless you consider 
75 per cent ownership out of province to be public participation 
in the ownership that the member from Canora talked about. 
 
And we piratized our parks. As a result of piratizing parks in the 
province of Saskatchewan, have the fees gone down? No, they 
haven’t gone down. Has the service gone up? Service hasn’t gone 
up. It just gets a little more difficult to get into the parks, 
particularly for those who live on more limited means because 
now parks are run for a profit. If the people of Saskatchewan want 
to share in the natural beauty of this province, then they have to 
participate in the public participation plan, the piratization plan 
of the parks of Saskatchewan. 
 
So who wins? Who wins in this whole process of piratization in 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker? Well, I can mention some 
who win. Paul Schoenhals wins. He was a great defender of free 
enterprise when he stood in his place in this Assembly as an MLA 
from Saskatoon. He wins at piratization because he’s now captain 
of the ship at the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and getting 
ready to participate in piratization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Paul Schoenhals is a winner. 
 
John Gormley is a winner. John Gormley didn’t win an election, 
but he won himself a job. John Gormley, the former member of 
parliament for The Battlefords, a great believer in the free 
enterprise system, and when the people of his constituency 
rejected him and the PC Party in the last federal election here in 
Saskatchewan, did he go to the private sector, looking to make 
his fortune? No, he went to the minister of piratization and said, 
can you give me one of them public civil service jobs that the 
people of Saskatchewan pay for? And so he’s a winner from 
piratization because he’s working in the department of 
piratization. 
 
Ralph Katzman is a winner. Ralph Katzman was the member for 
Rosthern. And after he had served as a legislative secretary to 
Jim Garner, the minister of Highways who transferred 400 people 
to the private sector, the PC Government of Saskatchewan today 
has transferred Ralph Katzman to the public sector. They’ve put 
him on the dole at the taxpayer cost, and he works now in the 
Department of Highways. Four hundred maintenance workers in 
this province of Saskatchewan are gone, but Ralph Katzman’s in, 
and he’s a winner in piratization of highways. 
 
How about Louis Domotor, the former PC member from 
Humboldt? Has piratization hurt Louis? Well Louis got rejected 
out in the constituency of Humboldt in 1986. But where do we 
find Louis these days? Louis is in the property management 
corporation where piratization is running rampant in the delivery 
of space and maintenance services in facilities owned and used 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. So piratization hasn’t hurt 
poor Louis any either, Mr. Speaker. He’s doing not badly. 
 

Has it hurt John Remai? Has it hurt John Remai? We know John 
Remai. He got $22,000 from the Government of Saskatchewan 
to conduct a little study to see if Saskatchewan, Regina, needed 
a convention centre with some office space. He decided, after 
taking the $22,000, that not only was it a good idea, he was going 
to do it himself. And he did. 
 
And who’s going to rent his space? Well he was going to take the 
free enterprise risk, because the Government of Saskatchewan is 
going to be the number one tenant in John Remai’s space. And 
so we pay $34,000 a day for empty office space so that we can 
occupy more expensive space in John Remai’s space. Because 
after he had conducted the study and determined that we had a 
need for this space and built it, it had to be used. And it had to be 
used by the people of Saskatchewan as the ones who pay the shot, 
who pay the shot for renting of this space. 
 
So that’s who wins and who loses. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
longer list than the ones who win. When you consider that the 
number one agenda of the PC government in Saskatchewan today 
is piratization as number one game plan, we have to ask 
ourselves, well what about the people? 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at the list of 
losers, the losers are the people. Let’s take a look at some of those 
people -- taxpayers. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan were 
promised by this party, prior to their election in 1982, that they’d 
get a 10 per cent cut in income tax. Has piratization helped 
deliver a 10 per cent cut in income tax? No, it hasn’t. Now we’ve 
got a 2 per cent flat tax that’s gone up a half per cent for 1985 
and ’86 and ’87 and ’88. 
 
What about the consumers? The consumers of this province were 
promised that the PCs would eliminate the sales tax. Has 
piratization helped this government to deliver on that promise? 
Did they eliminate the sales tax? Well if they did, then there’s a 
whole lot of folks who are making voluntary payments of 7 per 
cent along with every purchase that they make in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
How about drivers? The PCs promised to eliminate gas tax. The 
Premier said, as long as there’s a PC government, you’ll never 
see a gas tax again. Did piratization help to eliminate the gas tax? 
Well that’s a little hard to measure up, Mr. Speaker, when we 
recognize that in the budget just delivered, by the billion dollar 
man, that the people of Saskatchewan are now either paying 10 
or 12 cents a litre -- at least 45 cents a gallon on their gasoline, a 
third of them not getting it back -- completely absorbed by school 
boards and municipalities and businesses and passed on to 
customers and to property owners. So piratization really hasn’t 
helped the drivers either. 
 
Has it helped the seniors? We all remember the seniors being 
promised that they’d get free phones, free telephones. Has 
piratization helped to deliver free telephones? Well that one 
hasn’t come through either, because seniors are still paying for 
their phones, and they’re paying more than they ever paid before. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1989 

 

645 
 

Well what about the sick? We had a government that said they 
were going to eliminate the prescription drug charges. They 
promised to eliminate the dispensing fee. Has piratization helped 
to deliver on that one for the sick of our province? No, that didn’t 
get eliminated. Now they pay the first $125, and 20 per cent after 
that. 
 
Well how about the working poor, those who are making 
minimum wage? Has piratization opened up the Pandora’s box 
of opportunity for those folks, Mr. Speaker? Well we’ve seen a 
25 cent increase, 6 per cent, in the last seven years when inflation 
has risen in this province by 45 per cent. And the working poor, 
Mr. Speaker, the working poor have not been the benefactors of 
piratization. 
 
But what about family business? Goodness gracious! We heard 
this government saying that they are open for business and 
surely, surely family business across the province of 
Saskatchewan must have profited from a government that’s been 
open for business for seven years now. Well has piratization 
helped them? 
 
In 1981, Mr. Speaker, 456 bankruptcies, unfortunately, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. In 1988, after six years of piratization, 
in 1988 alone 1,236 businesses declared bankruptcy in the 
province of Saskatchewan, thanks to piratization and the PC 
government, three times as many as when they took office, in one 
year alone. 
 
What about the young people looking for work. Are these . . . 
obviously . . . I mean, piratization produces jobs; we hear them 
saying it all the time. Obviously our young people must just be 
dashing out there and going to work every morning, flooding into 
this province to take up the employment opportunities that are 
being created by piratization of the government of Saskatchewan. 
Is that happening, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well in 1981, Mr. Speaker, sad to say, and I was shocked at that 
time, 21,000 people were unemployed in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a rate of 4.7 per cent in 1981. In February, in 
February of this year, Mr. Speaker, 43,000 people unemployed 
in the province of Saskatchewan and looking for work, a rate of 
9.1 per cent, or one in 11. And clearly piratization has failed 
young people looking for work in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what about home owners? We’ve got to find somebody that 
piratization has helped -- how about home owners? Has it helped 
them? Well property taxes are up because of cut-backs to 
municipalities. Gas and electricity costs are up and rising. And I 
say as well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister’s piratization of 
SaskPower Bill goes through, and they think their electricity 
costs are high now, hang on to your hats because they’ll be going 
through the ceiling. 
 
What about the home builders? This has got to be good for home 
builders -- we’ve got to find somebody that this is good for. 
Home builders, they must be getting help by piratization, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, have they been helped? Met with some home 
builders not so long ago, just a couple of weeks ago, and what 
did they say? They say that the tragedy is that many of them are 
going under. You know, Mr. Speaker, prior to the days of 
piratization, in the 

last four years of the NDP government of Allan Blakeney there 
were an average of 8,400 housing starts a year. Under piratization 
in the last four years of this government, Mr. Speaker, an average 
of 4,900 housing starts a year -- a drop of 3,500 a year. 
 
Home builders in this province say that we need one thing to help 
them, and that’s more people. And so have we got more people 
as a result of piratization, Mr. Speaker? Well in the last 14 
months, Mr. Speaker, we have 21,000 fewer people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. In February alone, Mr. Speaker, the 
outflow, our net loss of people in February alone was 6,261 
people -- shattered dreams -- that left the province of 
Saskatchewan. In February alone, Mr. Speaker, more than 250 
people a day left the province of Saskatchewan -- in February 
alone -- I’m sad to say. In our beautiful Saskatchewan, every six 
minutes somebody left Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, surely piratization, if it’s not helping people, it must be 
helping the deficit. It’s got to be helping the deficit because these 
are . . . the best business minds of the PC Party are sitting in this 
room. Surely piratization has been helping the deficit because the 
theory is, you sell off the assets and you bring the money in and 
you get rid of the deficit. That’s what they say. Has piratization 
helped that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well, all I can say is this government inherited $139 million 
surplus; surplus. Surplus -- maybe I should just explain that word 
because people haven’t heard that for a long time, Mr. Speaker. 
Surplus means that you have more coming in than going out. 
Allan Blakeney left $139 million surplus to the PCs when they 
took office in 1982. 
 
And what did the Minister of Finance tell us when he stood in his 
place and gave the budget this year? He told us the cumulative 
deficit, entirely accumulated under the PC government, is now 
$3.9 billion. That’s $3,900 million. That’s the debt. It’s almost 
the size of the budget itself for an entire year, and it costs us more 
than a million dollars a day just to pay the interest -- just to pay 
the interest. We spend more on interest on the debt today than we 
do in the Department of Social Services. 
 
(1245) 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, has piratization helped some? Sure it has. 
It’s helped Paul Schoenhals and John Gormley, Ralph Katzman 
and Louis Domotor and John Remai. But I say that piratization 
PC style has failed Saskatchewan. It’s failed kids with teeth; it’s 
failed taxpayers; it’s failed consumers; it’s failed drivers; it’s 
failed seniors; it’s failed the sick; it’s failed the working poor; it’s 
failed family business; it’s failed young people looking for work; 
it’s failed home owners; it’s failed home builders; it’s failed 
families, and it’s failed to reduce the deficit. Other than that, it’s 
been pretty good. 
 
Well there ain’t a whole lot left, Mr. Speaker, and is it any 
wonder that around the province of Saskatchewan people of this 
province are saying that when this Premier and this party leave 
this province, there won’t be anything left. When this band of 
pirates leaves, there won’t be anything left. All of this from a 
Premier who, within a few   



 
April 7, 1989 

 

646 
 

months of being elected, told the financiers in New York that 
Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can afford to 
mismanage it and still break even. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I started out by saying that I love this 
province and its people, and it tears at my guts to see people up 
and leaving and deserting our province with shattered dreams. 
Like so many others, I want my children to grow up and to make 
their futures here in Saskatchewan. 
 
All of us have had many a conversation, day after day, with our 
own constituents who are feeling saddened by the fact that they, 
or their children, or their neighbours or friends, are leaving 
Saskatchewan to build their futures elsewhere. Is there any 
experience that is more difficult than for a parent to accept that 
to see your son or daughter making a decision to leave this 
province that we love, because there isn’t a future to be made for 
him or her here. 
 
We have the natural resources and we have the people who love 
this province, Mr. Speaker, who believe in the principle of caring 
and sharing and co-operative problem solving, who want to see 
young people stay in this beautiful province of ours to build a 
brighter tomorrow. 
 
And I want to be a part of that process, that political process, to 
offer freedom of future to the people of Saskatchewan. Freedom 
of future that provides an opportunity for employment and 
education with a sense of justice and compassion, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s fuelled by the three engines of the economy that the Leader 
of the Opposition has talked about is the principle for economic 
stimulation that’s part of our party: the private sector, the 
co-operative sector, and a public sector, in a large province with 
a harsh climate but a determined people working together to build 
futures and opportunities for our people. 
 
And the formula isn’t hard because a lot of the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I believe are a lot like Uncle Louis. 
Uncle Louis was a fellow who came from the old country, 
determined to work hard and build a future for himself and his 
family. He decided to do the thing he knew best, the only thing 
he knew, to open up a drug store. He worked hard and he worked 
long and he cared about the health of his customers, especially 
the elderly and the disadvantaged. And his motto was always 
this: good products at reasonable prices, and always service with 
a smile, because Uncle Louis put people first. 
 
And as a result, Uncle Louis’ reputation grew because people 
came to know him as an honest man. His business did well and 
soon Uncle Louis was able to expand his drugstore because he 
was making enough to expand without borrowing. He opened up 
another drugstore in a town that needed one and didn’t have one, 
and the motto continued -- good products at reasonable prices; 
service with a smile; and people first. 
 
Eventually Uncle Louis had a whole chain of drugstores all 
across Saskatchewan and they all did well because he always put 
people first. Uncle Louis felt satisfied with what he’d done, and 
confident in the future that he could provide for his family. And 
after many years, he decided that he’d like to take a well deserved 
break and go back to 

the old country for a year or two, and turn the business over to 
someone else. 
 
At first he didn’t know who, Mr. Speaker, but he had a son-in-law 
with a bit of a shaky track record but a lot of enthusiasm. And he 
knew that this son-in-law had a lot of enthusiasm because he’d 
say things like, “Give ’er snoose, Bruce,” “Don’t say whoa in a 
mud hole,” and “There’s so much more we can be.” And the 
son-in-law’s name was Grant. 
 
Uncle Louis turned his keys to the store over to Grant and told 
him that he had faith in him, and left for the old country. Two 
years later, Mr. Speaker, Uncle Louis came home and he was 
devastated with what he found. His drugstores were in a mess. 
He found his son-in-law had had a lot of enthusiasm for 
piratization -- pirates first and people second -- and the motto is 
no longer, good products at reasonable prices, service with a 
smile, and people first. 
 
The first thing the son-in-law had done was bring in second-rate 
products and jacked up the prices. To be popular with his friends, 
he hired a bunch of them at big wages, even though they didn’t 
know the business or care about customers. They spent most of 
their time talking about pay-day and rarely gave service with a 
smile. 
 
At first the stores found that they weren’t getting new customers 
and then their old customers started to desert them and go 
elsewhere. The stores began to lose money, Mr. Speaker, so the 
son-in-law decided to sell some off, and he did. He sold the most 
profitable stores first and kept the losers, but because he kept 
running them in the same old way the business kept losing 
money. 
 
Uncle Louis looked at all of this, Mr. Speaker, and he said there 
is one grant this business can do without and he fired him. By the 
way, he gave him three weeks pay in lieu of notice. 
 
And although the task seemed large, Uncle Louis was 
determined, determined to build his business back to what it once 
was, using that proven motto -- good products at reasonable 
prices, service with a smile, and people first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of Saskatchewan that Uncle 
Louis is Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan is you and me. 
Saskatchewan is you and me and our parents and our 
grandparents. Saskatchewan is our children and our children’s 
children. More than anything else, that’s what Saskatchewan is. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of this province that 
Saskatchewan is ours; let’s keep it that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- In concluding, Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members 
give some very serious thought as to how they’re going to vote 
on this Bill. And I ask all members of this Assembly to think 
about this province that we love, and the history of our province 
and its people, and most importantly, even more important than 
the history of our province, about the future of this province and 
its people. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1989 

 

647 
 

Mr. Speaker, I feel confident that if all members of this Assembly 
vote at the end of the day, motivated by love for the province and 
love for its people, and committed to building a future for the 
people of this province, that we will reject the concept that’s 
implicit in this Bill. And I ask all members to do as I intend to 
do, Mr. Speaker, to say no to this Bill and yes to the future of 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very interesting when we speak to this 
Bill to note that this is the first Bill in the session. And I think it’s 
also important to note that the Minister of Health and the PC 
government and the Minister of Education and the Premier have 
all talked over the last few days about how important education 
and health are to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But what we see, the first Bill that’s tabled in the session, is a Bill 
on privatization. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that 
shows the real priorities of this government. The real priorities of 
this government lies with privatizing the heritage of our 
Saskatchewan families. PC privatization and cut-backs are 
harming the province’s future prosperity, Mr. Speaker. PC 
privatization is failing to create jobs in Saskatchewan for our 
young people, and PC privatization benefits big business and 
wealthy out-of-province investors. 
 
And what we have experienced from PC privatization in the last 
few years is a betrayal of Saskatchewan, and it’s nothing less, 
Mr. Speaker, but a betrayal of Saskatchewan. The privatization 
and cut-backs that we have experienced are harming the 
province’s future prosperity. And let’s look at some of the facts 
in that regard. In 1981, before the PC government started on its 
privatization campaign, there were only 21,000 unemployed 
people in Saskatchewan. By 1988, after the PC privatization had 
been in effect for several years, Saskatchewan had 37,000 
unemployed, and over the past 12 months, Saskatchewan has lost 
12,000 jobs. 
 
If PC privatization is so great, Mr. Speaker, why are there no jobs 
for our young people? Why was there an out-migration of more 
than 6,000 people from Saskatchewan in the month of February? 
Why, Mr. Speaker, if PC privatization is so great, why are we 
seeing an exodus of our young people from this province? Why 
are we seeing such high unemployment rates? And why can’t the 
young students going to university, and finishing their grade 12, 
and going on to technical education -- why can’t they get jobs in 
this province, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. PC 
privatization does not benefit the people of this province. It 
benefits big business, Tory friends, and wealthy, out-of-province 
investors. PC privatization does not benefit the young men and 
women of Saskatchewan. It benefits the friends of the Tories. 
 
In the 1981-82 fiscal year, the last one of the Blakeney 
administration, Mr. Speaker, there was an actual budget surplus 
of 139 million, according to the Tories’ own publications. Eleven 
straight balanced budgets with the 

New Democratic administration, but ever since they started their 
PC privatization after 1982, the Tories have had seven straight 
budget deficits, seven straight budget deficits. And the 
cumulative PC privatization deficit is close to 4 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in every year that they have privatized anything, the PC 
deficit has increased. When they privatize, the PC deficit 
increases, Mr. Speaker. Remember those PC election promises 
about taxes? Oh yes, they promised they’d reduce personal 
income tax by 10 per cent, but they broke that promise, Mr. 
Speaker, and they imposed their privatization and they increased 
income tax. They said they would eliminate the provincial sales 
tax in the first term of office, but they broke that promise, Mr. 
Speaker. They imposed their PC privatization and they increased 
the sales tax by 40 per cent to 7 cents. 
 
In 1985 the PC government privatized Saskoil and eliminated the 
property improvement grant -- another PC tax increase. 
 
In 1986 they gave away Saskatchewan assets to the U.S. 
company, Weyerhaeuser, and they increased the PC flat tax. 
 
In 1987 they privatized the children’s school-based dental plan 
and they increased both the PC flat tax and the sales tax. 
 
In 1988 they privatized a large part of SaskPower and gave away 
Saskatchewan assets to a company from Ontario and one from 
Quebec, and once again they increased the PC flat tax again. 
 
That’s the record, Mr. Speaker, of PC privatization. Tax breaks 
for big business and unfair tax increases for ordinary families in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. It being 1 o’clock, this House now stands 
adjourned until Monday at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


