


















































March 8, 1989 Hansard Morning


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 8, 1989 
  

2725 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

TABLING OF THE RETURN TO THE WRIT 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of 
the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral 
Officer a certificate showing the election of John Thomas Wolfe, 
Esquire, as member for the constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present 
Mr. Jack Wolfe, member for the constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who has taken the oath, signed the roll, 
and now claims the right to take his seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PROROGATION 
 
AT 10:04 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. 
 
Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the second 
session of the twenty-first legislature. In so doing, I would like to 
congratulate you on the work you have undertaken and completed. 
 
At the opening of this session, my predecessor, the Honourable 
Frederick Johnson, emphasized the government’s commitment to 
protecting and improving essential services for the people of 
Saskatchewan to expanding its partnership with the people of this 
province, and to providing opportunities for our citizens to use 
their considerable talents and expertise to build Saskatchewan’s 
prosperity. 
 
To that end, you have worked to maintain the economic 
framework of rural Saskatchewan by passing The Saskatchewan 
Farm Security Act. This Act helps farmers to gain a clearer 
understanding of their rights and obligations, without reducing the 
ability of lenders to advance credit. This became increasingly 
important as our farm sector suffered the devastating effects of this 
past year’s drought. 
 
Concern for public safety led you to implement measures for the 
control and regulation of all-terrain vehicles and to provide strong 
and responsible legislation to control dangerous dogs. 
 
Concern for the environment led you to designate  

additional lands as critical wildlife habitat, and to reduce litter by 
controlling the use of non-refillable containers, while creating new 
jobs for disabled persons. Amendments to The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act were made to require identification of toxic 
chemicals in the work place. 
 
To permit individual Saskatchewan residents to invest their skills 
and capital in areas that were not previously available to them, 
measures were undertaken in the past year by way of bond 
offerings by Crown corporations and employee investment in 
Crown corporation and government activities. Legislation to 
permit the creation of one of the world’s largest uranium mining 
corporations was also passed by this legislature. 
 
To balance the need to guard the interests of the investor wit the 
business community’s need to have relatively easy access to 
capital, you have enacted The Securities Act, 1988. 
 
You have enacted legislation which allows the certified nursing 
assistants to manage the affairs of their own profession and made 
changes to The Registered Nurses Act to allow nurses to regulate 
their affairs in an effective manner and provide better protection 
for the public. The Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in 
Health Care, created during this session has received extensive 
representations throughout the province and has already raised 
some interesting approaches to the issues our health care system 
must address over the next few years. 
 
In taking leave of you, I commend you for the manner in which 
you have carried out your duties during the session and wish you 
the full blessings of Providence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 
Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 8th day of March, 1989, at 2 
o’clock p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly 
prorogued. 
 
Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:09 a.m. 
 
 
 


