


















































May 12, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 12, 1989 
 

1099 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Acting Clerk: — It is my duty to inform the Assembly of the 
unavoidable absence of Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
through you, and to members of the Assembly, a group of some 
40 students from the Stobart High School in Duck Lake. They 
are accompanied here today by Walter Epp, Doug Tarassoff, and 
Bill Brace. 
 
I do this on behalf of the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, 
who is unavoidably absent today. There is a very serious forest 
fire in his constituency in which a lot of personal property, and 
in one case, unfortunately, the death of an individual . . . Some 
people have been moved from Lily Plain to Macdowall, I 
understand, and he was unavoidably absent here today. 
 
I’d like members of the House to join me in welcoming them. I 
would like to point out that I will not be able to join you for 
pictures and drinks at 11 o’clock, but the member Regina 
Lakeview will join you at 11 o’clock for pictures and drinks. And 
I would like the members of the House to welcome these students 
and their guests from Duck Lake. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like, through you, to ask 
the House to welcome the 52 students from the grade 6 class at 
the Confederation Park School in my constituency. They are here 
to tour the building, and I’ll have drinks and pictures with them 
later on this morning. I’d like you to welcome these students from 
Confederation Park School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crisis in Farm Debt 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, my question is to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. 
Mr. Minister, I have in my possession a document which purports 
to be a draft of your Farm Finance Act, a Bill you’ve promised 
in both the throne speech and the budget speech. 
 
This Act would give yourself and your cabinet sweeping powers. 
It has nothing specific to say about what you would do, however. 
Mr. Minister, can you tell this House and the farmers of 
Saskatchewan if you have any specific plans to attack the 
mounting crisis in farm debt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, when our

government is ready to make further announcements relative to 
responding to farm concerns, whether they be drought, farm debt, 
international grain trade wars, the Premier will make those 
announcements and present that legislation in its proper time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the proper time. We see 
a crisis in debt in rural Saskatchewan, a crisis of income, and it’s 
not the proper time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, if you will not tell us if you have 
. . . or obviously you’ve told us that you have no plans at this time 
to tackle the mounting farm debt. Another area that this Bill that 
we have says is that there’s nothing happening with foreclosure 
actions and nothing happening with legal actions against farmers. 
I ask you: what actions are you taking to prevent these 
foreclosure legal actions, and also what actions are you taking to 
help our farmers get access to operating capital during spring 
seeding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the initiatives of 
this government have been many over the past several years, 
whether the issue has been droughts, grasshoppers, high interest 
rates, international trade wars, floods — you name it. To back up 
our farmers, we will continue to do that. 
 
Specifically as it relates to operating loans and credit there, 
protection from foreclosure, obviously things like farm security 
Acts address those questions; the guaranteed operating loans, 
those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, which many, many farmers 
have utilized and appreciated; production loans at low interest 
rates. I think the reason for the success for many of these 
programs, albeit that by themselves there is no single solution for 
what is occurring in agriculture today, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
simple, magic solution. Rain still is fundamental to our 
well-being, both for farmers and as well to our economy. 
 
But why these programs have enjoyed, I think, the measure of 
success in backing farmers up to the degree that they have, that 
they’ve been put together in consultation with the Premier as 
Minister of Agriculture, this Agriculture caucus, in consultation 
with groups like the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, the wheat growers, the stock growers, Mr. 
Speaker, the very people who themselves understand, along with 
our caucus, what will work in rural Saskatchewan. And we’ll 
continue to use those kinds of measures, Mr. Speaker, to put 
proper programs in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also want to 
address a question to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Minister, attached to this draft Bill, called the farm finance Act, 
is a memorandum dated April 20, 1989. It indicates in that draft 
that there’s a considerable amount of work to be done before it is 
even finalized. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1100 
 

I want to ask you: could you tell this House why you have waited 
so long into this spring session to bring forward any legislation 
to deal with the farm crisis facing Saskatchewan farmers? Why 
have you brought forward privatization Bills and not agricultural 
Bills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reality 
is that this government, this caucus, has been over . . . well, for 
example, last year on the whole question of farm finance, a 
number of the MLAs from this caucus were out holding meetings 
across rural Saskatchewan to get a sense of what further 
initiatives might be useful, Mr. Speaker. Some of these have been 
outlined in a blueprint form, if you like, in the throne speech just 
a few weeks ago, and consultations are important to making sure 
that these programs work effectively. 
 
It’s a recipe that’s worked for us in the past, and it’s one we 
intend to stick to in the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a supplement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I ask you: are you so out of touch with the reality of 
what’s going on here in the province of Saskatchewan that you 
will in fact bring in in this legislature and debate, and debate the 
potash privatization, the privatization of SaskPower, and will not 
in fact deal with the real issues facing the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
I ask you: will you rearrange your legislative agenda, pull your 
privatization Bills, and deal with the Bills dealing with 
agriculture and the crisis that’s facing Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be putting 
our farm platform, future farm platforms, before the legislature. 
The Premier will be introducing it at the appropriate moments. 
And this is not a single or simple track for this government, Mr. 
Speaker, because we, as well, are very much of the view on this 
side of the House that developing and diversifying and building 
that farm economy, broadening that farm economy, is very much 
part of what farmers want and what this economy needs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I speak specifically of diversification measures in 
agriculture, that whole business of taking our raw resources, our 
raw products, and processing them, adding value to them, 
whether it be pork processing, beef processing, special crops, Mr. 
Speaker. All of those things in the past that we’ve undertaken 
have proven very successful, and we look to doing even more of 
those in the future, Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with the farmers 
across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I ask you to address to the people and the farmers of 
Saskatchewan: why have you announced in the budget and in the 
throne speech that you had action

that would help Saskatchewan farmers? Why haven’t you 
brought that forward rather than privatization, a mania that has 
taken over this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Further responses will be tabled in due 
course, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Acquisition of Apnea Monitors 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, following an inquiry from a 
Regina woman, I’ve looked into the situation respecting apnea 
monitors for infants and I find the situation appalling. 
 
You will know, Mr. Minister, that a number of babies suffer from 
a condition where they simply forget to breathe and that apnea 
monitors watch them for this precise situation. But the total cost 
of these monitors is not covered by MCIC (medical card 
insurance commission) and their acquisition is difficult because 
demand outstrips supply. 
 
Has your department taken any steps, Mr. Minister, to correct this 
serious problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, my information is that these 
monitors that the hon. member refers to are paid for by the 
hospital services branch, but as she’s quite right in saying that 
there are some aspects of these, the calibrating and some of the 
other aspects of this that have been done by other agencies or by 
the individuals themselves in the past. And yes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we are looking into the whole area of these monitors to 
see what can be done, and we believe, frankly, that there is 
something that should be done. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As you 
know, Mr. Minister, these babies right now who can’t get access 
to these monitors have to remain in the hospital, and if they don’t 
have access, will be in the hospital for six to 12 months of the 
first year of their life, which is an extremely expensive procedure 
as far as hospital costs are concerned. 
 
It is costing low income families $110 per month, Mr. Minister. 
And I understand the Red Cross is filling the gap, but they 
indicate they’re going to have to quit supplying these monitors 
because they are having trouble meeting their costs. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, when we can expect the 
government to take some firm steps. When, Mr. Minister? A 
study isn’t good enough. You’ve known about this problem now 
for some time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this issue of these 
monitors has been around for some considerable time, I want you 
to know, and they have been responded to by this government. 
Now just so that you get the facts 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1101 
 

straight, Mr. Speaker, and so the House knows the history behind 
this whole issue, the member is quite right in the assessment of 
the Red Cross who has had a role in this for some period of time. 
And the Red Cross is having some difficulty with some of their 
fund raising, ongoing fund raising that they’ve had over a number 
of years, which was related to junior Red Cross and Red Cross in 
schools which isn’t quite as active as it once was, and so on. 
 
But the other point is, Mr. Speaker — and it’s an important one 
to make — these monitors that are being referred to today by the 
hon. member from the NDP were not covered at all while they 
were in government, and in fact when we asked it in opposition 
that they be provided, it was refused by the former minister, the 
present member from Saskatoon South. They were put into place; 
they cost about $2,600 each. They were put into place, and full 
coverage was provided by hospital services under this 
Progressive Conservative government. 
 
I have acknowledged in my first answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that there are some aspects as it relates to the cost of calibration, 
the cost of some of the other maintenance of these, and some 
extra costs in there that have in fact been covered by the Red 
Cross or are covered by the individual families. We are looking 
into that. We understand the concern that the member is raising, 
but I want the member to be sure that she understands very well 
there’s a history to this, and it’s not something that just started 
now when she’s discovered these monitors and the issue as it 
surrounds the Red Cross. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, you have been the government for seven years. 
You’ve had seven years to correct this problem, and I don’t think 
that $110 per month is too much to pay for the life of a child, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now you had no hesitation, the minister of privatization had no 
hesitation setting up the commission for $1,100 per day — no 
hesitation. But when it comes to apnea monitors, after seven 
years of government, this government still has to study the 
problem. Mr. Minister, what are your priorities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me tell you where 
our priorities are; let me tell you where our priorities are. I’ve lost 
my second son to sudden infant death syndrome. I was a member 
of the opposition, and I pleaded with the NDP to bring in apnea 
monitors, and it fell on deaf ears. When I became the Minister of 
Health we put apnea monitors in the hospitals of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Meeting on Public Participation 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same 
minister who just answered on behalf of the Minister of Health, 
and it’s come to our attention that on May 18 in Saskatoon you 
intend to host an invitational meeting on public participation. 
And at the meeting, registration is

supposed to take place at 5:30, and there’s a — get this — there’s 
a free buffet supper beginning at 6:30. 
 
I’m wondering if the minister could tell us: is your position so 
weak on privatization in the province of Saskatchewan as you 
have offer free meals to attract people to convince them of 
something they don’t want? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s the only way to get the NDP there — 
they always liked their free lunches. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My seat mate says some of the NDP may 
turn up for the free lunch. That wouldn’t surprise me. 
 
I just want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that about a week 
ago I had a group of young people in Regina, about 400 of them, 
and we spoke about the opportunities in public participation; and 
more than that, we spoke about the truth, the truth in SaskEnergy, 
and not the sale of SaskPower. And I can tell you from the 
response of that group, from the response of that group, I think it 
is only fair you offer that opportunity to other young people in 
Saskatchewan, in Saskatoon. 
 
And there will be other meetings of young people in the province 
because they support public participation. They want part of it, 
and they will be there. And I’m sure they will be there in large 
numbers to hear the truth and to support these new initiative 
because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people in that group — not 
the group that turns out to hear the Leader of the Opposition tell 
about his misguided and untruth to the people of Saskatchewan, 
but that young group, 18 to 35 . . . And I remember the press 
person that was there; he said, a well-groomed, enthusiastic 
group. They had that opportunity in Regina; they’re going to 
have it in Saskatoon; they’ll have it in Yorkton and Lloydminster 
— wherever young people want to hear the truth, I’ll go and tell 
it to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can assure the minister 
there’s no free lunch in the NDP. We work; people work; people 
come to our meetings. You’ll remember, while we tried to 
preserve democracy in this legislature, we had thousands of 
people come to meetings . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Does the member have a 
question? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The question I have to you, Mr. Minister, is: 
will you today stand in this House and give the address of the 
place of the meeting and invite publicly today all those people 
who can’t afford shares in your privatization and piratization 
moves in the province? And the people who have to rely on food 
banks — ask them to come for a free meal and try and convince 
them of your privatization moves. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It seems rather strange to hear the member 
opposite talk about work when we went on 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1102 
 

strike for about 15 days in this legislature here. My colleague 
here brings in work for welfare; he opposes it. So he stands up as 
the great disciple of work. 
 
Certainly we will be having the meeting, and certainly there’ll be 
many young people there. And I invite people to come, those who 
wish to want to come to hear the truth about public participation, 
about SaskEnergy, about potash, about the buy-outs by the 
employees such as Bruce Solilo and the people in the yellow 
pages and the people in Sask Government Printing and the 
welder, property management, who now has a shop of three 
people. 
 
I’ll tell those stories because those are true facts about public 
participation, and I welcome young people to come and hear 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — People in Saskatchewan know all they need to 
know about privatization, especially Tory style. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Will the minister undertake to put this funding 
not into government-sponsored brainwashing sessions to try and 
convince people of something they don’t want in this province, 
and put the money into food banks and into social support 
programs in the province of Saskatchewan, and not waste it on 
free meals to your friends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It seems to me that he’s very concerned 
about the lunch. I tell you that the lunch will be provided by the 
business communities, not by government, as it has been by the 
business community of Regina. And he talks about brainwashing 
— he talks about brainwashing. And I’ll be talking to the media 
in a short time about brainwashing because the member from 
Regina North saw fit to go into a grade 4 class-room in Regina 
with nothing but blatant political propaganda right from the NDP 
caucus, untruths that he took to grade 4 students. I say, that’s 
brainwashing. I say, go back to that school and apologize; you 
should be ashamed of yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I can’t hear the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Appeal of Court Decision re Rafferty Dam 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Deputy 
Premier, and it concerns the appeal that has been launched by the 
Government of Saskatchewan from the decision of the federal 
court respecting the Rafferty-Alameda dams. He will know, Mr. 
Speaker, he will know that the federal government has 
announced that it is not proceeding with an appeal; it is not filing 
an appeal itself. In other words, the federal government has 
acknowledged that the decision is going to be binding upon them, 
and they will now proceed to undertake the environmental 
review, and indeed I think they’ve made some announcements in 
that respect.

Now in light of that, the question for the Deputy Premier is this: 
will you confirm that the provincial government will drop its 
appeal from the decision of Mr. Justice Cullen and save the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers a lot of useless expense in connection 
with that appeal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that that member is 
a reasonable member, and I know that that member, Mr. Speaker, 
did not design that question himself to come in here. Mr. Speaker, 
we will not drop the appeal. We will not drop the appeal, Mr. 
Speaker, because we have a right to clarification of the law. 
 
We believe that we have a shot, or as the lawyers say, we believe 
that we have a good chance at winning the appeal. We believe 
that if we win the appeal that the project will be back on track. 
We have asked for an accelerated hearing, or an expedited 
hearing, and if that happens, we’ll be back on track. 
 
But let me say, Mr. Speaker, when that member said to avoid the 
cost of the appeal, would you please announce that you’re going 
to withdraw the appeal, do you know what it’s costing us every 
month that that project is stopped because of members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker? Members opposite stopped that project. The 
member for Regina Rosemont took great delight in saying, we’ve 
got it delayed for at least three years, and it’s costing us $2 
million a month. My God, Mr. Speaker, don’t talk to me about 
the cost of an appeal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is 
unbelievable arrogance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unbelievable 
arrogance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — We stood in this House week after week telling 
you that you were not complying with the laws of this country 
and you went barging ahead with your plans anyway, and finally 
the federal court stopped you in your tracks. And now you have 
the arrogance to blame us for it. That’s the height of arrogance 
and silliness. 
 
Now what we’ve got here is the federal government in effect 
admitting that the decision is correct and that it did not comply 
with its own environmental laws. And that’s the issue here. Now 
how does it make sense at all that the Saskatchewan government 
should take a position opposite to the federal government? How 
is it your business to tell the federal government that they did 
comply with their own laws when they’re admitting that they 
didn’t? How is that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m getting . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s the applause from members opposite that 
keeps me from answering, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1103 
 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the 
Shand-Rafferty-Alameda projects were in full compliance at all 
times. At no time, at no time, Mr. Speaker, did that project make 
one move without being fully licensed — fully licensed at all 
times — Mr. Speaker. 
 
Based on SaskPower and Souris Basin Development Authority 
believing at all times they were in full compliance, we have spent 
almost, almost a quarter of a billion dollars on those two projects, 
Mr. Speaker, almost a quarter of a billion dollars, all of the while 
in full compliance of the law with valid licences from the federal 
government. 
 
Now when, Mr. Speaker, members opposite and certain of their 
friends from central Canada decided to challenge this, and they 
did, and the court ruled in their favour, and we complied once 
again, we complied once again by putting a stop work order in it, 
the Rafferty-Alameda project. But do you know what it’s costing 
us while that project is stopped, Mr. Speaker? Two million 
dollars a month — $2 million a month. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, we had people come from Tisdale to 
Estevan to work on that project. They were on site for one day 
and they were out of work, young people with families working 
on the Rafferty project, and they put them out of work, Mr. 
Speaker. They came down looking for a six-month job, and they 
worked one day, and they were put out of work by the NDP. 
We’re spending $2 million a month on the project while it’s 
stopped. People are out of work, and they have the gall to ask us 
to stop the appeal because it’s costly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — On behalf of the Speaker, I hereby 
table, pursuant to section 222(1) of The Election Act, a report 
respecting the Returns of Election Expenses incurred by 
candidates in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election held in the 
province of Saskatchewan, December 15, 1988. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be back in 
this debate. It seems that we’re still sacrificing the important 
issues in this province, like agriculture, with the obsession of the 
government towards privatization.

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — When we see the Minister of Public 
Participation, I think we should start calling it puppet 
participation because now they can’t get the support of 
Saskatchewan people. They have to offer free lunches to have 
people come out — a selective, invitational group — to try and 
convince them that privatization is a good move in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I maintain to you, Mr. Speaker, they’ve failed in the past — 
dismally failed — and they’ll fail again in the future because 
people in Saskatchewan are smarter than to be bought by free 
lunch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think people in Saskatchewan understand 
there is no free lunch. You might be able to offer free lunches in 
Great Britain and maybe in the province of Alberta and other 
places, but you can’t do that in Saskatchewan. 
 
And to attest to that, I’d just like to point out an example, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not uncommon in the province of Saskatchewan to 
have about an 80 per cent turn-out of the electorate of the eligible 
voters in an election campaign in the province of Saskatchewan, 
whereas you look at the province of Alberta just across the way, 
last provincial election less than 50 per cent of the population 
turned out. 
 
Now I think that people in Saskatchewan are more aware, more 
in tune than possibly anywhere in North America, and they 
certainly won’t be swooned into supporting something they 
know is a bad deal for themselves and a bad deal for the province 
of Saskatchewan and a bad deal for those people who have to 
suffer in the future because of this government’s incompetence. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, during the time while we were obligated to 
walk out of this legislature in support of Saskatchewan people, in 
support of Saskatchewan farms, in support of Saskatchewan 
families, in support of Saskatchewan small business, in support 
of Saskatchewan working people, in support of Saskatchewan 
poor, there was a poll done; in fact there were several polls done, 
and I want to point out some of the items that were given to the 
press, to what the press reported in terms of privatization in the 
province of Saskatchewan. In the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on 
May 3, Wednesday, May 3 of 1988, front page headline, Mr. 
Speaker, “Privatization showdown.” Next subtitle, “Poll shows 
67 per cent reject selloff.” Now this was a poll that was done by 
Angus Reid Associates, and it found two out of every three 
respondents opposed the Saskatchewan government’s plans to 
privatize SaskEnergy by making a public offering of shares in the 
company, while only one in about five, or 22 per cent, supported 
the idea. The remainder had no opinion or would not state it. 
 
Now what this has done, Mr. Speaker, is it’s pointed out to many, 
many Saskatchewan people that not only is the sell-off of an 
important utility like the Saskatchewan Power Corporation a bad 
deal for Saskatchewan people, but it’s brought to Saskatchewan 
people’s awareness that 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1104 
 

the whole plan for privatization has gone astray. It’s an obsession 
by the government. They’ve gone too far, and there won’t be 
anything left for people in the future in the province of this . . . 
of this great province of ours. 
 
Now the first thing that’s listed in the poll done by Angus Reid 
Associates. Number one, the question was asked: do you support 
or oppose plans to privatize SaskEnergy? Support — 22 per cent; 
opposed — 67 per cent; don’t know — 10 per cent. Now that’s 
overwhelming. I have not seen a more devastating poll against 
the government anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan in the 
time I’ve been involved in politics over about the past 15 years. 
And I think that this government should soon wake up and smell 
the coffee and understand that Saskatchewan people are sending 
them the strongest possible message. The only message that 
could be stronger to this gone-astray administration would be for 
them to call a provincial election and let the people reject this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — They say they won’t call an election, but there 
are other ways to stop this government from doing what they 
want to do, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll go into some of that a little later 
on after I’ve gone through some of the polling results, to just go 
through step by step as to how Saskatchewan people and how this 
opposition will make the government accountable for their 
actions and lack of direction and lack of action in the important 
issues such as hunger, agriculture, small business, the economy, 
working people — the very important issues that have not been 
dealt with during this session of the legislature because of the 
obsession of the government with privatization. 
 
The second question, Mr. Speaker, that was asked in the poll was: 
do you support or oppose privatization in general? Twenty-seven 
per cent supported privatization in general. Do you know how 
many opposed it, Mr. Speaker? Fifty-eight per cent. Over double 
opposed it as to those that supported it. Those that didn’t know 
were 15 per cent. 
 
And I would maintain to you at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, 
after the great heightened awareness of Saskatchewan people of 
exactly the betrayal and what this government is up to, the 
percentage that oppose privatization in the province is not going 
down; in fact it’s increasing. 
 
And the government know that through their polling with 
Decima. Decima does all their polling. In fact I understand 
people from Decima had to phone the government and beg them 
not to call an election, because they didn’t even know they would 
lose an election if they called one. I understand the Premier 
wanted to call an election. People from Decima had to phone and 
plead with this government that pumps all kinds of money into 
their organization: don’t call an election because you’ll lose; 
please don’t call an election. 
 
The Premier had to be convinced not to call an election. He was 
going to show the member from Riversdale just what was going 
on out there. And we wish that Decima

hadn’t phoned and convinced the Premier not to call an election 
because the people of Saskatchewan would have shown this 
government decisively what was going on in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Third question in this poll that was released on 
May 7, Mr. Speaker: do you support or oppose privatization of 
PCS? PCS, for your information, sir, means Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. In support, 28 per cent. Well, a little over a 
quarter of the population support the privatization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. How many oppose it? Fifty per 
cent of the population in the province of Saskatchewan oppose 
the privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s the one where they’ve been laying the message out 
about the NDP wasting money buying empty holes in the ground. 
Yet even in the 1988 annual report there’s $106 million profit 
from these empty holes in the ground. And I went on at some 
length yesterday explaining how investors, when they want to 
offer the share offering, wouldn’t be whitewashed into buying 
shares in a corporation that only had assets that were empty holes 
in the ground, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they’re going to be going into an advertising campaign — 
the free lunch in Saskatoon on — when is it? — on May 18, I 
believe. That’s only one portion of it. Come and get your free 
lunch; we’ll convince you that privatization’s good in the 
province. They will also, I predict, Mr. Speaker, be spending 
millions of dollars on advertising to convince the Saskatchewan 
public that privatization is good for them. 
 
It’s like convincing a child that something is good for them. And 
the child even knows it’s really not; the parents know it’s really 
not; the grandparents know it’s not good. But there’s a little few 
that are obsessed with an idea, and they’ve been proven wrong 
and they’ll be proven wrong time and time again, Mr. Speaker. 
If an election doesn’t come soon, if the election comes later, 
they’ll continue to be proved wrong because they’re dead wrong 
on their moves for privatization. People in the province of 
Saskatchewan are too well aware, too informed to be baffled by 
a government that’s gone astray. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — In the fourth question, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 
little diagram there. I know I can’t show an exhibit in the 
legislature, but it almost looks like a bomb exploding; you can 
see that there in the paper. Actually it’s a dinger going against 
the gong; it’s the ringing of a bell, is a little picture there, and it’s 
exploding. 
 
Well there was an explosion, Mr. Speaker, there was an 
explosion of an outcry from Saskatchewan people, led by the 
Leader of the Opposition, to inform Saskatchewan people of the 
astray plans of that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — But the number four question that was 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1105 
 

asked was that, do you support or oppose the NDP tactics — 
NDP means New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker — do you 
support or oppose the NDP tactics in the legislature? Support — 
49 per cent. Oppose — 39 per cent. Don’t know — 12 per cent. 
 
The “don’t knows,” I predict, you do know now. And if that poll 
was done again today, the opposition to the bell-ringing would 
drop and the support for the bell-ringing was increased because 
people know that was the only point of democracy since the last 
provincial election on October 20, 1986. 
 
Well there’s other questions, Mr. Speaker. The fifth question 
that’s headlined in the Star-Phoenix was: should there be an 
election on SaskEnergy?” You know how many said yes? Well 
let me tell you. Fifty-two per cent of the people in Saskatchewan 
said yes, there should be an election on the issue of SaskEnergy; 
40 per cent said no; 8 per cent don’t know. There’s hardly 
anybody in Saskatchewan at this point in time that doesn’t think 
an election would be a good idea as soon as seeding is over. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sooner the better. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Sooner the election comes, the better. And I 
think the government should gear up and call an election in June. 
Forget about what Decima says, phoning the Premier and saying, 
don’t call an election. Forget about what Decima’s saying. If the 
government in their own wisdom feel they can go out and sell 
privatization to the public in Saskatchewan, go out and do it. We 
wish them all the best. 
 
But we’ll be out there with the Leader of the Opposition, leading 
the forces in Saskatchewan, those masses of people that are 
opposed to this government, that have been hurt by this 
government, that want to send this government the strongest, 
democratic message possible, and that’s a resounding defeat in 
the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now here is one of the most telling questions 
asked in the poll. Now remember this was done on May 3. We 
were still passing out the message to Saskatchewan people. 
Saskatchewan people were still rallying. There were tens of 
thousands, by this point over 100,000 names on petitions that 
were still being gathered. 
 
The question was asked back then: if an election were held 
tomorrow, which party would you support? Thirty-three per cent, 
Progressive Conservative. 
 
(1045) 
 
An Hon. Member: — That high? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Yes, it was higher than I thought, but the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview asked if it was higher, higher 
than he thought. Well it was higher than I thought too, but it’s 
going to go down. And I predict since May 3 when this poll has 
been released, it has gone down.

And the government members should maybe tell us what the 
Decima polls are saying. Are the Decima polls treating you well? 
Could the member from Kinistino regain his seat in the 
legislature? Could the member from Canora regain his seat in the 
legislature? The only way he would retain his seat in the 
legislature is if he came to his senses and sat as an independent 
because we believe him to be a good member. 
 
Would the member from Melville retain his seat? No. Would the 
member from Weyburn retain his seat? For sure not, the member 
from Weyburn. In fact, the member from Regina North West has 
been out there. If the member from Regina North West ran in 
Weyburn, he’d defeat the current sitting member because people 
are so disgusted with what your government has been doing. 
 
But let me finish question six. I’ll repeat the question again. If an 
election were held tomorrow, which party would you support? 
I’ve already pointed out what the Conservatives would get. The 
New Democratic Party, do you want to know, Mr. Speaker? 
Through you to members of the government, do you want to 
know? Yes, they say. Well the New Democrats would have 54 
per cent of the vote in a general election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And Linda Haverstock and the Liberals would 
have 11 per cent of the support. And others would have two. 
 
Well the others may be growing because those disaffected Tories 
out in Saskatchewan that can’t bring themselves to voting Liberal 
or New Democrat will likely go off and form some other party. 
And by the time the next provincial election comes around, 
because of their desire to privatize the potash corporation, 
privatize SaskPower, privatize anything that moves — people 
can’t stand it. They’re fracturing the face of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think those are worth going through just once 
more: if an election were held tomorrow, which party would you 
support? Progressive Conservative — 33 per cent and dropping, 
as I have explained; NDP — 54 per cent and likely rising, but I 
don’t want to gloat about that or predict that because we’d be 
happy having 54 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan vote 
New Democrat; Liberals — 11 per cent; other — 2 per cent. 
 
Now something that I think members of this House, on this side 
of the House at least would agree with, is the most embarrassing 
question that was asked by the Angus Reid poll. Number seven: 
do you generally approve or disapprove of the leaders’ 
performance? Premier Devine — approve — 40 per cent; 
disapprove — 50 per cent; don’t know — 10 per cent. 
 
Now if the Premier was left on his own, without all the 
interference from Decima and the Deputy Premier and the 
Minister of Finance and the embarrassment of the member from 
Melville, and all the things that happen out of his cabinet that 
portray him in a negative light, I’m sure that 50 per cent wouldn’t 
disapprove. But he is so weak that he allows those members of 
his own cabinet to run roughshod over him, run roughshod over 
their leader to 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1106 
 

drive him into the dirt. 
 
He can’t even trust . . . the Premier can’t even trust turning over 
the Department of Agriculture to one of his back-bench 
members. What is wrong? Do none of those back-bench 
members have the capability to be the Minister of Agriculture. 
The member from Yorkton used to be in the cabinet. He’s not in 
the cabinet any more. Why doesn’t the Premier put him in as 
Agriculture minister? 
 
There’s all kinds of talent, I would think, on the back benches. 
But if the Premier doesn’t have enough of a job being Premier in 
the province, does he have to take on being the Minister of 
Agriculture as well? That is a big problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s why in this poll on privatization such things that were 
taken into consideration as the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, the Bill that we’re studying here today; if he 
doesn’t enough problems with that, he has all these other burdens 
to bear as well. 
 
Now, Opposition Leader Romanow: approve — 58 per cent — 
58 per cent of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. How 
many disapprove? This is very telling. Disapprove — 23 per cent 
— less than half of what disapprove of the Premier of this 
province. The Leader of the Opposition has a very high rating. 
Nineteen per cent don’t know. But our leader, the Leader of the 
Opposition has come out with such devastating strength within 
the past month that people are moving towards our leader, the 
Leader of the Opposition in Saskatchewan, because they know 
he could do a good job as Premier. They know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — They know that he fronted the fight when 
members like the current Minister of Finance sat in the Liberal 
caucus and criticized the coming into being the Bill that brought 
about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in 1976. 
 
Nineteen seventy-six was an historic year. It put into place one 
of the most profitable Crown corporations under public 
ownership in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. That 
government opposed it. They don’t want money going to people 
in the province of Saskatchewan. They want 45 per cent of that 
to go to the people that live outside of our country, and that’s a 
shameful testimony that will go down and mark the people and 
the government, the Conservative government in this province, 
in the annals of history, and it will show them at the bottom of 
the heap for what they’ve done in trying to privatize where 
privatization is unpopular, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I know that . . . I ran through some different things. I just 
want to close off this poll by running through question 7 again: 
do you generally approve or disapprove of the leaders’ 
performance? Premier Devine, approved — 40 per cent; 
disapproved — 50 per cent; don’t know — 10 per cent. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve allowed the

member a lot of latitude in what he’s speaking about, but I would 
want to remind the member that the Bill before the Assembly is 
Bill No. 20, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. I would ask the member to relate 
his remarks to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll certainly do that. I want 
to go to a speech that had very specific reference to the potash 
debate, and I know, sir, that you were in the Chair for at least part 
of the debate. And the actual speaker was there for the other part 
of this which is also a very historic debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would look at the page 997 of Hansard, and it’s: 

 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, May 8, 1989, 
Evening Sitting, Adjourned Debates, Second Readings. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — 
An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 

And I’ll just quote here, Mr. Speaker, because the debate should 
be kept relevant in this legislature. And so this refers to the actual 
debate of Mr. Hopfner on May 8, and I quote . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Members are not to use other 
members’ names except in quotations, and you said referred to 
the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I appreciate that ruling. I should have said, and 
I quote . . . I want to quote from a speech, Mr. Speaker, that was 
given on May 8, concerning the debate on the Bill that we’re 
currently debating here this morning in the Legislative 
Assembly, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before dinner I 
was basically trying to point out the issue, and I’ll just back 
up a little so that the member from the opposition will 
understand what I was trying to put across. 

 
The member from Regina North will take note as to what 
I’ve got to say. When the member from Regina Victoria had 
indicated that they were a party that believed in Canadian 
ownership and believed in the national Canadian ownership 
and were promoting Canadian nationalism in this province 
and across Canada, I wanted to draw to your attention and 
to the people of Saskatchewan’s attention, basically that if 
you look at where he was coming from in speaking in 
regards to agriculture, I want to indicate to you that the 
philosophy of the NDP opposition is not that at all and is 
not being practiced like that at all, Mr. Speaker. Because 
basically when you look at the agenda of the NDP, they 
have never, never gotten outside the boundaries of 
Saskatchewan enabling outside interest to participate and 
partake in agriculture or anything like that. 

  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1107 
 

So I’m going to indicate to the members opposite — and 
this is a challenge to them — that if such a decree does 
happen to . . . and a decision does happen to come about in 
the province of Saskatchewan that the agricultural 
community wishes people from Alberta, or their sons and 
daughters from Manitoba or wherever, to participate in the 
family farm, we’ll see what side of the fence they’re on in 
that issue. Because they have never, never wanted anybody 
— the son or daughter or anyone — to own that particular 
family farm if they happen to have had a job in, say, Alberta 
or Manitoba or elsewhere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that the member from 
Regina Victoria had also touched on the fact of the spending 
and the amount of dollars going out of the province, and I 
had briefly touched on that, but I want to remind you, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is not the case that the $50 million that was 
. . . The member from Regina Victoria was saying that 
would leave the province. I hope, I hope, that as they go 
around the province and talk about their ideology and that 
they would be factual and truthful with people in the 
province and not use that as part of their argument because 
they know, they know very well that that is not fact. 

 
And when I say going around, the member from Regina 
Victoria also indicated that as they were out of the 
legislature here for the last two weeks or I think it was 16 
to 18 days, as they were travelling the province and talking 
to the people about public participation . . . Well no that’s 
not quite the fact either, Mr. Speaker. They were not talking 
about public participation; they were talking about 
privatization, and there’s two different meanings there. I’m 
talking about public participation, Mr. Speaker, and those 
just people just can’t seem to present the facts straight and 
truthful. 

 
But I want to indicate to that member from The Battlefords 
. . . And I hope that all the members of the opposition pay 
attention to this because, Mr. Speaker, I will quote to you. 
As that member from Battlefords was in my riding, he was 
being interviewed by the media, and this is what the 
member from The Battlefords had to say to my media when 
they were out there trying to suggest the fact that they were 
. . . we were selling out Saskatchewan, privatizing. 

 
But he indicated to the media that this was the only way that 
they’d come back here: the government withdraws the Bill; 
an election is called; (or) the people of Saskatchewan tell 
the NDP to call off their protest. Pardon me, the member 
from The Battlefords says he doubts Saskatchewan voters 
will (ever) give the NDP the last message, and the last 
message was that the people of Saskatchewan tell the NDP 
to call of their protests. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as you will have seen, the Bill has not 
been withdrawn from the legislature. As

you have seen, an election is not called. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that only leaves one thing left. It only leaves one thing left, 
and accordingly it’s got to be fact because the member from 
The Battlefords stated it, that the people of Saskatchewan 
have told the NDP to get back to the legislature and start 
debating public participation. 
 
The only reason they’re back — they lost out there, Mr. 
Speaker, because if they wouldn’t have lost out there, if they 
would not have been told to get back to the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, well then they would have still been out there 
because we did not call an election, and the government 
definitely has not withdrawn the Bill. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that you might have a hard time 
believing that that was in debate of Bill 20, an Act to privatize 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I’ve gone on at some 
length here, for 10 or 15 minutes; the word potash was not 
mentioned once. But it is a debate on Bill 20, an Act to privatize 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should in all fairness, I should in all fairness 
find the beginning of the speech from the hon. member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. And if we can just leap through it here. I 
just want to find the beginning of the speech, Mr. Speaker, 
because the speech had started prior to the supper break, and the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster continued after. 
 
And I want to look at the relevancy of the debate, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a pleasure to take part in this, what I guess 
probably may be a historic debate. And I would like to 
indicate to you that I have listened quite well to what the 
member from Regina Victoria had to say while he was 
speaking in this debate. 

 
And other than the fact that of a stonewalling factor that I’ve 
envisioned from the member from Regina Victoria, I would 
say and suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that his remarks to the 
Bill of public participation on potash has, I guess, probably 
in all summation, if you wanted to sum up the (total) amount 
of words and the amount of participation that he put into the 
Bill, directly related to the Bill, I would say that you could 
have all of what he said in about two minutes. 
 

Now I want to go on, Mr. Speaker, because in the entire speech 
from the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster he did virtually 
nothing but attack members of this side of the House. He attacked 
individual members, he attacked the Leader of the Opposition, he 
attacked our opposition party, he talked about privatization, but 
he didn’t talk about the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to go on to quote to you a debate that comes from 
Hansard on Bill 20, second reading, which we are in here today, 
Mr. Speaker. I continue my quote: 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1108 
 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that as I get into my remarks 
on the potash Bill here, you will, as well as the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, will begin to understand exactly 
what the truth is about the most common sense approach 
that any government can take to public participation. 

 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 
opposition have for now, the last hour and a half or so, been 
continually suggesting that this is a sell-out of 
Saskatchewan potash mines and the Saskatchewan 
company. I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I find that the relevance and 
repetition of reading other members’ speeches into the record, 
and I’ll read you the rule out of the members’ handbook, rule 
25(1) on page 15 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 

A Member addressing the Assembly, if called to order 
either by the Speaker or on a point raised by another 
Member, shall sit down while the point of order is being 
stated, after which he may explain. The Speaker may permit 
debate on the point of order before giving his decision, but 
such debate must be strictly relevant to the point of order 
taken. 

 
The Speaker, or the Chairman, after having called the 
attention of the Assembly, or (of) the committee, to the 
conduct of a Member who persists in irrelevance, or tedious 
repetition, either by his own arguments or of the arguments 
used by (other) Members in debate, (the Member) may 
direct him to discontinue his speech, and if the Member 
continues to speak, the Speaker shall name him. 
 

But I would ask the member to get back to the debate on Bill No. 
20, the reorganization of the potash corporation, with his own 
remarks. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I would like to speak to the comments you 
just made, if I might, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I recognize that the 
member from The Battlefords developed his point rather fully, 
but his point was: there’s got to be one set of rules; that’s all we 
ask. 
 
The member from — not yourself, but the Speaker was in the 
Chair — the member from Lloydminster was allowed to go on 
for almost an hour with nothing but personal attacks that had no 
relation at all to the Bill being under discussion. Thus the 
member’s comments here were on point. The point the member 
from The Battlefords is making is we simply ask for a single set 
of rules that will apply to both. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. It is not permissible to 
challenge the ruling of the Chair, and it is also not permissible to 
quote at length from other member’s speeches. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker.

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I respect your ruling. I didn’t know, when you 
had first risen, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t know there was a ruling 
because you had mentioned that a member would have the 
opportunity to explain before the ruling was made. That was your 
first words that you gave when you rose in your place, reading 
from the rules. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member, 
if he wants to continue the debate, to refer his remarks to Bill No. 
20, the reorganization of the potash corporation. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Potash, potash, potash, potash, potash, potash 
Bill, potash Bill, potash, potash, potash, more potash, potash, 
potash, Bill 20. 
 
See, Mr. Speaker, who supports privatization in the province of 
Saskatchewan for things like the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan? Who supports privatization initiatives on many 
of the public ownership Crowns, public ownership in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Who supports it? 
 
I can tell you who supports it — members of the cabinet, not even 
their own back-benchers. Many of their own back-benchers are 
muzzled. I’m sure that when they go out to their constituencies 
they don’t try and sell privatization; they don’t try and sell the 
potash Bill. They hide in their homes or they hide in Regina 
because the public certainly do not support the privatization of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. That’s very evident — 
very, very evident. 
 
There are other groups though. Look at things like the . . . this is 
a publication called Unbalance: Media treatment of public policy 
issues. And who is it put out by? Well I believe it’s put out by the 
Fraser Institute. Now we all know that the Fraser Institute are 
likely one of the most right-wing organizations in Canada 
advocating that the only people who should be helped are the 
very rich. Those that have the most amount of wealth should have 
more wealth because eventually it’ll all trickle down. And so 
those people who have to work in potash mines, that have to 
supply potash mines, will eventually get a little bit of the crumbs, 
as the wealth up at top eats all the bread and allows the crumbs 
to fall off the table and down the mine shaft. That’s what they 
advocate. 
 
And what about the coverage? They say in this article that: 
 

Not all Canadian legislatures have adopted privatization 
plans; however, as of the 13th of August, 1988, a Robert 
Sheppard article reported its chief proponents so far have 
been Conservative governments in Ottawa, $2.1 billion 
worth of public sales; in Saskatchewan, 430 million; Social 
Credit in British Columbia, 1.1 billion; and born-again 
Liberals in Quebec, $827 million. 
 

Now Saskatchewan, of course, stands out in that, because as of 
August 13, 1988 we didn’t have all of these privatization Bills 
before us, like Bill 20, an Act to privatize the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1109 
 

Since that time, Mr. Speaker, since that time, we’ve got of course 
the potash Bill that we’re talking about today; we’ve got the 
SaskPower Bill. We’re talking about Bill 1, a Bill that gives the 
government unprecedented powers so their Executive Council 
can privatize anything they want without having to come into this 
legislature. In fact, if Bill 1 passed, if they put the emphasis on 
that, they could abolish the legislature and just sell the potash 
corporation off, because they wouldn’t need the authority of this 
Assembly to sell off a very valuable asset. 
 
So in this article on privatization, out of a publication by the 
Fraser Institute, it wouldn’t be 430 million in terms of selling off 
of public assets, it would be in the billions that we’re talking 
about, because we’re talking about public ownership with assets 
of billions of dollars — in excess of 1 billion, maybe as high as 
2 billion. Somewhere certainly between 1 and $2 billion are the 
assets of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what about the coverage on this, because this does talk 
about media coverage. And I quote: 
 

For CBC, the privatization plans of B.C. and the federal 
government were the only ones that were really discussed. 
The federal Crown corporations were mentioned in 43 per 
cent of CBC’s coverage of privatization. British Columbia 
privatization plans were included in 55 per cent of CBC 
coverage. Coverage of Saskatchewan’s plans comprised a 
little over 1 per cent of total coverage. 
 

That is not true today. The coverage is much greater because of 
the escalation of this government to carry through their obsession 
of selling off everything that’s in the public sector, things like the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — the potash, potash, 
potash that we’re debating here today in the legislature, that we 
will not stray from again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Globe and Mail also was looked at. The Globe and Mail 
looked at federal plans most often, and I quote: 
 

Federal privatization was the predominant news story in the 
The Globe and Mail. Three-quarters of their coverage 
mentioned federal privatization plans. B.C.’s plans 
comprised 11.4 per cent of the agenda. Saskatchewan’s 
plans comprised 10 per cent of the coverage. 
 

Now here’s a very interesting statistic, Mr. Speaker. Why do you 
think when we were only 1 per cent in CBC, which is quite a bit 
for the amount of privatizing that was done at that time, but 10 
per cent in The Globe and Mail? Ten per cent in The Globe and 
Mail, because The Globe and Mail know that there is a historic 
fight going on in the province of Saskatchewan right now. 
 
(1115) 
 

The eyes of North America are on the province of 
Saskatchewan in determining what it is the government is 
trying to do and gauging the public reaction, not just of the 
NDP opposition, but the public reaction of the people of the 
province of

Saskatchewan. Because they have known since the days of 
the Depression and before that, that Saskatchewan people 
are politically aware, they’re well informed, and the eyes of 
North America are on Saskatchewan to see whether the 
government wins or whether the people of Saskatchewan 
win. 
 

And we say on this fight, the people of Saskatchewan will end up 
winning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has 
occurred in this debate, and I won’t go back and quote from 
Hansard because I’ve seen already today, Mr. Speaker, that you 
don’t like me quoting from Hansard from speeches that have 
already been given, so I wouldn’t offend you by going back and 
quoting from Hansard again. 
 
But I would ask you to take my words for it that members 
opposite, if not in Hansard through their catcalling, through their 
catcalling on that side of the House, said: well, you never told 
anybody that you were going to nationalize potash; you never 
told anybody that there was going to be real public participation 
in potash in the province. Well they are dead wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ve mentioned these articles before, but I want to go into 
them in some depth. I have copies here of two articles. One is a 
New Deal for People put out by the New Democratic Party of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s a program for progress. 
 
And this was put out prior to the 1971 election in which Allan 
Blakeney and the New Democrats at that time defeated the 
government of Ross Thatcher. And at least one member over 
there sat as a Liberal — the Minister of Finance at that time was 
a Liberal. He got re-elected as a Liberal, and saw his fortunes 
more in the Conservative Party, so he jumped from that one. He 
may soon be back with Linda Haverstock and the Liberals, 
because he certainly knows what the Decima polls are saying 
about potash privatization . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I don’t see how this is relevant 
to the potash Bill. I’d ask the member to make his remarks on 
Bill No. 20. I’ve been awfully lenient and allowed a far-ranging 
debate. So I would ask the member to speak on the Bill that’s 
before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I was speaking on the Bill, and I’ll go on 
to speak about the Bill. But I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, if I have 
to mention the word of the Bill, the actual wording of the Bill 
every few minutes. If you want, I’ll do my debate. 
 
I can remember our Leader of the Opposition being called to 
order as well for being too specific, too specific on the Bill 
because he referred to the Bill. And now I’m not referring to the 
Bill often enough, so I get a confused message. But I will try my 
best to honour the rules that you’re imposing on me here today, 
Mr. Speaker, because I certainly wouldn’t want to offend you by 
what I’m saying about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1110 
 

Bill 20, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Bill should actually read, an Act respecting the piratization 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, or the privatization, 
or the public participation, or puppet participation, but it certainly 
isn’t the reorganization. 
 
This Bill gives foreign investors control of our precious resource, 
a resource that we have 4,000 years supply. So I was thinking, 
maybe you’d give me 4,000 years latitude on either side of the 
argument, but apparently that won’t happen. 
 
Anyway, at the time there was a potash debate going on in 
Saskatchewan, not one on public participation versus 
privatization; it was an argument that was assisted by the current 
Minister of Finance in Ross Thatcher’s government, one of his 
strategists in the back rooms, also a member of this Assembly, 
who tried to collect taxation from potash companies. 
 
And that’s how it’s relevant to the debate, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
relevant because at that time that member of this Assembly tried 
to collect taxation from the potash companies privately operating 
in the province of Saskatchewan. They couldn’t. They even sent 
Premier Ross Thatcher, the late Premier Ross Thatcher, down to 
New Mexico, and he was charged for conspiracy against the laws 
of the United States of America. That minister knows that; that’s 
the argument; that’s the history of the argument; and I maintain 
to you it’s relevant to the debate in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — But those members say that we weren’t up front 
with what we wanted to do with resource ownership in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We were up front. I refer you again 
to this article. It’s New Deal for People by the New Democratic 
Party of Saskatchewan, a program for progress, issued prior to 
the 1971 election. And what do they say in here? Well in the 
index it refers to resource and economic development on page 7. 
What does it say on page 7? And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this was 
a widely circulated document in 1971. It wasn’t something that 
was used by back-room members of the New Democratic Party 
to orchestrate some devious plot and plan on the Saskatchewan 
people. It was campaigned with door to door, and anyone who 
wanted to receive a copy received one. If they wanted to walk 
into a campaign office during the election, there were copies 
there for the public to see, the public to read, to absorb, and 
educate themselves as to why New Democrats wanted to form 
the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what does it say on this page? Just let me read some of this, 
Mr. Speaker. But I want to point out item 3 on page 8. No, I think 
I have to read the other part to put it into context, Mr. Speaker, 
just to put it into context. The title on page 7 is “Resource and 
Economic Development”: 
 

Saskatchewan’s natural resources . . . 
 

And I’m quoting now. But I want to say one of the natural

resources we would have to understand, and I think members at 
least on this side of the House and the government side of the 
House, that one of our natural resources is potash. Potash is a 
natural resource. Potash is being debated in second reading of 
this Bill 20. And you know the title of the Bill, sir. I go back and 
I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s natural resources are the rightful heritage 
of people in our province, not the preserve of private 
interests. The New Democratic Party believes that Liberal 
policy of selling out our birthright is both unwise and 
unnecessary. 
 

Now you have to realize, Mr. Speaker, that it was unwise and 
unnecessary at that time. The Liberals were the government up 
to 1971, and it was not wise what they were doing. And we know 
from earlier in the debate and what I’ve said today, is that the 
current Minister of Finance and the late Premier Ross Thatcher 
did try and collect taxes from the potash companies and they 
couldn’t. So we thought we’re going to have to take a different 
approach to this. I continue to quote: 
 

We have faith in Saskatchewan people. We believe them 
capable of developing their own resources for their own 
benefit. Outside help is sometimes necessary, but a sell-out 
is not. Development must be aimed at maximizing benefits 
for people, not maximizing profits for big business and its 
promoters. 

 
New Democrats recognize the need for research and 
planning, and the folly of the growth of the state for the sake 
of growth. We must take into account all aspects of the 
well-being of citizens, including their right to a healthy 
environment. 

 
Toward these ends, a New Democratic government will: (1) 
establish a department of economic development to plan 
and encourage orderly economic growth, and to integrate 
and co-ordinate such programs as northern development 
and urban and rural planning; (2) establish a Saskatchewan 
development corporation which will mobilize capital for 
public investment in the economic development from a 
variety of sources, including direct investment by the 
province and by share offerings to individuals, 
organizations, and companies; (3) . . . 
 

Now I want very particularly to listen to this, because this applies 
directly, Mr. Speaker, to Bill 20 which we’re debating here today 
in second reading, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I go back to quote: 
 

(3) oppose any further sell-out of our resources. 
 

With respect to new development, the NDP will give first 
priority to the public ownership through Crown 
corporations. Co-operative ownership will be encouraged. 
Partnership arrangements between government and 
co-operatives or private developers will be undertaken when 
appropriate. Limits will be established with respect to 
foreign equity capital, and every effort will be made to 

  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1111 
 

limit foreign investment in resource development to 
non-equity capital. 
 

That’s printed, Mr. Speaker. Prior to the election of 1971, when 
we became government, we indicated what was going to happen 
in the resource sector in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, pointed out very clearly. Now let’s compare that to an 
example. 
 
The PC government promised to eliminate the provincial sales 
tax in election campaign, but it increased it by 40 per cent, from 
5 per cent to 7 per cent. It promised to cut income tax by 10 per 
cent; instead it introduced the flat tax and it’s increased it three 
times. Two broken promises that people voted for. They didn’t 
vote for any broken promises of New Democrats because we 
pursued what we said we’d pursue. 
 
And here’s a good one, Mr. Speaker. The PC government, the 
Tory candidates around the province at election time promised to 
balance the budget. And it has introduced eight straight deficit 
budgets with an accumulated deficit now of nearly $4 billion. 
Over a million dollars a day the Saskatchewan people have to pay 
in interest on a debt that’s been created totally by the government 
of the day, by the Conservative government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Poor management, poor economics, still going 
deeper into debt, and selling off the assets of the province while 
retaining debt. 
 
What kind of promises is that to the people of Saskatchewan? No 
wonder they felt betrayed on things like SaskEnergy and will be 
feeling betrayed on Bills like this because the government is not 
believable any more. How can you believe a government that 
continues to break promises and betray the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Now the PCs promised an honest government. Before the 1986 
provincial election the Minister of Finance claimed the budget 
deficit for that year would be $389 million — $389 million. After 
the election he admitted that the real deficit was 1.2 billion. This 
with another election on the horizon — he claims the budget 
deficit is being reduced. Well, unbelievable! 
 
And do you know that we found out that it was an even bigger 
betrayal in public accounts? Because we find that during that 
fiscal year the Department of Finance submitted monthly reports 
that there was access to by the Minister of Finance. He knew long 
before the election that he would overshoot his budget by 300 or 
400 per cent, unheard of in the history of ministers of Finance, I 
would venture to say, throughout Canada. And he deceived, he 
lied to the Saskatchewan people about . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the member to apologize 
for using the word . . . saying that the member lied. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I knew that that word 
was unparliamentary, and I should not have used it. I apologize 
for using the term.

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The question I pose under the point of 
order. During this session the hon. member from North 
Battleford has, I think at least on 10 or 12 occasions, used that 
word and has been brought to order by the Chair. It’s got to the 
point now, Mr. Speaker, where it’s not a slip of the tongue but is 
simply an obvious tactic by the hon. member. And I suggest that 
the Chair review the fact of repeated offences of that particular 
rule, that stronger action be taken in the future. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me just comment on that point of 
order. That is not a point of order. I think the member knows that, 
and the member has withdrawn his remark. It was made. He did 
as you requested, and I think that the matter is now closed. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I want to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair has no way of knowing 
whether it’s done intentionally or unintentionally. The member 
has apologized; the Chair has accepted the apology. If there’s 
some stronger action needed, it would have to be addressed by 
the special rules committee. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I’ll just finish this short list here as to why 
Saskatchewan people do feel betrayed and will feel betrayed 
when they know the whole story on Bill 20, the Act to privatize 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s one. The PCs promised to eliminate the provincial gas tax. 
Today Saskatchewan has the second highest gas tax in Canada. 
Promise made, promise broken. 
 
The PCs promised to bring home children. Today young people 
are leaving the province at a rate of one person every 60 minutes 
. . . sorry, every six minutes. Every six minutes there’s a young 
person leaving the province of Saskatchewan because they see 
no hope here. 
 
Potash mines . . . 
 
The Deputy Minister: — Order. Order. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Point of 
order is as follows, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member is obviously 
engaged in a filibuster, and that’s a legitimate forum in this 
legislature or any legislature. 
 
I simply say this: when the hon. member becomes involved and 
initiates a filibuster, then that filibuster must deal with the issue. 
He can’t just simply ramble on on any issues that he wants, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would suggest to the hon. member, if he wants to 
know how to conduct a filibuster, he might be well advised to go 
back and read the debates from the 1976 filibuster on the setting 
up of the potash corporation. 
 
He does have to stay on the subject matter. He cannot simply 
move in all directions, whether it’s a filibuster or not. And I 
suggest that a filibuster can be properly done, but it has to be 
properly done. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1112 
 

opposite may refer to the member’s comments on second reading 
of this Bill as a filibuster. That is his opinion; that is his decision. 
That is not something for you to decide on. 
 
I remind you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that the debate in second 
reading is a debate on the principle of the Bill. When one debates 
the principle of the Bill of this kind, one is debating the principle 
of privatization. And I submit that the member who has spoken 
so well on this issue has related what he has said to the principle 
of privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
has done that mighty well besides, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The point of order was 
relevance. I’ve been drawing that to the member’s attention all 
morning, and I will continue to do so. I would ask members, all 
members on both sides of the House when they’re speaking on 
the Bill, to keep relevance in mind. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The PCs promised never to cut medicare. They 
privatized the school-based dental program . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve asked the member 
to speak on the Bill. I find that the material that he’s using 
irrelevant, and I would ask him to move back to debating the Bill 
that’s before the House. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well maybe when the olive branch committee 
that was offered yesterday by the member from Kindersley, if it 
looks at broader things, maybe it could look at the fact that some 
members on one side of the House can ramble and attack . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member’s 
comments are not related to the Bill at all. I can read the rule back 
to him again. 
 

(The) Speaker, or the Chairman, after having called the 
attention of the Assembly or of the committee, to the 
conduct of a Member who persists in irrelevance, or tedious 
repetition, either of his own arguments or of the arguments 
used by other Members in debate, may direct him to 
discontinue his speech, and if the Member continues to 
speak, (the) Speaker may name him . . . 
 

I’ll give you another opportunity to speak on the debate, and your 
remarks should be relevant to Bill No. 20. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, you’ve helped me temper my 
temper over the years, Mr. Speaker, and I do appreciate your 
ruling. We’re debating here today Bill 20 — An Act respecting 
the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
The Bill has to do with privatization, and so I want to refer to 
other privatization initiatives because it’s in a package. And 
certainly this Bill is a bad deal for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I have told you before that the

Saskatchewan public are saying you’ve gone too far. They’re 
saying there won’t be anything left because you’re selling off 
everything, like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now earlier, Mr. Speaker, I made very specific reference to a 
document called New Deal for People, 1971 election, about 
resource policy — and potash is a resource — by the New 
Democrats in the province of Saskatchewan. This document was 
put out by the New Democrats. 
 
If you recall accurately, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats formed the 
government in 1971. Liberals were defeated. Minister of Finance 
of today was obviously re-elected because now he sits here as a 
Conservative after having crossed the floor. But during the period 
of 1971 to 1975, our government tried to get the private sector 
potash which all there was at that time in Saskatchewan to 
co-operate — to co-operate with the taxation, the production 
levels, revenue generation. And they said . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Did the Deputy Premier want to speak? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Allow the member from The 
Battlefords to make his comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — During the period that New Democrats were in 
government from ’71 to ’75, Mr. Speaker, potash was an issue. 
As the Liberals had tried, New Democrats tried to hold the potash 
companies, privately owned, in some cases outside of Canadian 
ownership, tried to hold them accountable to Saskatchewan 
people. They asked to increase taxation. The privately owned 
potash companies said no. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan said, well open your books 
and show us what kind of profits you’re making. The company 
said no. They increased taxation. There was the Cigol case. The 
courts ruled against the Government of Saskatchewan. So all this 
took place over a period of time. 
 
In 1975 the premier of this province at that time, Allan Blakeney, 
called an election. And the political party that he represented, the 
New Democratic Party, put together a program called New Deal 
’75 Again, as the publication was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Does the Deputy Premier and the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd 
want to enter into the debate? The Deputy Premier says he wants 
to enter into the debate, Mr. Speaker. As soon as I’m done I 
expect to see him spring to his feet in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So, Mr. Speaker, what happened in 1975? This 
publication was a public document, again not used in closed back 
rooms for political strategists. It was available to the public. It 
was available by door-to-door canvassers. People could get it 
from constituency offices or from, pardon me, campaign offices 
during the election campaign. It was called New Deal ’75. Let’s 
see what it says in here. Okay. In the index, resources, page 4. 
Turn to page 4, and under the title, resources, and I quote, Mr. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1113 
 

Speaker: 
 

In 1971 the New Democrats promised to act decisively to 
see that the Saskatchewan resources are developed to the 
benefit of Saskatchewan people. Under the Blakeney 
government that has been done. 

 
Direct revenue to the provincial government from minerals 
alone in 1974 was more than four times what it was in 1970. 
These revenues will still be higher in 1975. When 
re-elected, New Democrats will continue to act to see that 
Saskatchewan people get the greatest possible benefit from 
our resources in the decades ahead. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know I can’t show an exhibit in here, but I’d 
like you to take my word for it — you can examine this document 
later — what is underneath what I’ve just quoted? A picture of a 
potash mine. A picture of a potash mine. 
 
I continue to quote: 
 

This may well involve new approaches to public ownership, 
to joint ventures between the government and private 
enterprise, and to resource royalties and taxation. All 
approaches will be measured by the test of what will give 
Saskatchewan people the greatest overall benefits in the 
decades ahead — benefits in revenue, in industrial 
development, in job opportunities, in conservation of scarce 
resources, and in the ability of Saskatchewan people to have 
a greater control over their own destiny. 

 
Specifically we will defend and protect the right of 
Saskatchewan people to full benefits from their rightful 
heritage, the natural resources of this province. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want specifically to highlight item number 
2, and I quote: 
 

(2) Speed up direct government participation in exploration 
for and development of potash and hard rock minerals to 
achieve a greater measure of public ownership of these 
resources and industries. 
 

(1145) 
 
Now I read that again for the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, (2), 
and I quote: 
 

Speed up direct government participation in exploration for 
and development of potash and hard rock minerals to 
achieve a greater measure of public ownership of these 
resources and industries. 
 

I don’t know how much more up front Saskatchewan people 
could have received than what New Democrats were saying at 
that time. And any elected member or interested person or 
student of politics would well remember the potash debate in 
1976 when the Potash

Corporation of Saskatchewan came into being. And people were 
proud once that came in, people were proud. 
 
The member from Regina Wascana, Mr. Speaker, said without a 
mandate — that we brought in the potash corporation without a 
mandate. We stated it on the public record what we were going 
to do, that I’ve outlined to you today. Even a court of law would 
accept that we were up front with people. But the member from 
Regina Wascana cannot understand being up front with 
Saskatchewan people because this government is not up front 
with Saskatchewan people. They won’t even entitle the Bill, the 
sell-off of Saskatchewan’s heritage. They call it an Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Reorganized? Hogwash! 
 
So what happened during this period of time? In 1976, after the 
’75 election, the potash debate came in. A Bill to enter into public 
ownership of potash was introduced in this legislature, and it was 
hotly debated — debated for several days. 
 
Some members that are in government side of this House entered 
that debate, and we have a hard time understanding, after they’ve 
seen all the benefits of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
why they would want to sell off our heritage. It would even be 
understandable if they would sell it to the employees of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; if they would restrict 
shares to people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Most people do understand that they currently own 100 per cent 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, because it’s 100 per 
cent owned by the Government of Saskatchewan. The 
Government of Saskatchewan is not the cabinet; it’s not the 
Progressive Conservative Party. The Government of 
Saskatchewan is the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The shares are held in trust by the government, and they do 
currently own 100 per cent. Now granted, dividends have not 
been declared directly to individuals, but dividends are received 
through the programs and services and the support of government 
programs, of government initiatives, of the dollars that are raised 
by resource revenue through very important Crown ownership 
and Crown corporations like the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Dividends that accrue to people in Saskatchewan have been good 
health care, a good standard of education, social programs that 
support people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster says, how much money do they cost? 
I’ll tell you, they cost very little in comparison to the rape and 
pillage and the sell-off of Saskatchewan’s assets at the same time 
as the government wants to retain the debt. 
 
They say one of the reasons that they’re having this privatization 
move, this obsession with privatization, is that they want to get 
out of debt. Have they been in debt? Yes they’ve been in debt. 
Whose debt is it? It’s their debt — the mismanagement of a 
Conservative government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1114 
 

In terms of just operating revenue, $4 billion in debt. Has there 
been one budget where the debt has decreased? No. There’s been 
deficits in every consecutive budget that this government has 
brought in. The debt has continued to increase with each deficit 
budget. The privatization moves to date have not reduced the 
debt by one cent, and I don’t think, if the privatization moves 
continue, will the debt be reduced by one cent. 
 
Now there’s more than just the debt, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 
talking about in the operating revenue of the province. There’s 
the debt of Crown corporations which has increased 
astronomically — astronomically — through mismanagement of 
Crown corporations and public ownership by a government 
that’s bent on an ideology that doesn’t believe in any public 
ownership whatsoever. They believe in helping their rich friends 
and helping rich investors from outside of our country take 
control of a very precious resource. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debt of Crown corporations has also increased. 
We will know that a year or so ago the Crown investment 
corporation, which is the banker for the public ownership Crowns 
in the province of Saskatchewan, paid off, I believe it was about 
$600 million of debt of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
So Crown investment corporation is retaining a debt there, the 
banker for the Crowns and the public ownership in the province. 
And so, almost debt free, this government wants to sell off the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. The Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan won’t have a big debt passed on to the investors. 
We’re retaining the debt in the Crown investment corporation. 
 
Crown Management Board made that decision, a decision made 
by Conservative, Tory cabinet ministers that The Globe and Mail 
refers to as revenge of the nerds. And in fact they should extend 
the revenge of the nerds to nerdonomics because the economic 
policies and privatization and sell-off of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan make no sense. 
 
Nerdonomics should be coined as the economic development and 
policies of the Government of Saskatchewan under this Tory 
administration because it makes no sense to anyone in the 
province other than those who have benefitted, and those who 
have benefitted are very few. If you got a couple million, they’re 
willing to give you a couple million more. If you got a billion, 
they’ll give you several million. But if you’re going to a food 
bank or you have to rely on unemployment insurance or the 
unfortunate circumstance of being put on the social service rolls, 
they have no sympathy. 
 
The minister wants to cut them even further to give them an 
opportunity — to what? Work in the private sector? There aren’t 
jobs in the private sector right now to any large extent. They even 
cut youth employment summer programs. They don’t want to put 
people to work. They don’t want to use public ownership and 
government as an engine of the economy. They want to allow the 
private sector to do all that, and the private sector won’t do all 
that because the private sector is there to make profit and

maximize profits. And I understand that, because if they weren’t 
there to make profit, they wouldn’t be in business very long. 
 
But in a province like Saskatchewan, you need public ownership 
like the potash corporation, like SaskEnergy, those things that 
make money for the province, because this government doesn’t 
have the intestinal fortitude to stand up and collect taxation where 
taxation is available, and that’s the corporate sector, the big 
corporate sector friends of the Conservatives that have all the 
money, and they refuse to tax them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So nerdonomics Tory style in Saskatchewan is 
what we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to tell you how much it’s helped — and I think it’s 
worth reviewing — I want to tell you how much it’s helped our 
deficit by selling off the Crown corporations. In 1982-83 fiscal 
year — that’s the first year that the government of the day had to 
bring in a budget — deficit budget. And incidentally, I think it’s 
important to point out that when there was a good portion of 
public ownership in Saskatchewan under Allan Blakeney’s New 
Democrat government, and will be again under Roy Romanow’s 
New Democrat government after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — There was sound economic management. 
Public sector participation with the private sector and 
co-operatives was viewed from all over North America. In fact 
people from other places in the world would come and look at 
the Saskatchewan model where you have a vast amount of 
resources, not a lot of local capital, a sparse population spread 
out over a large geographic area, and we were able to provide 
services that people appreciated and weren’t given a heavy 
burden of taxation on. They might have thought it was a heavy 
burden of taxation at the time, but they hadn’t seen anything till 
nerdonomics came along, I’ll tell you that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there was, prior to 1982-83, a surplus budget. In fact from 
1971 till 1982, every year there was a surplus budget for the 
operations of government. Never once was there a deficit budget. 
And Allan Blakeney, I’m sure, did believe that if it was necessary 
to have a deficit budget, go ahead and deficit budget, but let’s 
have a repayment plan. Let’s have a deficit to invest in something 
that will give us a return in the future, or a have a deficit budget 
as a short-term measure to boost the economy, to create jobs, to 
be a major engine in the economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — This government wants to destroy two engines 
of the economy, and the third engine of the economy is sputtering 
because they’re running out of gas. They’ve destroyed 
co-operatives in Saskatchewan to a large extent. For the first time 
in many, many years we do not have a department of 
co-operatives in Saskatchewan, an important part of our 
economy. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1115 
 

They don’t want any public ownership. For a long time it’s been 
an important engine in the growth and development and the 
maintaining of our economy. All they want is private sector. And 
where their engine to the private sector is sputtering and running 
out of gas, is that they’re losing support of Saskatchewan people 
at such an unprecedented rate. It’s even boggling the pollsters at 
Decima, that they have to phone and tell these people that are so 
far out of touch with the province and the people of 
Saskatchewan that they shouldn’t call an election because they’d 
hardly win a single seat, even in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But going back to the deficit that has not been helped by 
privatization and won’t be helped by the sell-off of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan: ’82-83, deficit budget; ’83-84, 
deficit budget; ’84-85, deficit budget; ’85-86, deficit budget; 
’86-87, deficit budget; ’87-88, deficit budget; ’88-89, deficit 
budget — continual, continual deficit budgets. 
 
So they started privatizing, Mr. Speaker, back in the earlier years 
of their mandate. In fact they started privatizing prior to the 1986 
election, but they were discreet about it. 
 
Let’s look at some of the things that were privatized that haven’t 
helped bring down our deficit. And this Bill, if we allow them to 
have this Bill passed, Bill 20, an Act to privatize the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, I predict the debt still will not 
come down because nerdonomics does not dictate that you 
should spend money on your province and not give it to wealthy 
investors, the 45 per cent that this Bill will give to foreign 
investors — clearly stated in the Bill — 45 per cent to foreign 
investors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at the highway workers. Highways workers were 
privatized. Did it save the government money? They were 
privatized starting back in ’82-83. That was ’82-83 where 
Highways workers were privatized, wasn’t it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’82-83, yes. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Yes, I checked with some members, so ’82-83 
Highways workers were privatized. I remember Jim Garner 
standing up in the legislature — I wasn’t a member of this House 
at that time, but I remember seeing him on TV, saying he was 
going to give the Highways workers a chance to work in the 
private sector. 
 
That was the same thing as Ross Thatcher, when he was back in 
his hey-day, the late Ross Thatcher, saying that he wanted to 
impose deterrent fees so people could participate in their own 
recovery in the hospital — not a very good deal. 
 
So the Highways workers were privatized in ’82-83 to a large 
extent. And what happened in ’83-84, Mr. Speaker? Did the 
deficit reduce? Was there less of a deficit? No, there was a greater 
deficit than there was in ’82-83. So has privatization helped?

Well who has it helped if it’s helped? Did it help the dental 
therapists? We saw the privatization of the dental plan, the 
school-based children’s dental plan in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Did that help . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it was brought to the Chair’s attention a few minutes earlier that 
when this member tried to ramble on into the area that he’s now 
rambling into, that he was brought to order and he was warned 
not to get in onto that track and to get back into discussing the 
potash Bill. 
 
I am now asking you to either reprimand the speaker and . . . or 
let’s move to the next speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, there are apparently not 
two certainties in life but three: death, taxes, and the fact that the 
member from Lloydminster will not be listening to what’s being 
said. This time . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, read your own speech. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, the member from Lloydminster ought 
to be really an expert on rambling on and getting off the point. 
 
At this time, however, I say to the Deputy Speaker that the 
member from The Battlefords was on privatization and was 
talking about potash. Whether or not a repetition of the speech of 
the member from Meadow Lake . . . from Lloydminster had any 
bearing on anything is a moot point. But he was talking about 
potash and he was talking about privatization. This time he’s on 
the point. 
 
The member from Lloydminster who’s giving us so much 
assistance — what a valuable asset — the member from 
Lloydminster who’s giving us all this assistance, apparently 
wasn’t listening. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I have listened with 
interest to the debate. I was also aware of the Deputy Speaker and 
his request that the member from The Battlefords present his 
remarks on the potash debate. And I believe that the remarks 
being made just prior to order being called were ranging a little 
bit beyond the debate on potash, and I would ask the member to 
again . . . in addressing the House to limit his remarks to the 
debate on the potash Bill, Bill No. 20. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The potash Bill is Bill No. 20. It’s An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. It’s privatization. Would you agree with that? I 
think you’d agreed with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 
member from Kindersley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If I 
could raise again, when a person becomes involved in a filibuster, 
which I indicate is perfectly legitimate to do in this Chamber, but 
when you’re involved in a filibuster you (a) have to be relevant, 
and (b) you cannot simply repeat, repeat, repeat what you’ve said 
before. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1116 
 

Now that takes some talent, Mr. Speaker, but you must, in order 
to filibuster and filibuster properly, you have to be relevant and 
you can’t simply repeat. Now the hon. member is repeating for 
about the sixth or seventh time what he said today, not only the 
day before and the day before that. 
 
And he’s also straying away from the subject matter 
tremendously, Mr. Speaker, and therefore he must be brought to 
order on those points. If he’s going to filibuster, you have to 
know how to properly filibuster. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m not sure how the member from 
Kindersley would recognize that sort of talent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest to you that this is a fairly broad 
subject. If, for instance, a filibuster . . . And this is not a filibuster. 
The member from Kindersley calls it that, but I want to give the 
member from Kindersley some assistance on what a filibuster is 
if we are ever provoked to that, if we are ever provoked to that. 
 
A discussion of the rule change, for instance, if we had been 
discussing the member from Kindersley’s motion on the rule 
change, it’s a very narrow subject, whether or not there ought to 
be bell-ringing. 
 
This, however, with respect to privatization and potash is one of 
the broadest possible subjects, going as it does to the public and 
private ownership, to government financing, to control of our 
natural resources. It’s a very broad subject. 
 
The member from The Battlefords was canvassing the matter 
with some care, but he was on subject and he was not repetitious. 
If the member from Kindersley believes it’s repetitious, then he 
ought to tell the Chair what he believes was repeated, because I 
was listening with care to these carefully crafted remarks, as the 
member from Kindersley was, and I didn’t hear any repetition. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Yes, I’ve again listened to the point of 
order, and I find that the debate that has been taking place has 
been ranging far broader from the principle of the Bill before the 
House. Therefore I would suggest the point of order is well taken, 
and I would ask the member from The Battlefords to restrict his 
comments to the relevancy of Bill No. 20. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The Bill has to do with privatization. I don’t 
think there’s any question about that. What I’m going to do for 
the balance of this morning is I’m going to relate how 
privatization has not helped the province so far and how this Bill 
will not help the province of Saskatchewan. It couldn’t be more 
relevant than that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But can you say anything on it? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Oh, the member from Kindersley wants to 
know, can I say anything on it. Yes, I can say something. I know 
that people like you want to sell 45 per cent of our potash 
corporation to investors from outside the country. You should be 
ashamed of yourself. Did you learn that in law school, or did you 
learn that after you got to be a Tory? When did you learn that, 
how to sell off Saskatchewan’s heritage and Saskatchewan’s 
resources

to foreign investors? Did you go along with the Premier on the 
Orient express when he tried to sell 125 per cent of something 
that only contains 100 per cent? You were likely there. That’s 
nerdonomics. 
 
Nerdonomics goes through not only your deficit financing; 
nerdonomics goes through the potash sell-off as well. In fact, 
there’s nothing in this Bill to assure that one single share of 
potash will remain in the province of Saskatchewan, because the 
other 55 per cent can be sold off outside of Saskatchewan. And 
when shares get on the stock exchange, how do you control 
them? You tell us how you control shares once they get on the 
stock exchange. Know how you control them? If you’ve got lots 
of money, you can control them because you can buy them up. 
 
And when people in Saskatchewan are leaving the province, 
they’re out of work, they’re sitting on welfare, there’s no jobs, 
how do they buy these shares? How is it public participation; how 
do individuals get a benefit from this? They don’t. 
 
So we know what’s in your Bill, mister; we’re just trying to show 
you that other things in privatization haven’t helped as well. 
Other things have not helped in privatization. 
 
We want to know one privatization move, what privatization 
move has reduced the deficit? Not one. Was it privatization of 
parks? Has the privatization of SaskCOMP and SaskTel’s data 
centre to WESTBRIDGE reduced the deficit? Has the 
privatization of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) to 
Weyerhaeuser reduced the deficit? Has the SED Systems sell-out 
reduced the deficit? Has the SMDC privatization, Saskatchewan 
Mining and Development Corporation, reduced the deficit? Has 
PC privatization in general reduced the deficits? Has Manalta 
Coal sale reduced the deficit? Has the sell-off attempts of 
SaskEnergy reduced the deficits? Has Sask Minerals reduced the 
deficits? Has their hypocrisy reduced the deficits in the province 
of Saskatchewan? Has the privatization of the highways workers 
reduced the deficit in Saskatchewan? Will the Bill to sell the 
potash corporation reduce the deficit in Saskatchewan? You 
know it won’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You know it won’t. So I would have to say that 
all of this is relevant to deal with privatization. 
 
In April of 1983 the PC Highways minister, Jim Garner, fired 
157 highway workers because he was privatizing the road 
building function of Sask Highways. He said, and I quote: 
 

These lay-offs are a move from socialism to freedom for the 
employees who will now have the opportunity to work in 
the private sector. 
 

And you can look at Hansard from April 18, 1983. In March of 
’84, Garner’s further privatization of Highways led to the firing 
of a further 237 workers. He said: 
 

It’s freedom of choice. I’m giving them the opportunity to 
transfer to the private sector. 

  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1117 
 

That’s a quote from the Leader-Post on March 23, 1984. Has that 
helped reduce the deficit? Just like the Bill won’t help reduce the 
deficit. We want you to explain to Saskatchewan people why 
you’re obsessed with the move of privatization. 
 
In May of ’84 Garner privatized more than 400 pieces of highway 
equipment, replacement value of $40 million. The province 
received $6 million for this. Do you think you’re receiving good 
value in what you’re proposing to do with the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve called the member 
to order many times on dealing with privatization in general. The 
debate before the Assembly is Bill No. 20, the reorganization of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we get into the debate on Bill No. 1, which is the public 
participation program, the far ranging debate on public 
participation certainly will be relevant in the legislature. But right 
now we’re on Bill No. 20, the Bill respecting the reorganization 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I’m asking the 
member again to make his remarks according to Bill No. 20 
which is before this Assembly. 
 
The member for Regina Lakeview — why is the member on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to make a 
comment, if I may, about what the member from The Battlefords 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair has made a ruling. It cannot 
be challenged. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You don’t call order in the House any more, 
Mr. Speaker, when the members yell back and forth across, do 
you? 
 
Let’s look at a very important part of this Bill . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . How long would you like to holler back and 
forth? Is there a problem? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you look good on TV, Doug. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m sure it’ll look very good on TV. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Allow the member 
from The Battlefords to make his comments. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I can’t believe what’s going on in the 
legislature here today. Members of the government side don’t 
want to hear the opposition, just like they don’t want to hear 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. They don’t want to 
listen to the most crucial fundamental debate that’s going to face 
this legislature in many, many years. But they don’t want to 
listen. 
 
They don’t want to go out and talk to people in Saskatchewan, 
what about us selling off the potash corporation. How many 
meetings are you going to hold?

Why don’t the individual members, like the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, how many meetings have you held in 
your riding? How many times have you been out there holding 
public meetings on the sale of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan? This many — zero. And that’s how they’ll treat 
you in the next election — it’ll be zero. Because people are 
concerned that there won’t be anything left. 
 
Part IV of this Bill, conditions relating to the voting shares, and 
it’s number 11(1) in the Bill. It’s limitation on holding by 
non-residents. Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point of order is this, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member, 
knowing the rules on second reading, you debate the principle of 
the rules. You don’t go from section 7(3). That is for Committee 
of the Whole. That is not for debate on second reading. 
 
Now I once again ask you, Mr. Speaker, that this individual 
attempting a filibuster, what I would call . . . what might be 
called, Mr. Speaker, the Dagwood Bumstead filibuster on the 
potash Bill, has to keep to the point of order, Mr. Speaker, and 
has to be relevant and cannot deal with the specifics of the 
section. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the point of order, 
here we have the Minister of Justice who is trying to change the 
rules in this House — arbitrarily, initially — is now trying to 
make some comments to frustrate the speaker of the opposition 
who is speaking on Bill 20. 
 
In every circumstance that the member from The Battlefords has 
raised with respect to whether it’s a reference to the Bill or he’s 
tied it into the debate, Mr. Speaker. And it’s my view that when 
the Minister of Justice stands up on a point of order, he is off the 
mark; he is doing it in an arbitrary fashion. And I would suggest 
that his point of order is not well taken. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I find the minister’s point of order well 
taken. Page 224, paragraph 734, the last line: 
 

It is not regular on this occasion, however, to discuss the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 

Order. The member from Regina North, I’d ask him to be quiet 
while the Speaker is on his feet. 
 

It is not regular on this occasion, however, to discuss (the) 
details (and) the clauses of the bill. 
 

It is at this stage in the debate, it’s the general principles of the 
Bill that are debated in the legislature. In Committee of the 
Whole, every member, opposition and government, will be able 
to ask questions on a clause-by-clause review of the Bill. He was 
quoting directly from a clause in the Bill, and so therefore I have 
to rule him out of order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I thank you for the ruling, Mr. Speaker, that 
debate at this stage is on the principle of the Bill. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1118 
 

That’s your ruling and I appreciate that. The principle of this Bill 
is privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I 
don’t see how else to debate the principle of this Bill without 
referring to other privatization moves by this government that 
have not worked in the past. That principle of privatization has 
not worked in the past and will not work in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So we have to look at the principle of the Bill, 
and the principle is privatization. Privatization has not reduced 
deficits; it has not reduced income tax; it has not assisted people 
with more government services or even better government 
services. There are less jobs in Saskatchewan, more people 
leaving the province, more people on welfare, more people on 
waiting lists to get into hospitals, people who cannot imagine 
why the government is on a move for privatization. 
 
Bill No. 20 is a continuation of the principle of privatization 
that’s happened in the past. What happened with Sask Minerals? 
Let’s take a look at that and see. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. This Bill that’s before the 
Assembly is (An) Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Bill No. 1, that’s in 
adjourned debate, is the general debate on the public 
participation. I would ask the member to speak on the Bill that’s 
before the Assembly. I have asked him many times and I would 
ask him again to keep his remarks to Bill No. 20. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to speak to that, if I may, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I ruled on what the debate will consist 
of and that stands. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want to speak to the point you just made, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It was not a point of order. It 
was a ruling from the Chair and it cannot be spoken to. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wish to raise a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Bill involves a good deal more than just the word potash. It also 
involves privatization, it also involves revenue to the province. 
All of those things are relevant and that’s what the member from 
The Battlefords was speaking to. He was speaking to revenue for 
the province. This is a very wide ranging Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I recognize that you’ve got a job to do, but 
inherent in that job is to be fair to both sides. You are not now a 
member of the government. You occupy an independent 
position, and I ask you to keep that in mind. The member was on 
the subject of revenue to the

province and that’s perfectly in order and perfectly relevant. He 
was not outside the scope of this Bill. It’s a very broad Bill, and 
I ask you to keep that in mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would like to speak to the hon. member 
from Regina Centre’s point or order. And in speaking to that 
point of order, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina 
Centre’s point of order is not well taken. The debate is on Bill 
No. 20, an Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash 
Corporation (of Saskatchewan). As I have said before, the 
general debate on public participation is on Bill 1. 
 
It’s up to the member to find ways to make his point within the 
rules, and if the member continues, if the member continues . . . 
Order. If the member continues to use irrelevance, I will have to 
refer back to the rules in the general handbook and ask the 
member to discontinue his speech. With that, I will recognize the 
member from The Battlefords. 
 
Order, order. Order. I would ask the member from Regina North 
East to rise and apologize to the Chair. Threats to the Chair are 
not allowed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I so will 
apologize and withdraw. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think that we have to really look, Mr. Speaker, 
at the potash companies that have and are operating in the 
province of Saskatchewan, to put the debate into context. And 
the potash companies of course that operated in Saskatchewan up 
until 1976 were all private sector potash companies, most of them 
owned from outside of the province of Saskatchewan, if not all 
owned outside the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I would like to go through some of the companies just sort 
of firm by firm to summarize the development of each in the 
history of the potash resource in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And first off, Mr. Speaker, there’s the Potash Company of 
America. This firm is one of the pioneers in North American 
potash and was the first firm to begin a major potash 
development in Saskatchewan, except for the abortive effort at 
Unity. It now operates a division of Ideal Basic Industries Inc., 
having merged with Ideal Cement Company, a large cement 
producer, on December 31, 1967. 
 
The Potash Corporation of America also mines potash in the state 
of New Mexico. Production was commenced at Patience Lake in 
late 1958, but operations were suspended in 1959 because of 
water seepage into the shaft at this New Mexico mine. It took six 
years actually to repair the shaft, and that tells something, Mr. 
Speaker, about the complexity of the potash industry, that a shaft 
would take six years to repair. 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1119 
 

They rehabilitated the underground works and installed some 
new mill equipment, and production was commenced again in 
1965. A second shaft was completed in early 1969 and, while it 
at present serves the function of the mine ventilation and supply, 
it has been designed to allow the Potash Corporation of America 
to expand its output, after construction of a second mill and 
refinery, to about 3 million tons of KCl annually. That’s 1.8 
million tons of K2O. The ore reserves in the vicinity of the 
original shaft were estimated at 35 million tons, grading 27 per 
cent K2O. Now that’s quite amazing, Mr. Speaker, that that 
production capability of that particular mine and the percentage 
of grade at 27 per cent, at least at that time was very, very high. 
 
The other company that I want to refer to that has some 
ownership and involvement in the potash industry, Mr. Speaker, 
is International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) 
Ltd., but the (Canada) Ltd. on that company is a little deceiving. 
You will know, Mr. Speaker, you will know that International 
Minerals and Chemical, in fact, supplied the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan with Chuck Childers, who was formerly with 
that company. And to dismantle the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, they in fact brought him in from a competing 
company to run down our company. 
 
(1230) 
 
Now this debate, I have much more to say on this that is relevant 
to the principle of the Bill. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move that the debate adjourn on Bill 20 — An Act respecting the 
Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I so 
move adjournment to the debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member cannot move 
adjournment on debate. He had moved to adjourn . . . (inaudible) 
. . . I believe the hon. member already adjourned debate last day 
and cannot re-move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The company, International Minerals and 
Chemical, as I was mentioning . . . (inaudible) . . . clearly by the 
name of Chuck Childers who was hired by the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan to come here and run the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what administrators of nerdonomics in their right mind 
would bring someone from a competing firm to another firm to 
run the business? It doesn’t make much sense. And in some point 
in this debate I want to go step by step, Mr. Speaker, through who 
the people are that worked for other potash companies 
throughout the world that are now in place in the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think that first it’s important to talk a bit — you’re being 
very fair, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important first to 
go through who some of the actors are in the potash industry in 
terms of companies, and then what we’ll do is we’ll go into who 
some of the individuals are in the particular companies that we’re 
going to discuss here this afternoon.

Now the International Minerals and Chemical Corporation of 
Canada, Ltd., is totally owned by International Minerals and 
Chemical Corporation. It’s incorporated in New York, with the 
head office in Illinois. And I believe that the head office, Mr. 
Speaker, is in the city of Chicago, or in that greater area of 
Chicago, at least. 
 
The parent company is the world’s largest producer, and hear 
this, the world’s largest producer of chemical fertilizer and 
fertilizer material. It produces and sells rock phosphate, potash, 
phosphate concentrates, nitrogen phosphate, and mixed fertilizer, 
as well as buying and selling other fertilizer materials. It also 
engages in world-wide trading and other mineral production 
operations. 
 
The parent company is a multinational operation with a 
diversified line of mineral, chemical, and food products for 
industry, agriculture, and the home, with operations in some 300 
locations in 30 different countries throughout the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about any small players 
coming into this, because when this government wants to sell 45 
per cent of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, those are 
the people we’re talking about. What interest have they got in 
Saskatchewan people? Getting to be the point where we’re less 
than a million people. Do you think that some company that 
operates at 300 locations in 30 different countries throughout the 
world gives a hoot about Saskatchewan people or the revenue 
accruing to this province? They care about their own welfare, not 
the welfare of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And Chuck Childers has been sent from this company and hired 
by this government to destroy the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan — no other reason. And as I said, we’ll go through 
the list of other people that have come from multinational 
corporations to work in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
to not push its sales so that Canpotex can market sales from 
private companies, so that the private companies can prosper 
while the publicly owned company that accrues revenue to the 
province of Saskatchewan is run into the ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll make those arguments in the course of this 
debate. 
 
This company, International Minerals and Chemical Corporation 
(Canada) Ltd., the company has an operating agreement to mine 
ore from Amax Potash Limited. IMC was the first company to 
overcome the troublesome water problem in the Blairemore 
sands. It has two mines at Esterhazy, K1 and K2, and they’re 
connected underground, incidentally, and IMC has a potash mine 
in New Mexico. So IMC are one of the biggest, if not — I don’t 
know what it is right today at this moment — but if not biggest, 
they’re one of the biggest players in the potash market in the 
entire world. And again, it baffles people when they find out that 
Chuck Childers was hired from this company to run the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, to run it into the ground, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think we also want to have a look at a third company that 
operates in Saskatchewan. It’s Kalium Chemicals Limited, at the 
time of this writing owned 100 per cent by 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1120 
 

PPG Industries Incorporated. That’s Pittsburgh Plate Glass, a 
hugh multinational with operations that net sales of about $1.2 
billion annually — $1.2 billion annually, Mr. Speaker. That’s no 
small player in the potash industry throughout the world. 
 
And here we are with . . . the only thing that we seem to have 
lately that’s in the magnitude of $1.2 billion is deficit budgets 
after the Minister of Finance has got up on his feet. One point 
two billion dollars is a big player in the potash industry, Mr. 
Speaker. What if Kalium Chemical in their head office in 
Pittsburgh — I believe it is, somewhere like that — or Pittsburgh 
Plate Glass buys out the foreign shares of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this was the first . . . Kalium Chemicals, incidentally, was 
the first solution mine in the world, right here in Saskatchewan. 
It was a great piece of technology that was developed for that 
particular mine. It still operates, I believe, as a solution mine. 
And since that time, Texasgulf has converted its conventional 
mining operations in Utah to a solution mine as well, but with 
limited success. It depends a lot on the conditions, and who 
knows whether or not the mines that are currently owned by the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will . . . whether or not be 
able to use a solution mining technique. 
 
Right now I believe all the PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) mines are mines that are using a shaft system with 
the drills and everything, and you’ve got to use conveyor belts to 
get it out of the ground. And I don’t think that this Bill, Bill 20, 
will help find new technology in mining, and new technology is 
very important. It’s important for worker safety; it’s important 
for having improved methods of getting the ore from the ground 
up to the top. 
 
And I see nothing in this Bill to assist and to assure that happens, 
because the private sector are so consumed and responsible to 
their shareholders for profits, they don’t look at new technology, 
they don’t look at worker safety as much as they should. They 
have to be held accountable by governments, and we’re starting 
to question whether or not this government will, in fact, be 
accountable to people of Saskatchewan when they want to 
privatize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to make sure that there is technological development; 
that there is use for the mines; that at some point the waste from 
the mines will be disposed of. We want to make sure that the safe 
environment, the new technology, the environmental protection 
is there. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has been a 
leader in those things, and we’re afraid that if it goes back to the 
private sector in 100 per cent total, then those things will not be 
honoured and people in the province of Saskatchewan will have 
a great deal of disappointment over what is now called Bill 20, 
which we do not intend to see pass very lightly in this Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Kalium Chemicals has a patented process there, so we 
should be looking at working more co-operatively with them. It’s 
also originally started a joint operation

with Armour and Company, but in 1971, back at that time, 
Armour sold out its interests to Pittsburgh Plate Glass, and the 
parent company is also known to have undeveloped deposits in 
California. 
 
So when I’m talking about the parent company of Kalium 
Chemicals, again no small player in the potash industry 
throughout North America, Mr. Speaker, and certainly a biggie 
in the potash industry throughout the world — and I don’t think 
they need more potash like the potash that’s currently owned by 
the people of Saskatchewan, which this Bill wants to take away 
from the hands of Saskatchewan people. Again I reiterate, 45 per 
cent foreign ownership is what this Bill states. 
 
And that brings up the whole thing about the free trade agreement 
that can’t be stressed too often and too much. Once they put 
through the one-time exemption for a Crown corporation, we can 
never again limit the amount lower than 45 per cent for foreign 
ownership in our potash industry, and I think that’s a shameful 
tie for long-term obstruction of people’s wishes in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
What if some government comes along in the future and wants to 
own 90 per cent of the potash industry in Saskatchewan? They 
can’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because this government has tied our 
hands for ever because under the free trade agreement foreign 
ownership will have 45 per cent. 
 
I predict the majority of that 45 per cent will be American 
interests, and because of the free trade agreement we can never 
again limit the Americans to less than 45 per cent ownership of 
our potash industry in the province of Saskatchewan. And I think 
every member on that side of the House should be ashamed for 
the long-term consequences that you have performed by this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — There’s a fourth company I want to refer to, 
Mr. Speaker, in the potash industry — the Allan Potash Mine 
Operators Limited. This mine was owned 40 per cent by 
Texasgulf Potash Company, 40 per cent by U.S. Borax and 
Chemical Corporation, and 20 per cent by Swift Canadian 
Company Ltd., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Swift and 
Company of the United States — totally owned by American 
interests, Mr. Speaker. Ore reserves were estimated in 1971 to be 
50 million tons proven, grading at 26 per cent of K2O; 50 million 
tons probable, and 500 million tons inferred — 500 million tons 
inferred. Texasgulf acquired its 40 per cent share in 1969 from 
Homestake Mining Company. 
 
Now I want to go on to talk about the companies that own Allan 
Potash Mine Operators Limited. The one company I mentioned 
was Swift Canadian Company. Now this is a Canadian 
incorporated company which is — get this — a hundred per cent 
owned by Swift and Company, which is held by Esmark 
Incorporated, a large multinational operation in food, chemical, 
and industrial products, petroleum, and insurance. No small 
player in the corporate elite. 
 
Swift Chemicals Company, held by another company, 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1121 
 

Estech, Inc., which is also held by Esmark Inc., purchases all of 
Swift Canadian Company Limited’s potash production from 
Allan. Swift produces phosphate rock and fertilizer products in 
the United States and retails fertilizer in other products. I mean, 
this the big, big corporate elite, Mr. Speaker. We’re not talking 
about any small group of companies here. 
 
The other company that I mentioned in regard to the Allan Potash 
Mine Operators Limited, with that particular company, was 
Texasgulf Incorporated. Texasgulf Incorporated owns 100 per 
cent of Texasgulf Potash Company. The parent company is the 
world’s leading producer of sulphur and has interests in mining 
operations, many of them in Canada, and also has some oil and 
gas interests, which is not surprising. 
 
The company has a gross revenue figure approaching . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have leave to 
introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1245) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and to all members of the legislature a group of students in the 
Speaker’s gallery. These are 23 grade 6 students, Mr. Speaker, 
from Arcola School in Arcola, Saskatchewan. With them today, 
Mr. Speaker, are their teacher Ms. Bernadine Armstrong; 
chaperons Linda Pow, Lucille Weber, Maureen George, and 
Karen Riddell, and as well their bus driver, Jim Pow. I invite all 
members, Mr. Speaker, to offer a warm welcome to these 
students from Arcola. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 (continued) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The company Texasgulf Incorporated has, in 
the year that the article that we researched was done, had gross 
revenues of approximately $300 million and assets after 
depreciation and amortization of some $670 million, Mr. 
Speaker. This is the second company that makes up Allan Potash 
Mine Operators Limited. 
 
The third company I mentioned, U.S. Borax and Chemical 
Corporation, is a subsidiary of Rio Tinto Zinc Corporation 
Limited, a world-wide British mining company, which also 
controls Rio-Algom Mines in Canada. U.S. Borax sold its old 
New Mexico mine, which was closed in the ’67-68, in that 
period, to Continental American Royalty (U.S. Potash and 
Chemical). This mine was since sold to Teledyne Corporation 
and then to Mississippi Chemical Corporation, which is trying to 
develop more economic means of mining low grade ores.

And Mississippi has made numerous announcements about its 
plans to build a refinery, but while there are some doubts about 
its future, it must be considered as part of the potash picture. 
They’re certainly involved in mining and they are involved in 
potash. And certainly we wish them well in terms of doing a 
better job of extracting low-grade ores. So that gives you a 
picture of those three companies, of what the Allan Potash Mine 
Operators Limited consists of. 
 
I think that we’d now want to look at the Duval Corporation of 
Canada. This is a Texas incorporated company which is owned 
by Duval Corporation, which in turn is owned by Pennzoil 
Company, a multinational national resource company 
incorporated in Delaware, with head office in Houston, Texas. It 
has extensive interests in oil and gas. Its total revenues in 1971 
were $736 million, while its total assets after depreciation and 
other charges were $1.5 billion. 
 
And now we’re not talking about a small player here again. 
We’re talking with big financial backing of multinational 
companies when we talk about who the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan has been competing with throughout the world 
and, I maintain, since ’76 been competing very well until 
Childers and others were brought in from International Minerals 
to run the potash corporation into the ground. 
 
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, with Saskatchewan 
people at its head office doing its marketing, can compete with 
these large multinationals and should be allowed to compete in 
the future. We are Saskatchewan. We’re proud of what we’re 
able to do. We don’t need Americans, and we don’t need other 
people to run our business. We’ve run it in the past, and we can 
run it in the future. And I think this government should be 
ashamed of denying success for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now Duval Corporation, Mr. Speaker, it 
operates a potash mine at Carlsbad, which had a capacity of 
315,000 tons per year of K2O and is primarily a sulphate 
operation. Now it’s just part of their multinational connection. 
 
The sixth company I want to mention in the scheme of the potash 
industry on the principle of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the Alwinsal 
Potash of Canada Limited. This is owned, not by Americans this 
time, Mr. Speaker, but it’s owned by French and German potash 
interests. The mine construction commenced in early 1964 and 
was completed in late 1968. 
 
Now again you can see — four years to construct a potash mine. 
That gives you some idea of the complexity and the cost and the 
work that has to go into the construction of a potash mine. 
Substantial investment, substantial work, work for Saskatchewan 
people, and should be to the benefit of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now a sales subsidiary of Alwinsal Potash of Canada Limited, 
the Potash Company of Canada Limited, markets the potash in 
the mid-western United States and Canada. This sales company 
was originally incorporated in 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1122 
 

Canada as the sales outlet for European potash to exports to 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another company that I want to talk about is 
Cominco Limited. Now Cominco is a large Canadian mining 
company controlled by Canadian Pacific Investments. Not a 
Saskatchewan company, Mr. Speaker, but nevertheless, a 
American company. 
 
And Canadian Pacific Investments is truly an international 
company. It is one of the largest chemical and fertilizer 
manufacturers in North America, possibly throughout the world. 
In addition to potash, it mines sulphate rock in the United States 
and produces a wide range of nitrogen and phosphate fertilizers. 
 
Potash production is marketed in the United States through an 
American subsidiary, Cominco American Inc. The mine shaft 
was flooded at their mine in October of ’70, and rehabilitation 
work was completed there in late 1972 at a cost of about $9 
million, which may be recoverable from the original contractor, 
I guess, but that’s a long, tedious process. 
 
Now that tells you something about the danger, again, of mines, 
Mr. Speaker — the complexity, the large amount of work that 
has to go into them, and we feel that the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan has been leaders in the potash industry for 
promoting health and safety, for looking at new technology and 
providing a return to Saskatchewan people by Saskatchewan 
people and for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now provision was made in the construction of the mine and the 
plant for doubling the capacity, should the market conditions 
warrant it. And so there’s a good deal of planning has to go into 
the potash industry in Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, while 
the mine was flooded, arrangements were done to serve Cominco 
potash markets from the production at the Duval mine. So you 
can see how some of these mines in the past, before the potash 
corporation came into being, were willing to co-operate together 
to meet production levels when they couldn’t meet their 
commitments, or to share production levels when they couldn’t 
meet their commitments. 
 
The only thing that the private mines didn’t share in was 
contributions to the province of Saskatchewan in proportion to 
the returns they were getting from the resources that were owned 
by Saskatchewan people. They shared with each other, but they 
didn’t want to share with the people in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now an eighth company that is a player is Central Canada Potash 
Limited. This is an Ontario incorporated company, owned 51 per 
cent by Noranda Mines Limited and 49 per cent by C.F. 
Industries Inc. of — where? — Chicago. C.F. Industries is owned 
by about 20 farm and co-operative organizations, including one 
in Ontario, and markets about 25 per cent of United States potash 
consumption. C.F. Industries markets more of Central Canada’s 
production. 
 
And the mine was developed by Noranda and transferred after 
completion to the newly formed Central Canada Potash. Noranda 
then sold a 49 per cent interest in

Central Canada Potash to C.F. Industries. Share capitalization of 
Central Canada Potash is $24 million, Mr. Speaker, and the 
remainder of the $89,900,000 cost was covered by $65,900,000 
of mortgage income bonds held by Noranda. Noranda Sales 
Corporation markets this portion of the production not taken by 
C.F. Industries. 
 
The indicated reserves at the time of this research were over 600 
million tons averaging 28.2 per cent C D220, of which one-third 
can be extracted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there’s another company that is not totally Canadian owned, 
it’s 49 per cent American owned. It was 51 per cent Canadian, 
but not Saskatchewan owned, Mr. Speaker, not Saskatchewan 
owned like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And they 
can’t use the argument of empty holes in the ground any more 
because we know it’s fact. The potash corporation, 100 per cent 
owned by the people of Saskatchewan, made a profit for people 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the other argument that destroys their investment of empty 
holes in the ground is the fact that you could not get investors, 
either the 45 per cent foreign or the 55 per cent Canadian, you 
could not get those investors to invest in something that would 
not give them a return. So hog-wash to the government’s 
argument of empty holes in the ground and of bad investment. 
The investment in the potash corporation was good in 1976 and 
it’s a good investment for the people of Saskatchewan in 1988. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I want to talk about another company, Mr. 
Speaker, Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting. They have complete 
ownership of a Sylvite mine at Rocanville, and this mine is the 
principal supplier of potash for a fertilizer company, Terra 
Chemicals International Inc., located where? In Sioux City, 
Iowa. Terra also acts as the U.S. sales agent for Sylvite. 
 
The Anglo-American Corporation of South Africa through its 
Canadian subsidiary, Ammercosa Investments Ltd., owns 38.5 
per cent of Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Co. Hudson Bay 
has a 51 per cent interest in Terra Chemicals. Proven reserves of 
potash ore were 350 million tons at December 31, 1974. 
 
And the final company I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, while I 
still have a few moments in the debate is Amax Potash Limited. 
This company is 100 per cent owned by American Metal Climax 
Inc. of New York, a huge multinational mining and industrial 
firm which owns potash mines at Carlsbad, or a potash mine I 
should say, at Carlsbad, New Mexico. 
 
Its sales are about 800 million and its total assets after 
depreciation are about $1.25 billion. It purchased ore reserves 
from IMC and then contracted IMC for mining of the ore. It’s 
reduced production at Carlsbad on completion of this 
arrangement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in 1976 all of 
Saskatchewan’s potash industry was owned outside of the 
province and most of it, in fact 85 per cent was owned outside 
Canada. Our government tried to work with the 
  



 
May 12, 1989 

 

1123 
 

industry; the industry didn’t want to work with us. That’s why 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in 1976 
came into place by a Bill before this legislature. 
 
People were told that New Democrats would bring in such a Bill. 
The Bill appeared; there was debate; it proved good for 
Saskatchewan people; and this Bill to dismantle the potash 
corporation to give it to foreign interests will prove to be a 
disaster for people in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s an 
example of nerdonomics at its best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Being 1 o’clock, this Assembly stands 
adjourned until 2 p.m. on Monday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 
 


