


















































March 9, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 9, 1989 
 

7 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some 15 grade 2 and 3 students in the 
Speaker’s gallery who are from St. Timothy and MacNeill 
schools here in Regina. They are accompanied by teacher Jim 
McLeod, as well as chaperons Carol Schlademann, Trudy Folk, 
and Sandra Yungwirth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students are here to take part in an initiative 
relative to reading, entitled “Reading in the Rotunda,” and I’ll 
be meeting with them after question period this afternoon to 
read to them in the rotunda and as well to have some 
refreshments with them after that. 
 
So I’d ask them to be recognized and for all members of the 
Assembly to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
introduce through you, and to the House, some 20 grade 8 
students from Quill Lake High School. They’re accompanied by 
their teachers, Mrs. Joan Krienke, Mr. Pat Orobko, and Mr. 
Mark Anderson, and their bus driver, Eugene Horbach. 
 
I want to ask all members to join with me in extending a warm 
welcome to the students. I likewise will be meeting with you at 
3 o’clock for pictures and subsequently in room 214 for drinks. 
I wish you a safe return to Quill Lakes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to 
introduce to you and to this House a number of farmers, about 
40 farmers who have come in today, farmers who are concerned 
about the economy of Saskatchewan as it relates to agriculture 
in particular, concerned about the federal drought program and 
its effects. We will be meeting with them later this day, and I 
hope that they enjoy the proceedings here today. I’d like all 
members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Assistance Payments to Farmers 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this first question of this sitting of this session is 
directed to the Premier, who also happens to be the Minister of 
Agriculture, and it pertains to the question of the drought 
payments in agriculture and the fact that the Speech from the 
Throne yesterday was stone silent. In fact one might argue that 
the silence was deafening with  

respect to the drought payments under the federal-provincial 
program. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, in light of the fact 
that before the federal election you and your federal 
counterparts were promising the farmers of this province a 
payment in the order of 40 to $45 per acre, and now it seems 
like we’re going to be at $12 per acre or less, how in the world 
can you explain this breach of trust, this break of a major 
promise? How is it that you can explain this delay and this 
drastic reduction in much needed drought relief? It is because 
your government is so preoccupied with privatization that you 
have no time for the farmers of this province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 
member, I think everybody in Saskatchewan would like to see 
more money faster with respect to the drought program. I have 
personally discussed it with several cabinet ministers at the 
national level, and the premiers met with the Prime Minister 
just last week. And as a result of all the western premiers 
bringing that information to bear, I can’t, and will not, speak for 
the federal government. It’s their program. They said that they 
would be delivering $40 an acre, Mr. Speaker, and I have 
encouraged them to make the payments as quickly as possible 
and as large as possible, Mr. Speaker. They have informed me 
that they are going to be giving the payments as outlined at 12 
and 7, and final payments to come in in June or July. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see more, faster, but I am not 
the federal Minister of Agriculture, and I’m not the Prime 
Minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I must say, with the greatest of respect to the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan, that that is probably one of the 
lamest answers I’ve ever heard from any Premier on this 
important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I have to tell you, Mr. Premier, that 
promises of meetings and more meetings, statements wishing 
that your federal counterpart, Mr. Mulroney, would give you 
more help, is not going to be enough. 
 
My question to you is this: why was it that both you, as the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and the Minister of 
Agriculture, and the federal counterpart, Mr. Mayer, and the 
Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Mulroney, were able to 
announce with certainty $45 per acre prior to the federal 
election and now are reducing it to $12 per acre after the 
election? Isn’t that a breach of trust and a betrayal? Why don’t 
you ‘fess up and admit to that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 
knows that the only question here is a matter of how fast . . . 
We will see if they deliver the $40 an acre, and you and I will 
be able to watch. They said there will  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

8 
 

be an initial payment and a final payment, and they said that at 
the outset. 
 
Now there’s an initial payment and a final payment, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll see, and you may be right. I don’t believe 
that you will be, but we’ll see that it will be in $40 an acre for 
maximum, and then some place down, depending on how much 
drought there is. So there’s an initial payment and then there’s a 
final payment. 
 
I’d like to see the initial payment bigger and larger and faster. 
But they’ve decided what it is. They’ve decided. I didn’t; they 
did. Now I would like to see the final payment come as quickly 
as possible. We will see. So I guess you and I will stand here in 
June or July and we’ll find out if in fact they made the $40 an 
acre or whether they didn’t. I’m going to hold them to it, and 
I’m sure you will. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to 
the Premier. Is the Premier telling this House that in spite of all 
of these trips that he makes to Ottawa to speak to his good pal 
Brian Mulroney, in spite of all the statements that he makes 
about how close his connection is with respect to Mr. Mulroney 
on behalf of the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, are 
you trying to tell this House that you yourself don’t know the 
size of the final payment, or when it’s going to be made? 
 
Look, the farmers of Saskatchewan are making plans now for 
seeding. They’ve got all kinds of debt obligations. Can you not 
tell this House what the final payment is going to be made, or 
are you taking the position that Mr. Mulroney simply doesn’t 
trust you and doesn’t take you into his confidence? Is that the 
situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government said 
that there would be a payment of $40 in two instalments, and 
I’m going to hold them to it. They said there’ll be an initial 
payment and a final payment. Now we’ll see if they stay with it. 
I’m going to hold them to it. I know every farmer in 
Saskatchewan and people across western Canada will. They 
make their financial decisions, and they set their own budget. I 
can’t do that. They said it would be $40 an acre in two 
payments, initial payment and a final payment. We’ll see, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Hon. Premier. This is a new question, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
represents to the House at this stage in the game that he 
pretends he’s like the piano player that’s caught in a house of ill 
repute. He says he doesn’t know what was going on upstairs. 
That’s basically what he’s saying. He is saying that he is totally 
innocent, totally innocent of what the federal government is 
planning with respect to the payments for the rural farmers and 
the farmers of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask the Premier this: can you tell us whether or not you have 
made any written submissions to the Prime Minister and to the 
federal Minister of Agriculture as to the final payments to make 
sure that you’re going to hold them to that $40 per acre, and if 
you have so, will you undertake to table them today before 
question period is over? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says first 
that I don’t have any stroke with the federal government, and 
then he asked me if I’d made any submissions to them, as if it 
would make any difference. Well I don’t . . . I mean, what’s his 
point. Look, I am in constant conversation with the federal 
government on drought, on sharing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Premier’s having difficulty 
answering the question . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The difficulty is due to constant interruptions. 
I would ask the hon. members to please allow the Premier to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the co-operation from the members opposite. Let me 
just say to the members opposite — as they know, since 1984 
with the election of the new government, we have lobbied 
Ottawa for money for farmers every month, every year, and 
literally billions of dollars have been delivered, not only across 
the Prairies but even to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the opposition says they’d like more, faster. Wouldn’t we 
all? They say that, look it, this isn’t good enough because 
there’s an interim payment and a final payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m saying to the federal government — and I did 
prior to this election, the 1988 election — we need money and 
we need drought assistance. And they came up and said they 
would deliver. Now we’ll hold them to that. 
 
I talk to them about interest rates on practically a daily basis. I 
talk to them about drought payments, I talk to them about 
stabilization, I talk to them about international marketing, about 
trade, all of the time. And much of the influence comes from 
this province, Mr. Speaker. But I am not the Prime Minister, 
and I am not the federal Minister of Finance, nor the federal 
Minister of Agriculture, but much of what they can do and has 
been initiated over the last four years came from Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. It is really 
amazing to see all the so-called rural MLAs — back-benchers, 
the members of the Hallelujah Chorus — giving the loudest 
applause to the answer that says: I talk, I continue to talk, and I 
promise I will talk in the future. 
 
We know the Premier is a great talker and a smooth talker. We 
know that’s the only thing he’s got to offer the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. I want to ask . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I realize that the members are enthusiastic 
after coming back. Unfortunately now, the  



 
March 9, 1989 

9 
 

Leader of the Opposition is having the same difficulty. I ask for 
the same co-operation. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is 
this: before the federal election, you and the Prime Minister 
represented to the people of Saskatchewan that the 
federal-provincial program on drought relief was agreed upon; 
namely, that there was going to be money from the provincial 
purse and money from the federal purse to result in 
approximately 40 to $45 per acre in much needed drought 
relief. That’s the position. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: has the provincial government 
found the money to “pony up” its share to that drought payment 
program in order to ensure the farmers of Saskatchewan getting 
that $45 per acre, or are you holding it back and spending it on 
privatization schemes and other wasteful programs of your 
administration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m not sure if the Leader of the 
Opposition wants Saskatchewan to pay the federal 
government’s share, whether he’s asking us to bail out the 
federal government. I don’t think he’d want the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan to take more than their fair share of any kind of 
program. We have cost-shared programs before. We’ve 
delivered in terms of drought, in terms of interest rate 
protection, in terms of several programs — billions of dollars, 
most of it coming from the federal government. You know my 
position. I want to see most of the money come from the federal 
government. They have more money than Saskatchewan does. 
 
With respect to privatization and public participation, it makes 
us money. If you want money for health and education, as 
you’ll see in our upcoming budget, you’ll see it as the result of 
us replacing high interest rates internationally, so that we get 
the money from the people. And that makes us money, so we 
have money for agriculture, a brand-new agricultural college — 
a $100 million agricultural college — a $100 million 
agricultural college because we can finance it and afford it, Mr. 
Speaker, let alone federal money that comes in here as the result 
of us asking for it and having had it delivered to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, look, the farmers of Saskatchewan know that 
you’re hooked on this one. They’re having a little bit of 
difficulty reeling you in to give the truthful and proper answers 
to this question. 
 
The issue is not whether or not your government bails out 
Ottawa. The issue is, are you going to help out the family 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. The issue is not some 
intergovernmental dispute. The issue is, did you or did you not 
have an agreement before the federal election to guarantee that 
$45 per acre. I want a yes or no to that question, and I want a 
copy of that agreement tabled, and I want to know why the 
agreement was not honoured and is not being honoured by your 
government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I say as succinctly as I can 
to the hon. member, we have had programs delivered to 
Saskatchewan from the federal government — some entirely by 
the feds, some cost shared — and we will continue to deliver 
programs like that. 
 
I don’t want to pay any more than our fair share. If you’re 
asking me to bail out the federal government and put more 
Saskatchewan money into a federal program, I’m not going to 
do that. We will participate and we will be there, and the federal 
government knows that. 
 
Now if you want more money faster, I agree with you. I’d like 
to have more and faster because we need it here. But I am not 
going to take the Saskatchewan taxpayer and bail out the federal 
government, and I don’t think you’d want that to happen. Now 
if you’re saying that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’d be 
surprised. I don’t think farmers have extra money to be bailing 
out the federal government. We want them to pay because they 
have more money and it was their program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to hold fast. We’ll be there, as we 
have in the past in agriculture, as we will in the future, because 
never before in the history of Saskatchewan have you seen 
more defence and more dollars, and more talking and dollars in 
agriculture than in this administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to insist that the 
Premier give us a straightforward answer on this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I’m going to insist that the Premier tell 
us now, yes or no, whether or not prior to the federal election he 
and Mr. Mulroney had an agreement as to the amount of money 
that the province would “pony up” into this cost share program 
for drought relief. Can you give me a simple yes or no to that? 
And if the answer is yes, I want to have a copy of that 
agreement; and if the answer is no, then I want you to tell this 
legislature and the farmers of this province why you betrayed 
them before the federal election if you didn’t have that 
agreement. I want those answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what we agreed was: it is a 
federal program and we would discuss the possibilities of some 
sort of joint administration and/or financing after the program is 
implemented. There it is. And that’s the same thing we did with 
the cattle program, and the same thing we did with the interest 
rate protection, and the same we’ve done with the last drought 
program. We administer it. In crop insurance, we administer it; 
the federal government comes up with the money. 
 
Now that’s been going on for a long time, and maybe we should 
send you the various kinds of programs and the  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

10 
 

ways that we administer them, Mr. Speaker. But we often 
cost-share them, and in many cases we do. Some cases they pay 
it all, some cases we pay part. And we’ve seen that before. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. I find 
the total lack of forthcoming response by the Premier to be 
disappointing, not only to this legislature — forget about this 
legislature — but to the farmers and the farm communities. 
Because what he’s saying in effect is, you know, we’ll buy a 
combine . . . I wonder if this is the way he operates? I’m going 
to buy a combine; we’ll worry about the price afterwards. Don’t 
worry about those little details. 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Premier. I’ve received 
correspondence, I’ve seen some letters, Mr. Premier, from a 
farmer in Lake Alma, Mr. Melvin Schad. Mr. Schad is quoted 
as saying this about the drought payment . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and the Minister of Health should pay some 
attention to this. He’s a well known agricultural expert, no 
doubt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what this farmer, Mr. Schad, said. He said, 
“You hear all this malarkey about what they’ll pay. Then they 
chisel it down to nothing,” is what Mr. Schad said, talking 
about the drought payment announced. They chisel it down to 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is: how in the world are you 
going to explain this one away to Mr. Schad and the hundreds 
of others, the thousands of other farmers who depended upon 
your commitment on the drought payment? How are you going 
to explain this away without telling them that what you’re really 
doing is you’re wasting money to your friends in big business 
and selling off the province of Saskatchewan to privatization? 
How do you sell that to Mr. Schad? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said to the hon. 
member, we’ll see, and we’ll hold it to you. We’ll see if the 
payments are made, Mr. Speaker. When the payments don’t 
come, or they’re not here fast enough, then the opposition can 
say, well I’d like to see more, faster. Well that’s not much 
imagination in a question period, not very much at all. All right. 
 
If we get into the whole world of big business, and if the Leader 
of the Opposition wants to get into it, about farmers, okay, I can 
talk about all the people that are doing businesses with banks on 
farmers. We want to get into all that, and who’s helping the 
farmers. Okay, you want get into it lock, stock and barrel, the 
whole thing . . . 
 
We want more money, faster, for farmers, as you do, so we will 
be watching with you, and we know that billions of dollars have 
come into Saskatchewan because we’ve worked with the federal 
government, and we expect it to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Premier . . . I have a final question, Mr. 
Speaker, for the Premier on this topic. It’s going to be  

straightforward and simple. Do you have a commitment, yes or 
no, from the federal government? Do you have a commitment 
for that payment of $45 per acre on the drought payment and, if 
so, when will it be made? Do you have that commitment that 
you promised the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government and 
the Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve just gone through a 
federal election and the federal government was re-elected, and 
what they said is they’re going to make a payment of $40 an 
acre, and they’re going to do it with an initial payment and a 
final payment. I’m going to hold them to it. They made that a 
public statement across Canada and across western Canada. 
Every farmer in this province will hold him to it. Let’s see if 
they deliver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Long-Term Stability for Farmers 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, you were saying, along with your federal 
counterparts, that farmers were going to have cash in their 
hands before spring seeding and, despite what you say, you 
were indicating that they were going to get 45 bucks an acre so 
they could seed. Now we see the program tinkered with and 
changed. Now you’re saying that, better late than never, at least 
you know they’re going to get something. 
 
Just in case, Mr. Premier, that you have been so far out of touch 
with Saskatchewan farmers, I’ll tell you that it costs $20, 25, up 
to $50 an acre to seed. If I’m getting paid $7 or $12 dollars on 
500 acres, Mr. Premier, my question to you is how many acres 
do you think farmers can seed on that amount and what are you, 
Mr. Premier, going to do with those farmers who lose their land 
because you and your federal counterparts won’t come through 
with the program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the hon. member 
say those very same words in Willow Bunch not too long ago, 
and he was going on that there was no help for agriculture. And 
you know what? People didn’t believe that. They know that we 
have backed up agriculture. I believe I’m the first Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan to take on the responsibility so that 
we can put more money into agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now I’ll bring the list with me for the 
next question period so I can go down through all the things 
that we have delivered to agriculture, and we’re going to 
continue to deliver. 
 
  



 
March 9, 1989 

11 
 

So I’ll just say to the hon. member, we want $40 an acre. We 
need even more than that to help farmers, and we want it fast 
and we want it as quickly as possible. The federal government 
has gone and said there’s going to be two payments — an initial 
and a final. I’d like to see more in the initial. They said it will 
be $40. We’re going to hold them to that, or 40, 45, depending 
on the drought area. We’re going to hold them to that. 
 
And we will be there for farmers. And as you’ve seen in the 
Speech from the Throne, and you’ll see in the budget, 
additional help for agriculture, for farmers, helping them 
finance the home quarter, and helping them operate, and several 
new programs as a result of the concerns that have been 
expressed and expressed again in favour of our administration. 
And I think the new member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is 
living proof of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You were there. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
was saying it in Willow Bunch, and we won Willow Bunch. I 
tell you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I tell you, Mr. Minister, I’m certain that people 
of that constituency now know exactly what they got out of that 
by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — During the last federal election we put forward 
a proposal that would have gone a long way to provide stability 
for debt-ridden farmers in Saskatchewan — income stability 
and debt stability. In light of all the confusion with the western 
grain stabilization, with all the confusion with the drought, with 
all the double talk that you and the federal government is 
putting forward, my question, Mr. Minister, is this: have you 
made representation to the federal government giving them an 
outline for a long-term, stable plan in agriculture? And if you 
have, Mr. Minister, will you tell us what that is today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now you’re talking. I commend the hon. 
member for a reasonable question about a long-term program to 
deal with disasters in agriculture. That’s exactly what we’ve 
been doing. 
 
The Minister of Finance, for example, is in Ottawa today 
discussing agriculture, finance, interest rates. And part of that 
package is looking at long-run crop insurance, drought relief, 
safety net mechanisms for agriculture that can be put in place so 
that farmers understand them without changes, without any 
kinds of new programs or ad hocery. 
 
That’s what every Minister of Agriculture is doing. That’s what 
the federal government has asked us to do, and that’s what the 
farm groups have been asked to do. So they’ve brought together 
all their ideas now, and that’s precisely, Mr. Speaker, what 
we’re doing and why we’re  

discussing it with the federal government. 
 
I don’t think it’s time for us just to say we got a whole bunch of 
extra money to bail out the federal government in agriculture 
programs. I think it’s a good idea we talk just about what you 
said — long-run programs that can be cost-shared in three ways 
between farmers, provincial government, and the federal 
government, to make sure we’ve got the kind of insurance and 
crop insurance . . . In fact, the minister of crop insurance has 
just announced significant changes with respect to feed 
programs, with respect to the livestock industry, Mr. Speaker, 
and with respect to forage, which will help make sure that an 
awful lot of farmers are better protected, better protected than 
they’ve ever been in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Debt Crisis and Drought Payments 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question is to the Premier. It deals 
with the farm crisis, dealing with the debt problem and the lack 
of a drought payment. Mr. Premier, you have oft said that you 
would back the farmers to the wall, that you’d open the treasury 
to them in the time of need. Now many farmers are asking and 
saying that you’re going to the wrong wall. They didn’t expect 
you to go to the wall of China. But here we are today asking for 
a drought payment that you promised during the election. I want 
to ask whether $1 from the provincial treasury is going into this 
payment. Is there $1 that you’re putting in to help with this 
drought program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have put dollars into 
past programs and, Mr. Speaker, that’s under consideration 
now. I don’t want to be bailing out the federal government 
unless that’s what you’re . . . Mr. Speaker, if you . . . I’m not 
sure the hon. member knows. And he mentions China, where 
we sell a good part of our wheat and a lot of our wheat. And 
one of the first people to go there was Mr. Alvin Hamilton and 
make those wheat sales. And every time we go back and we sell 
more wheat, Mr. Speaker, at higher prices. The Chinese are 
saying, yes, we like Canadian wheat, and that’s the reason we 
go to China, Mr. Speaker. And the NDP doesn’t like 
international marketing. They’re not interested in international 
trade, Mr. Speaker. Let me say, he mentions China; I can 
respond to China. We sell wheat in China, Mr. Speaker. You’re 
going to see more sales at higher prices as a result of me being 
in China this last fall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Federal Drought Assistance Program 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, pursuant to Rule 39 in this Assembly on a matter of 
urgent and pressing necessity. The issue is the federal 
government’s drought program which has turned out to be a 
total disaster for Saskatchewan farmers. And this  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

12 
 

issue indeed, Mr. Speaker, is urgent and is pressing. 
 
During the federal election campaign the Mulroney government 
made grand promises about a drought aid that would be 
adequate, timely, and fair. These promises have been broken. 
Therefore, I seek leave of this Assembly to move a motion 
along the following lines: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Minister of 
Agriculture for their failure to ensure that the federal 
drought assistance program meets the needs of farmers 
and for their failure to ensure that the program be 
developed to meet the needs of our farm families in terms 
of timing, amount of payment and distribution of payment. 

 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to support this 
very urgent matter and join in this vote today. 
 
I move this, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from Quill 
Lakes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
have a number of routine motions that I’d like to pass, with 
leave and co-operation from the members opposite, if that could 
happen. 
 
I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, and with leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved by the 
Public Documents Committee be referred as tabled to the 
Standing Committee on Communication. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of the Report of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Library to the Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I move again, seconded by the member 
for Indian Head-Wolseley and with leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Communication. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal 
year ended March 31, 1988, be referred as tabled to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1988 be referred as 
tabled to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Annual Report and Financial Statements of 
Crown Corporations to Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley, with leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the annual reports and financial statements of the 
various Crown corporations and related agencies be 
referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Referral of By-laws of Professional Associations to Special 

Committee on Regulations 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the by-laws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto be referred as tabled to the Special 
Committee on Regulations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Granting Leave of Absence to Member for Canora 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the hon. member for 
Canora, Mr. Lorne Kopelchuk, from March 8 to March 18 
to attend on behalf of this Assembly, the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association Thirty-Eighth Seminar on 
Westminster Parliamentary Practice and Procedure. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
  



 
March 9, 1989 

13 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a tremendous honour to rise 
today for my maiden speech to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. I’m truly honoured to share that distinction with 
a most gracious and talented representative, Her Majesty, the 
Lieutenant Governor. And I’m sure you’ll agree with me, Mr. 
Speaker, when I say that Her Honour’s first presentation to this 
Assembly was one most fitting with the finest traditions of this 
place. I personally convey to Her Honour my congratulations 
on a job very well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, for me, this is an historic occasion 
in more than one way. It is my first opportunity to speak to this 
legislature. It is also, Mr. Speaker, the first time in history, the 
first time in history and in the history of this province, that a 
Progressive Conservative MLA for the constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has spoken to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I’m truly humbled at the trust my neighbours 
and friends have placed in me to represent their interests and the 
interests of their farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is a plan of the 
government for the coming session. The plan laid before us is 
clear, certain, and very impressive. This government is making 
change and it’s making progress. We are planning for the 
future. We can no longer live in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has a plan for the future. It has a 
vision, and it’s prepared to share that vision with the people of 
Saskatchewan. This government is an agent of change, and it’s 
a government of progress because it cares. It cares for our 
families, it cares for our farms, it cares for our homes, it cares 
for our environment, and it cares about our future. It truly cares, 
but it also acts. 
 
I wish to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I discovered the importance 
of that firsthand in the election I have just concluded. The 
member for Riversdale said it well, Mr. Speaker, when he said 
to my constituents, “Send them a message.” He went door to 
door amongst my neighbours and friends. “Send them a 
message,” he said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that my constituents took 
his advice and they sent a message. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — And I, Mr. Speaker, am proud to deliver that 
message here today. 
 
I will share with you, Mr. Speaker, the nature of the message 
from the folks of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. They said, you have 
a plan; you have to have a plan, and you have to have a plan if 
you want to represent us; you have to show us your plans, and 
you have to show us you care. They said, tell us what your 
vision is and let us make a  

judgement. They said, provide policy that addresses our needs; 
show us you care, and how you’ll care for us. 
 
And they said it in the loudest terms, Mr. Speaker. Tell us the 
truth, tell us the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. My 
constituents, and indeed the people of Saskatchewan are 
growing tired, very, very tired, of the unending assault of 
distortions and fear mongering. It happened in the free trade 
debate, and again in the by-election. 
 
And I say to the member from Riversdale, who is noticeably 
absent, I challenge him to come back to Rockglen . . . 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’m aware that the hon. 
member is giving his first speech in the House and he’s not 
expected to know all the rules. I’d just like to draw the 
following rule to his attention — that the absence of members is 
not permitted to be referred to by members in the House when 
they’re giving a speech. 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I will withdraw the remark. 
 
And I say to the member from Riversdale, I challenge him to 
come back to Rockglen and publicly debate with me the 
contents of his letter to my constituents. Tell us the truth. Tell 
us the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. 
 
I say to the Leader of the NDP, I’m willing to face him before 
the people I represent and have them be the judge. Is he 
prepared to stand before the people he wrote to and defend his 
actions? I think not, Mr. Speaker. I think not. But the invitation 
is open. 
 
This throne speech is exactly the kind of thing the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking for. It deals with the modern world, 
not the past. It deals with change; it deals with progress; and it 
shows how much the government really cares. 
 
It deals with health care and the ageing population. It deals with 
education and new technology. It deals with family support and 
children. It deals with seniors’ housing. It deals with the 
environment. It deals with the economy. It deals with 
agriculture; it deals with the problems of the drought. It deals 
with the future, Mr. Speaker, not the past. 
 
It addresses squarely the needs of our farm families and the 
families throughout this province, because this government 
truly cares. It not only cares, but it also acts. 
 
I want to touch with you for a moment on one aspect of this 
government’s policy that is extremely important to families in 
every town, city, village, hamlet, and farm. The policy is 
interest rate protection and the courageous stand that this 
government took, not only this year, not only last year, but in 
every year since year one of its mandate. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, this PC government, is no 
Johnny-come-lately on a vital issue of protection for the homes 
and families and farms and farm families that families have 
worked so hard to build for themselves. 
 
  



 
March 9, 1989 

14 
 

But you have to wonder at the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. You have to really wonder. He says he cares — he 
cares for the old, he cares for the sick, he cares for our farm 
families, he cares for the hungry, the poor. He says he cares. 
But does he? 
 
When that gentleman was the deputy premier and our Premier 
became the Leader of the PC Party — it’s in Hansard, Mr. 
Speaker — when the PC opposition was begging the member 
from Riversdale to give some help to the families of this 
province, the member from Riversdale ridiculed the idea of 
interest rate protection. This member who says he cares, 
ridiculed the idea of protecting our farms and farm families. 
 
I refer to you one example, Mr. Speaker, on December 9, 1981 
in Hansard. The PC leader was pleading with the government 
to bring forward a program to pay the difference between the 
drastic interest rates occurring under the NDP and some 
reasonable number such as 12 per cent. What was the response 
of the leader of the NDP? I quote, Mr. Speaker. When asking to 
bring in such a program, he said . . . and I repeat this. This is the 
same member who today says he cares; he cares so much. Do 
you know what the member said? We’re not going to allow that 
— we’re not going to allow that. Can you believe it? The 
member from Riversdale was not going to allow a program of 
interest rate protection. 
 
So the PCs said, if not, and if not that, then what is your 
solution? Give the people some help. And again the member 
from Riversdale had his flippant response. Again I quote. He 
said: 
 

My advice to the people of Saskatchewan is that they 
should try hard to continue their mortgage payments as 
best as they can and as best as they have done in the past. 
 

Make your mortgage payments as best as you can, he said. And 
he was told, Mr. Speaker, that people couldn’t make their 
payments — they couldn’t make their payments. As best as they 
could, they would. But they couldn’t. For Heaven’s sakes, Mr. 
Speaker, the rates were 20 and 21 per cent. And this man, who 
says he wants to lead the province, ridiculed that. He ridiculed 
that we should try to help Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan 
farm families, and the same families that today he cares so 
much about. 
 
What are his plans? The people have a right to know. Let’s see 
what saying one cares really means. If the member from 
Riversdale has had a change of heart about interest rates, then 
let him tell the people, and let’s know where he stands. Show us 
you care. We are used to changes of heart from the member 
from Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to delve into that a 
little bit more too, as it relates to the throne speech. 
 
This throne speech lays out the government’s plans for public 
participation, Mr. Speaker, and it sets out certain specific 
objectives, because this government cares. It has a plan for 
change and progress. This government is a government of the 
future and not of the past. 
 
I would like to read into the record some of the arguments  

for public participation, Mr. Speaker. The guiding principles of 
public participation are, quote: 
 

One, to provide a mechanism for all residents of 
Saskatchewan to invest in the province — to provide a 
mechanism for all residents of Saskatchewan to invest in 
the province. 
 
Secondly, to provide an alternate source of capital for 
major new investments in resource enterprises and 
industrial products — to provide an alternate source of 
capital for major new investments in resource enterprises 
and industrial projects. 
 
And thirdly, to reinforce the identification of a partnership 
between the government and the people of the province in 
the development of our economy — to reinforce the 
identification of a partnership between the government and 
the people of the province in the development of our 
economy. 
 

The document goes on, Mr. Speaker. It goes on. It goes on to 
say that public participation will mean, quote: 
 

A substantial sum of money could be raised. The 
government would be able to take advantage of large 
industrial projects if private infusion is substantial. The 
province could be in a better position to avoid long-term 
debt for the Consolidated Fund with a consequent 
reduction in interest costs (and so on, and so on). 
 

Now those are some pretty, pretty powerful arguments in favour 
of public participation, and they are arguments that I can 
certainly support. The document, Mr. Speaker, is dated January 
14, 1982, and among the many NDP notables, the name of the 
member for Regina North East is prominent. 
 
I’m referring to the minutes of the Crown investments 
corporation, agenda item 6, decision — decision. Note that 
word, Mr. Speaker, decision — not discussion, not proposition, 
but decision. In 1982 the NDP decided — they didn’t just talk 
about it, they decided — to engage in a program of selling 
shares to the public, what they now refer to as privatization, but 
then called SHAR — share? — which stands for Saskatchewan 
Holding and Reinvestment. 
 
The decision also included a list of possible privatization 
targets, Mr. Speaker. And on that list we find the NDP were 
recommending the privatization of natural gas reserves. Imagine 
that, Mr. Speaker, imagine that. We’ve accepted their advice. 
 
They recommended selling shares also in the potash 
corporation, and we’ll be accepting their advice again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They listed PAPCO, Mr. Speaker, and as you know, we took 
their advice on that one too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — The NDP wanted to sell shares in Ipsco,  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

15 
 

Prairie Malt, SED Systems, the Cornwall Centre, and other 
companies, Mr. Speaker. They had a broad privatization 
agenda, and I say to the members opposite, you were right then 
and you’re wrong now — wrong again. 
 
This is a change of heart that is a mistaken one. Public 
participation is not a partisan issue; it’s not a question of one 
political party over another. It’s an idea that even socialist 
governments around the world are engaging in, and indeed, as 
we now clearly see, it’s a policy that the former NDP 
government embraced in a large and whole-hearted way. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you might say that once is a fluke, they 
didn’t really mean it. Well let me quote from another document, 
Mr. Speaker, preferred share certificate: 
 

The corporation has been involved in discussion with the 
Department of Finance regarding the possibility of issuing 
a debt security to allow the public to invest in the potash 
enterprise. 
 

I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the corporation was 
going to issue preferred shares to the potash enterprise, or in the 
potash enterprise, and this is from the minutes of SEDCO board 
of directors meeting, April 15, 1976. 
 
Well you might say that they had considered it and rejected it. 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you look at SEDCO’s December 6, 1979 
minutes — three years later — you will find that they not only 
did not reject it, but they indeed expanded it. From considering 
preferred shares in the potash corporation, they went to a 
broad-based issue called participating notes — participating 
notes. 
 
These participating notes, Mr. Speaker, would be issued for, 
and I quote, “targeted resource Crown corporations.” In their 
targeting, the NDP specified the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation). Under the heading of advantages, this is what the 
NDP document has to say: 
 

The money would be raised locally, and residents would 
be able to invest in Saskatchewan resource developments. 
 

I think I’ve heard that before. Well, they were right, Mr. 
Speaker, and for the following three years they fleshed out their 
plan, pulled it out of SEDCO, and decided to set up this thing 
called SHAR. And I remind you that the minutes of the meeting 
called the decision to privatize a decision — not a thought, not 
an idea, but a decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we hear the member from Riversdale saying 
such plans are directly from Margaret Thatcher. I pose the 
question: does he know this because that’s where they got their 
plans from? I really wonder. 
 
So what happened to give the Leader of the Opposition yet 
another change of heart, Mr. Speaker? When he was in power, 
he supported public participation; now he’s opposed. Again, I 
invite him to come to my constituency, to come to 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and debate these questions. Let’s tell 
the truth. Let’s tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth, 
and let’s let the people decide — let  

them decide again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech contains some extremely 
important commitments to the people of Saskatchewan, because 
this government truly cares, and it’s planning for the future. It 
cares about health and education, it cares about the poor, it 
cares about the sick and the aged. It truly cares, but it also acts. 
The community care program will benefit smaller centres 
throughout the province, and I am hopeful that the program will 
have a full and positive impact in the communities I represent. I 
care about those communities, I care about my neighbours, and 
we have a plan to show them how much we care. 
 
I would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government, far from closing down hospitals, is building more 
than ever, and I’m grateful, I’m very grateful to this 
government and the Minister of Health for the recent 
announcement of an integrated facility for Lafleche. No 
hospitals have closed, not one, and one community is already 
planning, it’s planning a new facility for the future. We care, 
but we also act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — This government’s record on health care is a 
positive one, and it’s a record that this throne speech makes 
clear we will continue to expand. I cannot question the NDP’s 
policy on health care, Mr. Speaker, because no one really 
knows what that policy is. 
 
I listened to the hon. member’s remarks last night, and I 
congratulate him on recognizing the International Women’s 
Day. The PC government not only recognizes it, but also 
showed it cared. It cares, it cares for the women of 
Saskatchewan. A new screening program for early detection of 
breast cancer will be designed. This government truly cares, but 
it also acts. 
 
And frankly, that is not the only area, that’s not the only area 
that leaves the people of this province curious and curious about 
the member from Riversdale and his idea about leadership. I 
represent rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I represent rural 
Saskatchewan, and the many families that depend on ranching 
and farming for their well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale refuses, he 
absolutely refuses to bring forward any policy on agriculture. 
He has had time; he’s had lots of time. He has had all kinds of 
advice and all kinds of study. He says he cares. He says he 
really cares, but what does he offer, Mr. Speaker? What does he 
offer? He still refuses to tell the people what he might do. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I understand that it’s the job of 
opposition to criticize, and it’s the job of opposition to oppose. I 
understand criticism, and I expect that criticism, and I hope 
fervently for solid, productive criticism. But a person who has 
pretensions of becoming a premier surely has an obligation to 
tell us what he would replace the programs he opposes with. If 
he cares, he should. The people can’t wait. We know that. Yet 
the opposition still says he cares. He says he cares, but does he? 
 
He doesn’t like our interest rate protection program for  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

16 
 

families. Fair enough, Mr. Speaker. So what does he propose 
instead? Yell at Ottawa? He can yell at Ottawa until the 
chickens come home to roost, and all the while people will be 
losing their homes and their farms. These same families who 
need help need more than talk and sympathy from one who 
pretends to care. They need action. 
 
(1500) 
 
We protect families by putting a nine and three-quarters ceiling 
on mortgage payments, and the Leader of the Opposition 
suggests yelling at Ottawa is more effective. The member from 
Riversdale opposes welfare reform, which the throne speech 
indicates will be expanded and improved, yet he still has the 
nerve enough to say that he cares. 
 
Well it’s acceptable for him not to like it. So what would he do 
instead? Simply giving more money is not a policy; it’s a 
cop-out from having to deal with the problem. The Leader of 
the NDP says he’s changed his mind about everything from 
public participation to Meech Lake. Fine and good, but what are 
the alternatives? You watch, Mr. Speaker, the voting pattern of 
the NDP on my motion. 
 
The throne speech proposes to increase the number of nurses in 
Saskatchewan. It proposes to increase the number of nurses in 
Saskatchewan. It proposes to bring university-level education to 
my constituents in their own homes. It proposes to make a 
serious frontal assault on the tragedy of illiteracy and the 
tragedy of students dropping out of school. It proposes, Mr. 
Speaker, to bring forward a thoughtful agenda of legislation for 
families in Saskatchewan, including our most worthy members 
of society, children without parents. 
 
And how do you think the member from Riversdale is going to 
vote on this throne speech? He’s going to vote against those 
children, Mr. Speaker. He’s going to vote against the nurses, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s going to vote against the attack on illiteracy, 
against higher education for rural Saskatchewan, against 
protection for the mentally disabled, against everything, Mr. 
Speaker, against everything — the people that he says he cares 
for. He’s going to vote no, and he will not suggest one positive 
alternative. Yet he says he cares. And by his action he’s voting 
against the people of Saskatchewan and against the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sworn to defending the interests of 
those people, and with the formal motion I’m making today, 
I’m really telling the Leader of the Opposition that he cannot 
say no to our people, that we are saying no to him, just as the 
people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said no in December. 
 
Listen to his speech, Mr. Speaker, examine it carefully to see if 
there is one policy suggestion, one specific thing, even a 
general idea of what he suggests for policy and all the areas he 
will be voting no on. Don’t hold your breath. Please don’t hold 
your breath, Mr. Speaker, while you listen. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud indeed to stand before you today. 
And I must turn my attention for a moment to the  

many people whom I owe thanks. I want to say on the record I 
am very grateful indeed to the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for their support and their trust. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I’m grateful, Mr. Speaker, to those intrepid 
souls who worked so hard to see this day come true. I’m 
grateful to my colleagues in the House for their tremendous 
support, their tremendous support and effort that they put forth 
on my behalf, and to the members opposite for their efforts in 
the political process. And I’m grateful, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Leader of the Opposition. I’m grateful to the Leader of 
Opposition for the letter he sent out to each voter in my 
constituency, and I invite him to send other letters just like it 
any other time he pleases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I’m also grateful, Mr. Speaker, to Her Honour, 
the Lieutenant Governor, for her fine address to this body. And 
from that gratitude and in support of my leader, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, I therefore move, seconded by the member from 
Yorkton: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Sylvia O. Fedoruk. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like leave to 
introduce some guests, if I may. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my friend and 
colleague from the constituency of Shaunavon, I’d like to 
introduce some guests from Kincaid, Saskatchewan. The 
member is in Admiral today, opening the school over there, so 
he’s not going to be able to be here. So I’m going to join with 
you later on for pictures and refreshments. 
 
I want to welcome you here, and on behalf of all of the 
members here, we hope you have a real good day. And I hope 
the snow isn’t all melted by the time you get home. Thank you 
very much for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
  



 
March 9, 1989 

17 
 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let me 
say that as a member of this Legislative Assembly, I consider it 
a special honour to second the motion in support of the Speech 
from the Throne. And on behalf of the constituency of Yorkton, 
I have come here today to deliver a message of confidence in 
the excellent programs and policies contained in the throne 
speech, measures that will improve the quality of life and make 
Saskatchewan a shining example to the rest of Canada. 
 
As the MLA for Yorkton, I welcome the opportunity to speak in 
support of a government that has such a record of positive 
achievements in building our province, as we head towards the 
1990s and the next century. 
 
In keeping with certain traditions of this Legislative Assembly, 
I wish to pay respect to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, 
who came here yesterday for the first time to deliver the Speech 
from the Throne. I’m sure all members of this Assembly will 
agree that our province is proud to have such a distinguished 
representative of Her Majesty the Queen in our Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
As we begin this session, the third session of the twenty-first 
legislature, I wish to reaffirm my confidence in you, Mr. 
Speaker, and through you, welcome fellow members of the 
legislature as we commence the business of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is only natural, Mr. Speaker, that as a member I would want 
to take a few moments to pay special recognition to the 
constituency I represent and the fine people who live there. The 
constituency of Yorkton is one that I’m honoured to represent 
in this Legislative Assembly. The Yorkton constituency is a 
historic and dynamic part of the province. 
 
Thanks to the vision of our early pioneers who settled the 
Yorkton area back in the 1880s, the city of Yorkton and 
surrounding communities are today an important part of this 
province. Yorkton as a constituency is one of Saskatchewan’s 
leading economic areas. 
 
From the time that Yorkton became a village in 1894, then a 
town in the 1900s and a city in 1928, the people of my 
constituency have made a vital contribution to the development 
of our province. As MLA for Yorkton I am pleased to be 
working for the best interests of my constituency on the 
government side in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I deal with the actual content of the Speech 
from the Throne, I wish to single out for recognition the 
outstanding leadership of the Premier of our province, the hon. 
member for Estevan. The Premier of Saskatchewan exemplifies 
the meaning of leadership. The Premier is a man of solid 
principles, integrity, decency, and honour, who has the courage 
and conviction to do what is right for Saskatchewan. 
 
Times like these require strong leadership to build and meet the 
challenges of the future, the kind of outstanding leadership as 
found in the hon. member for Estevan. And with a respected 
captain at the helm of the ship of state, Saskatchewan is on the 
right course. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is part of 
the new generation of leadership in this province. He represents 
a generation that is proud to call this province home and wants 
to make a contribution in building this province for the future. 
His victory in the by-election in December symbolized the new 
generation of change that is taking place all over Saskatchewan. 
 
We heard a message from the people in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
that they wanted to be part of the innovative social and 
economic policies of this government, a Progressive 
Conservative government to promote solid growth and 
prosperity for the future. 
 
I commend the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for his 
maiden speech in support of the throne speech and I am proud 
to welcome him as a member of the Progressive Conservative 
caucus in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, next year, in 1990, our 
province will mark its 85th year as a province in Canada. 
Saskatchewan was founded with the courage and the vision and 
dedication of pioneers who believed they could make this 
special part of Canada a model to the rest of the nation. 
 
As we prepare for our 85th anniversary as a province, I am 
especially proud of the record of this government in its 
commitment to meeting the challenges to world-wide problems. 
We live in a rapidly changing world. Saskatchewan is a part of 
the global economy. As a province we must be at the cutting 
edge of change. We must manage that change. 
 
The first priority of this government is to maintain 
Saskatchewan’s reputation as a world leader in health care. 
Time and time again, and it bears repeating, the Premier of this 
province has given his word that health care is our number one 
social concern, and this government has kept its word on health 
care. 
 
History will show that Saskatchewan was the first province in 
Canada to establish medicare. The record will also show that 
since this government came into office, health care spending 
has increased to record highs. With the highest health care 
budgets in Saskatchewan history, the Progressive Conservative 
government’s commitment to health care is solid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is not going to rest on its laurels 
of the past; rather, we are going to strengthen our health care 
system. The Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health 
Care is going to lay the foundation to identify the changes 
needed for Saskatchewan’s future health care needs. And we 
plan to innovate health care services for the future. 
 
I wish to point out Saskatchewan’s new plastic health card that 
came into effect on the first day of this year. The new plastic 
health services card is the first of its kind in all of Canada. 
Health professionals say the card is another example of how 
Saskatchewan is a leader in health care concerns. 
 
  



 
March 9, 1989 

18 
 

The Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network, 
SCAN, as announced in the Speech from the Throne, will 
deliver distance learning technology to a wide segment of 
Saskatchewan’s population. 
 
In the last few years, there’s been a growing awareness with 
respect to education and, as a result of this public awareness, 
this government has sought ways to increase parent 
involvement in the school system. In this session, the Minister 
of Education will expand on policies designed to improve our 
education system. 
 
And it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that this government has, 
since coming into office, increased public spending for 
education. Government spending for education has increased in 
a very substantial way since 1982, and we believe education is 
the key to the door of economic opportunity. Ever since the 
days of the one-room school house, which I’m perfectly aware 
of, we in Saskatchewan have built a proud heritage in 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children are the product of our education system, 
and the protection of families and children is the foundation on 
which this government’s agenda is built. In many of his 
speeches, the Premier has said that no institution is more 
important than the family. Saskatchewan people value the 
family way of life. 
 
In 1989 the province of Saskatchewan will host a major 
national conference on the family. Family life in this province 
has been enhanced by such measures as mortgage protection, 
the removal of sales tax on footwear and clothing, the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and quality care for children. 
Protection plans for families have been a hallmark of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent nation-wide poll published by Maclean’s 
magazine shows that Canadians put a high priority on the 
family and child care. And to reaffirm this government’s strong 
ongoing commitment to the family in this session of the 
legislature, we will see the introduction of the child and family 
services Act and the children’s law Act. These family 
protection measures will further strengthen the family unit in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors are a special part of the family as well. We 
in Saskatchewan have one of the largest seniors’ populations of 
any province in Canada. Our efforts to protect seniors will 
continue. Special attention will be given to the changing 
housing and health care needs of seniors. 
 
This government was the first in North America to introduce a 
pension plan for home-makers, part-time workers, and the 
self-employed. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan has met with 
great public acceptance to the point where the plan has 47,000 
members: 80 per cent of them are women; 40 per cent of them 
are home-makers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our efforts to make Saskatchewan a leader in 
family public policy, your Progressive Conservative 
government has recognized that quality family life is dependent 
on such important factors as a strong economy and a clean 
environment. I wish to take a few moments to address the PC 
record in building a strong economy and protecting the 
environment. 

Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the state of the Saskatchewan 
economy. Despite world conditions such as trade wars, despite 
the conditions of nature such as drought, the Saskatchewan 
economy is growing in a stable and steady way. Through 
economic development and diversification, this government is 
building a prosperous future for our province. As a province 
that is heavily dependent on domestic and international trade, I 
am confident that the historic Canada-U.S.A. free trade 
agreement will mark the beginning of exciting new economic 
developments for Saskatchewan. As stated in the Speech from 
the Throne, the free trade agreement is important to 
Saskatchewan, since almost 40 per cent of Saskatchewan 
products are sold to our neighbours in the U.S.A. 
 
In the ever-changing global economy, the Pacific Rim has 
become Saskatchewan’s second most important trading partner. 
This government, through the Premier, has commenced to 
expand our markets in the Asia-Pacific Rim. Trade is important 
to the Saskatchewan economy and it is vital to our economic 
performance in the future. 
 
(1530) 
 
Our Premier, and Minister of Agriculture, is very much aware 
of how important agriculture is to Saskatchewan. Agriculture 
has always been the foundation of the provincial economy, and 
protection of the family farm cannot be overstated. World 
economic conditions and the North American drought have hurt 
our farmers; no doubt about it. 
 
And this government has taken strong leadership for the 
farming sector. Last year we took action to protect farmers, and 
in this session a new farm finance Act will be introduced, a new 
department of agriculture and food will be established. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a government are proud of our commitment 
to rural Saskatchewan. No other government in the history of 
Saskatchewan has done so much for agriculture. Compare that, 
Mr. Speaker, to the total lack of rural and farm policy on the 
NDP opposition side of this Assembly. We have a Leader of the 
Opposition who thinks putting on a cowboy hat backwards and 
setting up photo opportunities in a farmyard are the way to win 
over the farm vote. 
 
The NDP has no credibility with farmers. All they worry about 
is the time that the cheque is going to come. What did you do in 
1978-79 and 1980 when you should have been doing 
something? 
 
They do not trust the man who helped bring in land bank, a 
leader of a party that does not have one single solitary policy 
that would help farmers. They are out of touch with rural 
Saskatchewan, and the results of the by-election in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg prove that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agricultural development fund will be 
strengthened in this session. This government believes 
agriculture will continue to be vital to our province. Expanded 
protection for farmers, rural gas, irrigation, individual line 
service, rural health care are all part of our  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

19 
 

commitment to preserving and protecting the rural way of life 
in this province. Farmers know the record of our Premier and 
the PC government. When it comes to agriculture, we deliver. 
The Premier and Minister of Agriculture have provided strong 
leadership for agriculture in the past, and we will continue to do 
so in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a strong economy means we must strengthen it 
through economic diversification. Economic diversification 
means new jobs in such developments as the 200 million 
Weyerhaeuser paper mill at Prince Albert, the Regina oil 
upgrader, and the 1.3 billion heavy oil upgrader to be 
constructed at Lloydminster. 
 
Public participation is also a key part of this government’s 
economic plan. When this government established the 
Department of Public Participation, Saskatchewan joined many 
governments throughout the world who have similar policies. 
Mr. Speaker, the leader of the NDP and his left-leaning MLAs 
oppose public participation. They claim it is ideological. That is 
not the case. 
 
Over 100 countries as diverse as China, a communist country, 
and Australia, a socialist country, Great Britain and France and 
Sweden and New Zealand, have all brought in forms of public 
participation. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, it has come to light that 
in early 1982 the former premier of this province and the NDP 
government was about to embark on a plan that would have 
allowed individuals to purchase shares in the Crown 
corporations. Now that is the NDP that sits in opposition. They 
oppose public participation. 
 
It is little wonder the Leader of the Opposition has no 
credibility. Public participation is designed to increase 
economic growth, to diversify the economy, and most 
importantly, to increase public ownership and control of 
Saskatchewan corporations now or previously owned directly 
by the government. 
 
Public participation will allow for widespread public 
involvement through bond offerings, delivery of services 
through the private sector non-profit organizations, and to 
employee-owned and -operated companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a current example of the success of public 
participation are the SaskTel bonds. SaskTel bonds are an 
incentive for Saskatchewan people to directly invest in the 
provincial economy. The credit tel bond, for example, is the 
first of its kind in North America. It is an example of this 
government’s commitment to allow people to benefit from 
public participation. There is no doubt the Progressive 
Conservative Government of this province has built an 
excellent reputation in all areas of public participation. 
 
So let’s take a look at some of these achievements. The 
SaskTel, Power bonds, Meadow Lake saw mill sale to 
employees and Indian bands, Saskatchewan Government 
Printing services employee take-over, Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation welding services employee take-over, 
formation and share offering of WESTBRIDGE computer 
company — these are all highly successful public participation  

initiatives. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, for the record I wish to point out further 
positive highlights of the success of public participation. The 
Saskatchewan Power bonds: over 42,000 Saskatchewan 
residents purchased them — $343 million investment. The 
Meadow Lake saw mill means 400 projected jobs. 
Weyerhaeuser, the 250 million investment of a world-class 
paper mill at Prince Albert. Over 700 jobs during the 
construction of that site, and 169 new jobs, permanent jobs, at 
the mill. The WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, 13.9 
million share offering, with most employees buying into the 
company. Fifty jobs created and 200 projected. 
 
Job creation, new investment, new markets, economic 
diversification, and growth of all part of the public participation 
initiatives. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, the NDP and their union leader friends 
oppose public participation. It is the NDP who are very narrow 
in their minds. Their approach is state ownership, not public 
participation. Public participation is part of the future economic 
growth of Saskatchewan, and through public participation we 
can secure a more prosperous future for our province. 
 
In this session of the legislature, I am pleased that the 
government will continue further public participation programs. 
A sound economy, a strong economy bodes well for the future 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in building a better quality of life, we must protect our 
environment as well, Mr. Speaker. A clean and safe 
environment is a prime concern of this government. Clean air, 
safe drinking water, protection from toxic wastes, pollution, and 
the so-called greenhouse effect, are among the many 
environmental concerns. 
 
Protection of the environment depends on the active 
participation of this government. Saskatchewan’s PC 
government has an impressive environmental protection record. 
The government of this province has been sensitive to the 
protection of the environment, and the result has been an 
impressive array of environmental protection measures. 
 
Saskatchewan is a leader in a number of environmental 
protection initiatives. Saskatchewan’s institutional chemical 
collection program is unique in North America. The program 
was initiated to remove the backlog of unwanted or deteriorated 
hazardous chemicals from schools and hospitals. Three hundred 
and fourteen institutions were visited, and over 15,000 
kilograms of chemicals were removed. Our province has the 
only container collection program in Canada that has operated 
successfully in Canada over the last four years. 
 
In May of 1988, Saskatchewan established the aluminum 
beverage container collection and recycling system. The 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres was given 
the contract to develop a can collection system. A 2 cent 
environmental fee is collected for each can to help fund the 
system. This collection system operated by the handicapped is a 
system unique to Saskatchewan. There is no system like it in 
North America, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
March 9, 1989 

20 
 

Water quality is important to this province, and the provincial 
Environment department has designed guides for sewage works 
and waterworks that are considered by environment 
professionals to be the best in Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan is responsible for regulating the largest uranium 
industry in the world, and our province has responded by 
establishing a regulatory program that is capable of providing a 
degree of environmental protection at uranium mines that is as 
good or better than any other regulatory program in the world. 
 
Compare that to the PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) cover-up 
during the NDP years, Mr. Speaker — their total lack of 
commitment to the environment. Now the member from 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition at the time, who was 
part of the PCB cover-up, he wants to pretend to be a protector 
of the environment. Can we believe him? I think not. 
 
This government has been, and continues to be, committed to 
the protection of the environment, and a clean and safe 
environment is a lasting legacy we want to pass on to our 
children. 
 
The Speech from the Throne is the legislative blueprint for the 
government. It sets out our course for the future. Compare the 
Speech from the Throne, the past and present record of this 
government, to the total lack of direction of the NDP, an 
opposition trapped by radical, left-wing MLAs and a 1960 
ideology. 
 
It is a known fact that the New Democratic Party is a member 
of the Socialist International. Socialism is an ideology that 
people who believe in free enterprise, economic growth, and 
prosperity reject. Left-wing radicals of the Saskatchewan NDP 
want to take that party in this province towards more socialism. 
The member from Regina Rosemont wants more socialistic 
policy; so does the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. That 
member from Saskatoon has publicly stated, and I quote: “We 
have not been true and consistent to our socialist principles.” 
More Crown corporations, state ownership, land bank, the 
rejected policies of the past; that is where the Saskatchewan 
NDP is heading. 
 
The voters in two elections and the recent by-election in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg sent the NDP a message: we don’t 
want to go down the road to socialism; we don’t want to turn 
left. Our Premier, this government, represent a generation of 
leadership, a generation concerned about jobs, quality of health, 
education, economic opportunity, the future of farming, and the 
family. That’s what this government is all about. 
 
It’s a government that has built and continues to build a 
first-class health care system; a government that protects the 
family farm. We are a government that puts a high priority on 
jobs, economic opportunity, and building for the future. And 
that kind of government is what the people of Saskatchewan 
want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I decided to enter public life and I was elected MLA for 
Yorkton, I did so because I share the values and the beliefs and 
the principles of our Premier and his vision for Saskatchewan. 
 

We started in 1982 to clean up the mess left by 10 years of the 
NDP and put Saskatchewan back on track. We have produced 
record economic growth and development for our province. 
Over the past few years, this province has consistently had the 
lowest unemployment in Canada. Through competent and 
effective leadership, we have built a stronger Saskatchewan, 
and these are the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — As far as I was concerned, Saskatchewan in 
1981, the last year of the NDP, was sick. Well we came into 
office and brought the province back to good health, and now 
it’s stronger than ever. That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The debates in this legislature are about ideas and values. The 
Speech from the Throne represents the ideals and values of the 
Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. Our 
values include family, community, and co-operation. 
 
We are guided by certain Saskatchewan traditions — building, 
working together, and the sense of community. We are a 
province of communities working together, a leader in health 
care, in education, in agriculture, in protection of the 
environment, and helping families. Those are the values of the 
people in the Yorkton constituency, the folks who elected me to 
this legislature. And I, on their behalf, am proud to stand up for 
those ideas as stated in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government will keep Saskatchewan moving 
forward, ever forward, through progressive and innovative 
policies. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what leadership is all about 
— the will and the vision to build for the future. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with a sense of good, old-fashioned 
pride that I second the motion in support of the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, I want to tell you that I 
am excited and optimistic about this session of the legislature. 
It’s been nine long months almost since the members of the 
opposition have been denied the opportunity to hold the 
government to account to the various misdeeds and wasted 
activities and missed opportunities and mismanagement. Nine 
months where the Minister of Education has been afraid — 
dead-scared afraid — to face the opposition in this 
Saskatchewan legislature to answer for his . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Nine months, Mr. Speaker, where the 
Conservatives and the Premier have been in hiding. In hiding 
whether it’s in China, or in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg — I’ll say a 
word about that in a moment — hiding in Ottawa; hiding under 
their tables; hiding in the cabinet room; hiding away from the 
press; setting up the biggest security mechanism outside in the  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

21 
 

main Legislative Building; hiding from the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. Nine months. They can run and they 
can hide, but they can’t escape the day of accountability. It is 
here in this legislative session. 
 
So I’m looking forward to that very much, Mr. Speaker, 
because I think the people of Saskatchewan want to know more 
details about where it is that this administration has led this 
province. They want to know more of the details of their 
various deals, their private deals, their friendship or 
relationships whereby certain friends of the government have 
benefitted and certain other privileged few have profited, and 
they have in fact advanced in society while the rest of us, 
working people and farming people and small-business people, 
somehow tend to be ignored. 
 
So we’re going to be addressing that and we’re going to be 
asking the government to account for its actions. And we’re 
going to be doing something more than that, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to be advancing, in the weeks and the months 
ahead, a set of proposals for the reform of the Legislative 
Assembly, for the reform of the democratic institutions which, 
if we have our way, will guarantee that come the next 
government, an NDP government, never ever again will any 
future government be able to stymie democracy and the voice of 
the ordinary people — that the people will be heard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So I welcome the opportunity to come back. 
 
Now I must also say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I welcome to 
work with you, sir, as the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. 
I think you do a very good job under very difficult 
circumstances. And for my part and those of my colleagues, we 
will give you all the support that we can in the course of what 
will undoubtedly be some rather exciting debates in this coming 
session. So we welcome your return, sir, and we pledge our 
co-operation to you. 
 
I also say a word to the new member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I say to the new member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, congratulations on your election to 
this Assembly. I think it is very important . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I think it is very important recognition and a 
successful act by yourself on an individual basis, for your 
friends and supporters who worked so hard to get you elected. 
And really I think I speak now to all of the members, 
notwithstanding our differences and our partisanship and 
sometimes the heated nature of our debates, to serve in this 
Assembly is indeed a rare and high privilege. In a sense, it is a 
trust — a trust that we have to honour as best as we can. And I 
don’t say this by way of a lecture; I just simply say that it is, in 
my judgement, a club, an exclusive club that you’ve joined. I 
wish you well and congratulate you on your victory, and I think 
you made a good maiden speech a few moments ago. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, about the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I must also say that I was a bit  

disappointed in some of the directions that he took in his 
speech. I attribute this to the fact that he is a first-time member 
delivering a first-time address, and that in reality somebody else 
perhaps prepared the written text which he read, and was a little 
bit uncomfortable . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I don’t . . . 
In which case I think he was . . . well I think he was 
uncomfortable in delivering it. You could tell, in the tone and 
the tenor of the remarks. And I am a little bit disappointed in 
this regard. 
 
And I would say to the hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg — and I don’t say this in any political 
or partisanship terms to the hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg — if you look around you and about 
you, you will see in the back benches tens of bodies, bodies 
which have atrophied, bodies which have decided that there is 
no hope, no future, except to sing the Hallelujah Chorus when 
the conductor in the front row asks those members to sing the 
Hallelujah Chorus. 
 
Now what you must do, member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
is to resist that kind of direction and control. What you must do 
is to get up and to speak firmly and decisively and positively for 
the voters in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and to deliver on all those 
promises that you made in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And, as we know, there were numerous 
promises in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. They ranged from a new 
seniors’ complex at Rockglen, which, as I understand it, will 
have a bowling alley in it and moving pictures and swimming 
pools. And we have the promise of the Gravelbourg hospital 
and we also have promises to improve the Assiniboia Hospital. 
And of course the roads, as the hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg knows best of all, those more than 
anything perhaps, need as much repair. All of these promises, 
sir, we know that you will maintain and that you will deliver 
and that you will do so with independence and integrity. 
 
Let me give you just one last piece of advice if I can. If you are 
going to do it, do not join the Hallelujah Chorus. Be your own 
person. Be independent. Be intelligent. Be honest and 
straightforward. Don’t follow the back-benchers of the 
Conservatives. We’ll give you support and help if the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg can be improved. Please, though, reject 
these sort of canned speeches that your speech writers from 
Toronto give you. Otherwise, none of these promises will be 
fulfilled. I think if you do that you will succeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg also talked about the theme of the 
Conservatives. I think he used the word, we care. The line was, 
we care. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about your letter? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’m going to come to my letter in just a 
moment. He said, we care. And do you know something, Mr. 
Speaker, I say to the hon. member from  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

22 
 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and to the very vociferous, but from a 
seated position, Minister of Education, they’re right; 
Conservatives, they do care. The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that 
they don’t care for the ordinary farmers and workers and 
small-business people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Speaker, they care. You know they 
care for Peter Pocklington. They care so much that they give 
him $21 million of our taxpayers’ dollars when we could be 
using it to building the hospital in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
That’s how much they care. Yes, they care. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they care so much that they give 
Weyerhaeuser, a Seattle, American corporation, a deal which 
permits them not to pay back a penny on the purchase price of 
the P.A. plant — not a penny on that purchase price unless the 
profits are over a certain percentage. But the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, of course, are asked to pay the $25 
production loan, and by the way, with increased interest rates. 
Yes, the Conservatives, they care. They care for Peter 
Pocklington; they care for Weyerhaeuser. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they also care . . . they care for George 
Hill and they care for Paul Schoenhals and they care for Jack 
Cennon and they care for John Gormley and they care for Mr. 
Archambault; and they care for tens and tens and tens of 
defeated Conservative candidates. They care for every one of 
them in the probably highest level of political patronage that 
this province has ever seen. Yes you care, but you don’t care for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan; you care for your 
own friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I tell you, that’s for whom they care. But I 
tell you for whom they do not care, Mr. Speaker. They do not 
care for the Hon. Minister of Education from Weyburn, second 
highest rate of poverty in all of Canada — not my statistics, but 
Statistics Canada. Second highest rate of poverty in all of 
Canada, in this province, for children; second highest rate of 
poverty for families in all of Canada in this province. 
 
This is the bread basket of the world. It used to be the bread 
basket of the world. Not a word in the Speech from the Throne 
about the poor and the working poor in this province. Why? 
Because they care all right, but not for the poor. They care for 
the big corporations and their friends and their supporters. 
That’s for whom they care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh yes, oh yes, Mr. Speaker, they say they 
care; we care. Did you notice, Mr. Speaker — I think you did 
notice; it was a stunning observation. 
 
Yesterday was Speech from the Throne day, but it was also the 
day when International Women’s Day was to be marked. 
International Women’s Day, the day when  

there’s a struggle for the advancement of women’s issues and 
women’s causes, ranging all the way from questions of pay 
equity to child care — let alone those issues — to issues on a 
broader basis of family, worry about the future of their children, 
their sons and their daughters. Are they going to get an 
education? Are they going to get good health care? This is 
International Women’s Day, a major event which is being 
celebrated all over the world — all over the world, Mr. Speaker 
— but this government cares so much that it didn’t even 
mention a word about International Women’s Day. I say that is 
an outrage and an affront to every woman in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh yes, Mr. Speaker, they care. Peter 
Pocklington, he’s been looked after; Weyerhaeuser, they’ve 
been looked after; Gormley and Hill and the whole gang, 
they’ve been looked after. They care, but not a word about 
women’s issues and those things which concern themselves 
about the family. 
 
Now the hon. member from Yorkton gets up and he says, you 
know, this government’s concerned about the family. I want to 
tell you, this government is the enemy of the family in this 
province of Saskatchewan — the enemy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I’ll tell you how it is an enemy. It’s not 
because they purposefully set out to destroy the family — I do 
not attribute those motives to any of my friends and colleagues 
on that side — but they’re the enemy to the families because 
their policies in economic matters or social matters are not 
designed one iota to be of genuine help to the families. 
 
When the families needed assistance on the dental care 
program, for example — that’s a family-based program — how 
much did those people care for the families? They did away 
with the dental care program, and right then and there damaged 
what is so important and essential in one aspect of care for 
family life. 
 
When they concerned themselves on the drug plan, did they 
think about the family when they chopped out the drug plan, 
and by that one stroke attacked all of those who need 
prescription care and all of those who need health care? That’s 
how much they care for the family. 
 
Did they think for one moment about the statistics that show 
1,600 people, approximately, a month, Mr. Speaker — 1,600 
people a month — families, leaving this province of 
Saskatchewan? Did they even mention that in the Speech from 
the Throne? Did they even set out an economic game plan to 
get those people working? — not a word! I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, this is not a government that cares about the family, 
this is a government that has forgotten the Saskatchewan 
family, and it’s going to take us to get it back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Forgotten about the family, forgotten about 
these important issues that I’ve talked of: family issues, 
women’s issues. They’ve forgotten about the  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

23 
 

ordinary people. This is a government which is so tired, so 
bushed, so run-down, this Speech from the Throne I didn’t 
think could be topped by anything more anaemic, to be very 
frank with you, than with the addresses that we’ve received — 
with the exception of the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, because it’s his first address — the 
anaemic addresses following the Speech from the Throne, I 
didn’t think you could get any more tired out and bushed out. 
This government is lost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s third down in this province of Saskatchewan 
right now. It’s third down. We’ve got major economic 
challenges. We’ve got long yardage to go. It’s third down and 
the quarter-back has forgotten the plays. He doesn’t know what 
to tell the caucus in the huddle. And the wide receivers are 
offside and the line-backers are tired and they’re not able to 
move, and the team is simply sitting there, decrepit and stalled. 
 
This government is so worn out and so tired, I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s time now for a change of new government and 
new direction, and that’s what we’re going to give this province 
of Saskatchewan right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You know, they keep coming back, Mr. 
Speaker, to the same old issues about being world-class and 
first-class, and they’ve got to look to the future while people are 
voting with their feet and fleeing at 1,400 and 1,600 people a 
month. Oh, and they talk about privatization and they say that 
we’re opposed to privatization. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
what we’re opposed to. We are opposed to PC-style 
privatization, I’ll tell you that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What does that mean? What is it? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We’re opposed to PC-style privatization 
which . . . Oh no, the member from Weyburn says what does he 
mean about it. I’ll tell you what it means. It means the 
privatization of government buildings, for example, in 
sweetheart lease arrangements; privatized government facilities 
in leased government buildings to private entrepreneurs for fat 
contracts so that the friends of this government can make a 
profit. 
 
And the member from Yorkton who spoke just before me is a 
defender of privatization. This session is going to look very 
carefully at a privatized deal in Yorkton to see whether or not 
that’s to the advantage of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s PC privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to take a look at PC-style privatization where there 
are all kinds of deals made with respect to the computer 
companies, to WESTBRIDGE Computer — made without 
tender; made without any public information; confidential 
medical information in the hands of private entrepreneurs for 
the first time in the history of Saskatchewan. Those are the 
people that are going to benefit. We’re going to talk about 
PC-style privatization in that regard. 
 

We’re going to talk about PC-style privatization when they 
privatized the oats from the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’ll surrender my 
spot. I’ll let the Minister of Health tell me if that’s not 
privatization. Does the member for Meadow Lake say that’s not 
privatization? I’ll surrender my spot if he tells me it’s not 
privatization. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, as far as I’m concerned, I 
will stay here and stand here and listen to their laughs on that. 
 
And frankly I wish that they would laugh loudly — loudly — to 
confirm to the farmers exactly what you feel about this move. 
I’m going to want to hear your laughs so that the member from 
Kelvington, when his farmers are told that he does not at all 
care about the Canadian Wheat Board, that he’s for this 
privatization of oats, that he is for this kind of an action — I 
want this group to stand up and laugh. 
 
You tell me about that. I want the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena to get up in this debate and tell the 
Legislative Assembly, to tell the Canadian legislature, this 
legislature and Canada, that he believes in the privatization of 
oats. I mean, I feel, Mr. Speaker, that this laughter tells you 
everything that you want to know about PC-style privatization. 
 
Their argument is, you see, you’ve got to take oats out of the 
Canadian Wheat Board because the volume is so small it 
doesn’t make any difference, is their argument. 
 
Well if volume is the test, Mr. Speaker, why is it that canola 
and flax-seed isn’t within the Canadian Wheat Board where the 
volumes are greater? If volume is the test, why doesn’t the 
Minister of Agriculture and every one of those free enterprise, 
big business Tories advocate that kind of a development with 
the Canadian Wheat Board? Why is it that they are silent, Mr. 
Speaker? Why is it that the Canadian Wheat Board Advisory 
Committee condemned them and urged the resignation of their 
minister? And they still laugh. 
 
I say to these members opposite, your arrogance — your 
arrogance — is only surpassed by the stupidity of your 
agricultural policies, and you’ll pay the price come the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, we’re going to be examining PC-style 
privatization in some detail, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be 
examining PC-style privatization, and we’re going to be asking 
ourselves the question: is this a government which is so 
ideologically committed now and blinkered and blinded by 
Maggie Thatcher on privatization that it can’t do anything else? 
That it forgets about the drought payments? That it forgets 
about those waiting to get into hospitals? That it forgets about 
those who want to go to school? Is this a government which is 
so preoccupied with privatization that it has essentially 
forgotten the little guy? He’s forgotten. This Premier and this 
government has forgotten the small-business person. 
 
We’re going to be examining P. C. privatization in absolutely 
close detail, Mr. Speaker, I guarantee you that.  
  



 
March 9, 1989 

24 
 

And when they say we’re against privatization — this kind of 
incompetence and mismanagement and patronage and waste — 
yes, Mr. Speaker, we will be against it. Make no mistake about 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to adjourn 
because I want to have the bulk of my remarks to be made when 
the debate resumes which, as I understand it, is on Monday. 
 
But I do want to say a word about health care, and I do want to 
say this notion about health care being the priority of the current 
administration — the number one priority is what they say in 
the Speech from the Throne. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if there’s 
anything worth a laugh — except that it’s a cruel joke, it’s a 
cruel laugh — it’s that. 
 
To listen to the member from Yorkton, to listen to the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, to listen to the Minister of Health 
talk about being the defenders of health care is a sick joke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1962 the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan fought for medicare, Mr. Speaker, in 1962. I 
know who were on the front lines of that battle in medicare in 
1962. I know that Tommy Douglas of our party was there. I 
know that Woodrow Lloyd was the leader, and he was there. I 
know that Al Blakeney was there. I know that Orville Hjertaas 
was there. I know Roy Atkinson was there. I know a legion of 
CCF and non-CCF and non-New Democratic Party people who 
were there fighting for the principle of medicare and 
hospitalization. I was there, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you. 
 
And I also know who was not there. I know who was not there, 
and I know who fought it. I know the member from Yorkton 
fought it. He was a member of the KOD (Keep Our Doctors) 
and he fought it. I know that the member from Saskatoon 
fought it, Saskatoon Mayfair fought it. I don’t know if he was a 
member of the KOD, but he fought it. I know that the members 
in the back rows fought it. They took this action to court. They 
fought it politically. They fostered a doctor’s strike. 
 
I know that the leading Conservative in this province, Dr. Staff 
Barootes, fought it. Senator Staff Barootes opposes it to this 
day; he opposes medicare and hospitalization. And they have 
the gall to say that they are defenders of medicare, Mr. Speaker 
— shame to them. They do not know anything about medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I tell you, there were others who fought it as 
well, others in the medical establishment who fought it all the 
way. And the leadership of this Conservative Party, including a 
member from education, the Premier, they fought it, they fought 
it, and make no mistake about it, and they spoke against it. 
 
And I tell you, it shouldn’t surprise us, not only because they 
fought against it, it shouldn’t surprise us that now they’re 
launching a massive attack on health care. We shouldn’t be 
surprised that they talk about utilization  

rates going up. This is nothing new. They talked about 
utilization rates going up in 1962, and so the Liberal Party put 
on deterrent fees, and now they’re talking about it in 1989. It 
shouldn’t be new that they destroyed the drug plan. It shouldn’t 
be new that they destroyed the school-based children’s dental 
plan. It shouldn’t be new that there are 10,000 people waiting to 
get into a hospital bed. None of this should be new because 
those people believe in the free enterprise system of health care; 
they don’t believe in medicare and hospitalization. And I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, and I tell the Premier of this province, this 
party will never, ever, ever get the trust of Saskatchewan when 
it comes to health care. That is precedent here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a system of reports which 
advocate the closure of small hospitals which they quickly 
deny, falsely deny; a series of reports by people like Schwartz, 
who to this day still defends the government in its autocratic 
imposition of specializations on Saskatoon hospitals. The 
Schwartz report, my letter . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, 
signed by . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the government 
opposite is very allergic to truth, and you can tell that by the 
squeals and the howls of pain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll talk more about this on Monday. But I’ll tell 
you, a page and a half on health care — a page and a half on 
health care — by the wrecking crew, by the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the hon. 
members, and I just asked them about five seconds ago to not 
interrupt, and therefore . . . and also it applies to people on my 
left and people on my right. It applies to everybody in the 
House, and I ask all members to allow the Leader of the 
Opposition to continue his speech. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate you, Mr. Speaker, holding the floor so that I can get 
my piece out. I’m not really surprised by this reaction on health 
care. I’m not surprised about it because that’s exactly what they 
did in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and that’s exactly what they’ll 
be doing to their last political day, 1989 or 1990 or 1991. 
Anybody who would entrust this government to medicare 
would put Colonel Saunders in charge of the chicken coop. Any 
people that would entrust this government to medicare and 
hospitalization based on their record, their silence on the drug 
patent laws, would entrust themselves to the destruction of 
medicare. 
 
Look: “Health premiums favoured by Tories,” December 22, 
1987; “Return of medicare premiums urged by Moose Jaw 
Tories,” Joan Duncan . . . quote — I’m not saying your name; 
I’m reading a quote. Quote: 
 

Duncan said the government looked at reinstating 
premiums as a way . . . (et cetera) If there’s strong support, 
she says, those premiums are going to be  

  



 
March 9, 1989 

25 
 

back on. 
 

That’s around. That’s not 1982 or before 1982; that’s today. 
Right there, that’s where she sits, right to the left of the Minister 
of Health. They don’t deny it. They don’t deny it. 
 
I don’t expect, Mr. Speaker, that they would introduce deterrent 
fees or premiums between now and the next coming election. I 
don’t think that even these people are prepared to commit that 
blatant political suicide. But you mark my words, Mr. Speaker. 
Win, lose or draw this next election, if these people should win 
the next provincial election, mark my words. They will unleash 
the most savage attack on medicare under the guise of 
efficiency and deterrent fees and premiums ever in the history 
of the province of Saskatchewan, I guarantee you that. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, why. I say that, Mr. Speaker, 
because these are privatizers. They believe in it; they believe in 
the United Kingdom model; they believe in what Maggie 
Thatcher is doing in privatizing health. They believe in it, but 
I’ll tell you something else, Mr. Speaker: not only do they 
believe in it; they believe in applying a corporate test to health 
care and hospitalization. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne, they say: utilization has gone up 
for medicare and hospitalization. And they say that as if 
somehow we ought to be afraid that utilization goes up. What’s 
wrong with the people of Saskatchewan using health care? It’s 
there for them to be used. What’s wrong with that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh, the argument is, it’s abused and we’ve 
got to have a control on it. Well we have to have a control on it. 
Who do we blame, Mr. Speaker? Do we blame the sick person, 
the patient? Or do we blame the doctors, who are the 
gatekeepers to the system? Why are you picking on the public? 
Why are you suggesting the premiums? Why don’t you go back 
to your friends, Dr. Barootes and all of those KOD who write 
your agriculture and health policies and the economic policies 
of this party; why don’t you go back to them and say, look here, 
get a hold of this situation the proper way? 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be talking about privatization, 
and we’re going to be talking about health care, and we’re 
going to be talking about this government because, as I take my 
place, this is what I see this session being all about. This is the 
agenda. 
 
The agenda is this, Mr. Speaker. Number one, the people of this 
province want to make a judgement on the record of this 
government. That’s what democracy’s about. It is the question 
of determining whether or not the government has fulfilled its 
promises, kept the faith, established that trust. We’re going to 
be examining that record of this government in detail in this 
session. That’s agenda item number one. A record which goes 
from increased taxes to broken promises to cut-backs in health 
care and education to abandonment of the family farms as we 
know, that is the agenda, first and foremost. 
 
And the second agenda, Mr. Speaker, is going to be the  

development of a better way — a way which gives people the 
feeling that there’s a new day coming, that there is hope, that 
we can build a society based on opportunity and security and 
compassion and fairness and co-operation; that we can give our 
small communities and our farmers and our small-business 
people a chance to really control their own lives and have 
control over their individual lives and family life and 
community life. That is going to be the other side of the agenda. 
 
And by that kind of a yardstick, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from 
the Throne will take us back to the future. This is a Speech of 
the Throne worthy of the Anderson Conservatives of the 1930s. 
It’s time to defeat this government. It’s time to get on with 
building a new tomorrow, and I’m going to be talking about 
that when I get a chance next week around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:07 p.m. 
 
 


