


















































March 13, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 13, 1989 
 

43 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a group of approximately thirty Grade 8 
students from Argyle School in Regina who are here to visit the 
legislature today. I will be meeting with them after for pictures 
and drinks, and to talk with them for a while, so I’d like to ask 
you and the other members to join me in welcoming this class. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Environmental Impact of Power Projects 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
directed to the Premier, and it concerns what is probably the 
biggest environmental fraud ever perpetrated on the people of 
Saskatchewan, the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, it has now become very 
clear that you and your ministers directed a conspiracy to 
circumvent the environmental process of the federal 
government in this projects, and your own document shows that 
to be true. 
 
In a letter of November 10, 1986, a letter to Robert Walker of 
Environment Canada, George Hood of Souris Basin 
Development Authority wrote about anticipated problems with 
the project and the federal government. And in that letter, he 
states your strategy for the project, Mr. Premier, and I quote to 
you the letter. He says: 
 

Our strategy has been and will continue to be to take the 
project as far as we possibly can on our own and build as 
much momentum behind it before we open the process up 
to other governments. 
 

Now, Mr. Premier, how do you justify this blatant breaking of 
the law by your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Please be seated. Order. I believe 
maybe we should start question period off on the right foot and 
allow the minister to answer the question. Allow the minister to 
answer the question without interruption. 
 
Order. I ask the co-operation of the members once more, and 
that includes all members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
hon. member for the question. And I want to advise the hon. 
member that the Department of Environment is the  

department that sees that the letter of the law is followed when 
it comes to environmental impact assessment. 
 
The letter that you quote from was from the proponent, the 
Souris Basin Development Authority. And I think if you were 
to look at the replies that were given by Bob Walker, and his 
statement that we indeed had to go on and be involved with the 
federal government because this project included international 
waters and fish-bearing waters, and therefore was a project that 
the federal government needed to be involved with. 
 
I want you to realize that going back as far as 1984, the federal 
government has been involved in that particular project. They 
helped to draft the guide-lines that were used for the 
environmental impact assessment; they helped to do the review 
of the whole environmental impact assessment; and the federal 
government is very pleased with the way that this particular 
project has gone forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’d ask a question, a new question to the 
Premier who refused to answer the last question, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Premier, will you address the question, and will you 
respond as to whether you agree . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
If I may have the floor, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, do you agree 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order! Order. Allow the member to ask 
the question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Do you agree, Mr. Premier, that it is 
appropriate for the Department of the Environment and the 
Souris Basin Development Authority to have a strategy in 
place, sanctioned by you, Mr. Premier, because it’s in your 
constituency, a strategy that says that they will continue to put 
as much momentum into this project as possible before any of 
the other agencies and other governments can be involved, so 
that then they are in a position where they cannot stop it? Do 
you agree with that strategy, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. We can’t get the 
questions off and we can’t get the answers off if the respective 
members will be interrupted, so once more I’m simply asking 
the House for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s 
question, I think, lacks credibility. The Department of the 
Environment has done nothing to push this project forward 
faster than any project should go forward. 
 
This project was given the opportunity for a detailed 
environmental impact assessment. When the public review 
period came, we allowed 60 days for the public review rather 
than the normal 30. We also appointed a board of inquiry that 
went around and did a very thorough study of that project. The 
board of inquiry gave its report in January, and we issued the 
approval for the project in February with much of the direction 
that was provided in that report. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

44 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this particular report has had a very 
good hearing before the public, before the people of 
Saskatchewan. I’m very pleased that our department has done a 
thorough job of reviewing that whole project. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Premier, the Minister of the Environment may do 
his song and dance to try to protect you, but it’s not going to 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s not going to work, Mr. Premier, 
because the facts are the facts and they’re clear. In that letter 
which was written, which I refer to, Mr. Hood also says the 
following: 
 

It will come as no surprise to you, I’m sure, that a number 
of federal officials have in the past expressed their 
aversion to this particular project. 
 

Now, Mr. Premier, knowing in advance, knowing in advance 
that the project was not going to be looked upon favourably by 
the federal government, the Souris Basin Development 
Authority, which you appointed, decided to shut them out of the 
process. Now I ask you, Mr. Premier: who made that decision? 
Was it Mr. Hood? Was it the Minister of the Environment? Was 
it your seat mate, the Deputy Premier, Mr. Premier? Or did you 
make that decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that the hon. 
member is somewhat confused. The Souris Basin Development 
Authority is the proponent of the project, and as the proponent 
of a project, likely will try to expedite moving his project 
through. When you talk about the actual approval of a project, 
that comes back to the Department of Environment and the 
department’s environmental assessment branch. That branch 
has done a very thorough study of that project. I’m proud of the 
decision that was made there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me try the Premier one more time, 
Mr. Speaker. He is in the House. 
 
Mr. Premier, you yourself have been quoted in the media as 
saying that this information is going to have no bearing on the 
Rafferty project, that you are going to, in an arrogant way, 
proceed with the project regardless of anything that is said, or 
any evidence that is provided. Is that the strength of your 
commitment to the environment which your throne speech 
talked so glowingly about? Is it your position that the 
environment is only precious when it is politically expedient, 
and that at all other times deception and hiding the facts are 
appropriate? 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, why don’t you be honest for a change, and 
why don’t you admit that you have no commitment to 
environmental protection when your political needs are 
becoming more of a priority? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s interesting today 
to see the member who is asking the question, the member from 
the Regina North East riding, stand up as an environmental 
critic and try to tell us that his past record on environment has 
been so great. 
 
I sat just about in that chair at the time that he sat here on this 
side of the House, and that member was the member that was 
part of the government who actually poured concrete over the 
PCBs at Federal Pioneer. Now he stands up with this kind of a 
song. Mr. Speaker, I don’t take him very serious when he does 
things that way. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Premier. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am prepared to 
defend the record of the environment of the former government 
any day, any place, which is something the Premier is not 
prepared to do here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Premier, when officials of 
government and cabinet ministers break the law, when cabinet 
ministers break the law, they should lose their position. And 
normally under a situation as serious as this one in our system 
of government, you, sir, would do the honourable thing and you 
would resign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that this . . . 
That’s probably too much to ask of this particular Premier, so I 
ask him, will he do at least the next honourable thing and fire 
his Minister of the Environment today so we can begin to turn 
this thing around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the Minister of 
Finance . . . Please allow the hon. member to go ahead with his 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very serious 
accusation that the hon. member makes. I think if the hon. 
member goes back and reviews the project of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project right from beginning to end, at no 
time will he find that any member of this parliament, any 
member of this cabinet, have ever broken the law on this 
project. This project has been handled in a very forthright 
manner, and it has had all the opportunities for public input that 
any project could have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no, I won’t resign. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if 
every time this group called for somebody to resign, we 
wouldn’t have any government. I don’t take their call very 
serious. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier, if the Premier is alive down 
there and breathing. 
 
Mr. Premier, on October 27, 1986, an official of the Department 
of the Environment, R.E. Walker, wrote to Mr. George Hood. 
Mr. Hood is director of planning  



 
March 13, 1989 

45 
 

operations at Souris Basin Development Authority. Mr. Walker 
is the civil servant in charge of assessment of determining 
which projects are sound environmentally. And I want to read 
to you the opening sentence of that letter, Mr. Premier. It says: 
 

Federal Environment in Rafferty-Alameda environmental 
impact assessment. As you are aware, I am becoming 
increasingly concerned that Saskatchewan Environment 
has, as directed, not yet involved either federal or 
Manitoba environmental interests in its review of the 
proposed Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 

Mr. Premier, in light of the statements made by your Minister of 
the Environment that the federal government was involved 
since 1984, we have an official in the Environment department 
denying that statement. I want to know from you, sir, who is not 
telling the truth to the people of the province. Is it Mr. Walker, 
or is it your Minister of the Environment? Who, sir, is not 
telling the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I want you to take notice of 
the time of the letter. The letter was October of 1986. The 
environmental impact assessment of the Rafferty-Alameda 
project was beginning, but was not near completion. That 
particular environmental impact assessment came to the 
government in June, then went back for additional work and 
came to the government again in July of 1987. 
 
So yes, Bob Walker was concerned, but we were not at the 
stage where there had been any environmental impact 
assessment completed for the federal government to review. 
Immediately that we had an environmental impact assessment, 
the federal government was involved in the review, and a 
complete copy of that environmental impact assessment was 
mailed to the Minister of Environment in Manitoba. They also 
had that same opportunity to review it. 
 
Now when the letter says "as instructed," I believe if you go 
back to the legislation, that’s where the instruction comes is that 
that is part of the review process. That’s why Bob Walker wrote 
that letter, and that was his . . . that’s his way of wording it. And 
I believe if you check with Bob, he was following the law to the 
letter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again my question is 
to the Premier, because the date was October 27, 1986. This 
minister wasn’t the minister. Somebody directed Saskatchewan 
Environment not to involve the federal government. And I 
would remind the Premier, I would remind the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, that section 10 of the environmental impact Act says 
that as soon as a minister knows that an environmental 
assessment is going to be carried out — not when it’s done, not 
when it’s in the process, but as soon as he knows it’s going to 
be carried out — he has the responsibility of informing those 
people who will be affected. 
 

The question is, Mr. Premier, to you: did you — or was it the 
Deputy Premier — direct Saskatchewan Environment not to 
involve the federal government and not to involve the province 
of Manitoba in the environmental assessment review process, 
contrary to section 10 of the legislation which governs the 
conduct of your minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government, as I 
told you earlier, was involved as far back as 1984 in helping to 
develop the project’s specific guide-lines for the environmental 
impact assessment. So they’ve been involved right from the 
beginning, right from the very early beginning. They were 
involved again when the environmental impact assessment was 
provided by the Souris Basin Development Authority. They 
were also involved at the end of July in the whole review 
process. I think if you talk to the federal government, you’ll 
find that they were completely satisfied with the involvement 
they had in this project. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
incredible to listen to the statements of this minister which are 
directly contrary to the facts as written by the members of his 
own department. 
 
Let me continue quoting from the letter I’ve read. New 
question, Mr. Speaker, and the question is directed again to the 
Premier in hopes that he will answer and take responsibility for 
the action; this letter says: 
 

The same has been true for other provinces with an 
interest in Saskatchewan development proposal. Since 
Manitoba has not yet been involved in our review of the 
Rafferty-Alameda proposal, that province might 
understandably feel its only recourse is attempt to have its 
concerns expressed through the federal process. 
 
Project-specific guide-lines for the proposed 
Rafferty-Alameda development are in final draft form. 
 

That’s in the same letter that the environmental department 
officials say: keep Manitoba in the dark, keep the federal 
government in the dark. This is totally contrary to the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. What that minister is saying is totally, totally contrary 
to the truth. 
 
I want to know who is telling the truth in this House. Is it Bob 
Walker? Is he telling the truth? Or is it the Minister of the 
Environment or the Premier not telling the truth? Somebody 
here is misleading the people of this province and this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the drafting of the project 
specific guide-lines, as I told you, went back to 1984. During 
that time the federal government and the Saskatchewan 
government worked together to draft the guide-lines. I don’t 
think it’s customary to involve every province in Canada when 
you draft guide-lines, but the federal government and the 
provincial government are the ones that we involved, and I 
believe they were the  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

46 
 

right people to be involved throughout that whole process. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
the Environment, since the Premier won’t answer the questions. 
The final paragraph of the letter . . . excuse me, a new question. 
I will phrase it as a new question in order to be able to read this 
into the record. 
 
The final paragraph of this letter says: 
 

Accordingly, I feel we should arrange to involve federal 
and Manitoba environmental interests in our review of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project as soon as possible. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have today — and I want the people of 
Saskatchewan and the press to take note of this. The Minister of 
the Environment has said that the federal government has been 
involved in the review since 1984. Mr. Walker’s letter, in 1987, 
says: perhaps it’s time we should involve the federal and the 
province of Manitoba officials in this process. 
 
The question is very simple. Someone here is not telling the 
truth over this matter. Is it Mr. Walker? Is Mr. Walker not 
telling the truth on this letter of October 27, 1986? Mr. 
Minister, is Mr. Walker not telling the truth? Is that what you’re 
saying about this official? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the hon. 
member is a slow learner. I’ve taken him through this quite a 
few times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — And I believe that the federal government 
felt that they were very much involved. The paragraph that he 
draws attention to dealing with Manitoba — I have said before, 
they were not involved up to that point. Bob Walker is writing 
to the Souris Basin Development Authority telling him that he 
feels now is the time that he should involve the others. That’s 
what his letter was all about. He proceeded to do exactly that. 
 
I believe that Manitoba and the federal government had all the 
opportunities they needed. Whether or not the Manitoba 
government of that day took advantage of those opportunities, 
that was their decision, but they had the opportunity. 
 

Green Feed Program 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, last Friday I 
referred to your remarks, remarks that you made during the 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election where you told farmers that 
participants in the green feed program would not be 
short-changed by the drought program. Mr. Minister of 
Agriculture, will you answer my direct question today? Do you 
still hold the position that farmers taking part in the program 
will not be short-changed by the drought relief program. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the hon. member 
knows, and the farmers know, that anybody that participated in 
the green feed program would not be discriminated against, and 
they will not be discriminated against. They’ve been paid. 
 
For those that have seeded prior to June 20, 1988, and salvaged 
feed because of the green feed program, they received $15 an 
acre, and they will receive, obviously, the money from the feed, 
and they can receive the drought program, less the $15 an acre. 
So the combination of being paid a drought program plus $15 
an acres plus the feed is hardly being discriminated against, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If it’s after June 20 and they’ve summer-fallowed, obviously 
you can’t receive a drought payment on summer fallow. And I 
think the hon. member knows that’s the deadline. And maybe 
he would agree, or I’d assume that he would agree, that if 
you’re going to get paid for summer-fallowing, you can’t get 
paid for drought as well. 
 
So the June 20 deadline was acceptable among farmers; they 
could get both the $15 plus the price of their feed, or they could 
feed it themselves, plus the drought program. And they will get 
the combination of the three, Mr. Speaker, which I believe is 
only fair. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — A question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, on 
page G-2 of the form, I will quote, and it says, "Payments to 
producers who also receive benefits from the federal-provincial 
green feed assistance program will be reduced." 
 
The question I ask you now, Mr. Minister, is: were you aware 
November 14, the time you were issuing your press release, that 
you were issuing confusing and misleading information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I made it clear. If 
an individual in a very dry area receives $40 an acre on a 
drought payment, he can’t be expected to also receive $15 an 
acre on a green feed program, plus having the feed itself, which 
is worth some value. So we said we would not discriminate 
against anybody that participated. So if he was going to receive 
$40 an acre, we say, Mr. Speaker, he’s received 15, so he gets 
$15 on the green feed program, $25 on the drought program, 
and all the value of the feed. So the combination is greater that 
you’d received if you hadn’t participated in the drought 
program because you have feed, which is an advantage over 
both, Mr. Speaker. So he gets the drought program, he gets his 
$15 an acre, and he gets access to the feed supplies. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, again we are 
seeing the problem that you and your counterparts in Ottawa 
put forward. Farmers don’t know the details of the program 
before they have to make a management decision. 
 
The farmers did their part by participating in the green  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

47 
 

feed program. They have used their machinery, they put in their 
labour and other expenses in order to qualify for that program. 
They’re telling me now that if they would have sat on their 
backside and done nothing, they would have got more money 
because they wouldn’t have had to go through the whole 
process. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the farmers did their part. Will you do your 
part and explain to the farmers just why you manipulated and 
used them with your half-baked, ad hoc program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent quite a 
bit of time in the House convincing the hon. member that the 
green feed program was a good idea so that people could 
salvage feed and they wouldn’t have to go and pay for very 
expensive feed because we wouldn’t encourage them to take 
their crop off early. 
 
And I believe originally he was against the green feed program 
and argued against it. Finally, when the farmers thought it was a 
good idea, because thousands of people participated, I think that 
perhaps he’s fallen in line and figured it’s a good idea. And 
even today he talks about farmers and their machinery as if he 
still hasn’t made up his mind. 
 
It was a good program; they enjoy it; they salvaged feed all 
over southern Saskatchewan particularly, or the southern half of 
the grain belt. And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, they get access 
to a drought program. Now if he’s saying he wants maximum 
drought plus green feed plus the rest of it, then other farmers are 
going to say, well then why wouldn’t you give me the benefit 
all over the place of a green feed program? 
 
We said we would be fair and not discriminate against anybody 
who had the green feed program and, Mr. Speaker, we’re not. 
They get access to their feed, the green feed program, and the 
drought program at the same time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
and with leave of the Assembly, I would like to make a motion: 
 

That this Assembly express its condolences on the passing 
of Father Sean O’Sullivan, the former member of 
parliament for Hamilton-Wentworth, who passed away on 
Thursday, March 9, 1989. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from Melfort. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Last week a distinguished Canadian who 
had a special affinity with the province of Saskatchewan, and 
who had countless friends in  

Saskatchewan, died in Toronto. Father Sean O’Sullivan, 37 
years of age, passed away after a long and brave battle with 
leukemia. 
 
With your permission, Mr. Speaker, and with the concurrence 
of the fellow members of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly, I want to take a few moments to pay special tribute 
to Father Sean O’Sullivan. 
 
Sean O’Sullivan was a young boy of 12 when he first met his 
hero and mentor, the Rt. Hon. John Diefenbaker. A very special 
friendship between young O’Sullivan and the old chief from 
Saskatchewan began. 
 
In 1967, at the age 15, Sean O’Sullivan organized a nation-wide 
organization of friends of John Diefenbaker who loyally stood 
behind the chief as he faced his last national conventional in 
Canada. Diefenbaker never forgot the loyalty Sean O’Sullivan 
gave in standing with his friend in his darkest hours. 
 
Sean O’Sullivan came to Prince Albert in 1968 to work on Mr. 
Diefenbaker’s campaign in the federal election in that year, and 
that began a special relationship here in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, in the years that followed, many Saskatchewan people 
came to know Sean O’Sullivan as a special friend. 
 
In 1972, at the age of 19, Sean O’Sullivan became the youngest 
person in the entire history of Canada to be elected to the House 
of Commons in Ottawa. Sean O’Sullivan served in parliament 
from 1972 to 1977, and during his years as a member of 
parliament, though he was young in years, he became respected 
for his principles, his integrity, and most particularly for his 
love of Canada. 
 
Then in 1977 this young man gave up a promising future in 
politics to become a Roman Catholic priest. Father Sean 
O’Sullivan felt that he could better serve humanity in the 
service of God. 
 
His devout Roman Catholic faith and love of his people, his 
caring and compassionate ways were an inspiration to everyone 
who knew him. Though I did not know Father O’Sullivan in a 
close, personal way, I knew of his respected reputation. 
 
Five years ago Father O’Sullivan was told he had leukemia. 
Instead of giving up his life, he became a model of faith and 
courage for Canadians from coast to coast. He wrote a book, 
Both My Houses, an inspirational book that was a nation-wide 
best seller. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to pay tribute to the memory of Father Sean 
O’Sullivan, a great Canadian and a special friend to 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

48 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to begin by bringing greetings from 
the constituency of Regina Centre. I do so with a tad more 
emotion than I normally would. If the redistribution Bill is 
passed, and if rumours of an impending election this year prove 
true, this might be the last time I in fact bring greetings on 
behalf of Regina Centre. 
 
Nearly 14 years ago I was nominated to run in that riding. Four 
elections have passed, some of them easy and some a little more 
challenging. Throughout the 14 years I’ve enjoyed a good 
relationship with the constituents. And if indeed I am 
representing another riding after the election, I will leave with 
many a fond memory. 
 
I want to congratulate the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I do so out of courtesy and, I think, 
also out of pure sympathy. I’m sure, given the details of the 
drought program and the green feed program, there’s probably 
very few people in that area who are congratulating him now. I 
want to extend a helping hand to someone who I think probably 
needs it. 
 
I want to say a word or two about agriculture. Sitting, Mr. 
Speaker, watching this government opposite over the last seven 
years, I’ve developed a definition of bad management. 
Watching this government operate I would define bad 
management as the pursuit of short-term gain at the expense of 
long-term pain . . . with apologies to John Crosbie. And that’s 
what this government has been doing over the last seven years, 
pursuing short-run interests without worrying about the 
long-run affect. Well, Mr. Speaker, some of those long-run 
effects are coming home to roost in a number of ways. 
 
That is particularly true in agriculture. One might begin with the 
$25 an acre loan program that was announced some five years 
ago. Mr. Speaker, there were those of us who . . . I thought it 
obvious at the time that one of the most serious problems which 
beset agriculture was that the agricultural industry, if I may 
refer to it in that fashion, family farms were carrying far too 
much debt, far more debt than the price of grain and the quality 
of the crops could service. 
 
It seemed equally obvious, Mr. Speaker, that if you add a 
billion dollars in debt to the farms of this province, you add 
very considerably to the problem. I, and a number of others, 
said so at the time. A whole lot of people are saying so now, 
Mr. Speaker. The Premier, who was also the Minister of 
Agriculture, now has a stable of lawyers whose sole function is 
to harass farmers for these loans. Indeed, I see the statements of 
claim are on a word processor because they all . . . and all you 
do is change the name. They’re suing so many of them they 
can’t possibly type them out individually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word or two about the deficiency 
payments. I, and a number of others, Mr. Speaker, heard the 
federal Minister of Agriculture and the provincial Minister of 
Agriculture promise $40 an acre. Indeed, the federal Minister of 
Agriculture was so obliging as to issue a press release on the 
subject, just in  

case there be any doubt. So we have the figure from his office. 
 
Rather than $45 an acre, Mr. Speaker, we now have a maximum 
of 12, and probably an average across the province of $3 — a 
thin, almost invisible shadow of the program that was actually 
announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has an unusual approach to the 
federal government. Virtually since the inception of the 
province, provincial governments have acted as spokesmen for 
provincial interests. And that has been particularly true in the 
area of agriculture, which is an area of shared jurisdiction. 
 
This government has adopted an approach which, if it isn’t 
unique in Canadian history, it’s certainly most unusual. Rather 
than acting as a spokesman for provincial interests, this 
government has acted as an apologist for the federal 
government, in the hope that in payment for that service the 
federal government would shower money on the province when 
the province asked. That’s always been a crass and cynical 
approach to government — too crass and too cynical for 
virtually anyone but this government opposite. 
 
It’s also now proved to be very foolish, Mr. Speaker. Some hon. 
members will have noted the results of the last federal election. 
In the last federal election, listening and enthusiastic about the 
New Democratic Party farm policy, farm program — 
enthusiastic as well about the candidates in rural Saskatchewan 
— a majority of the rural ridings in Saskatchewan elected NDP 
MPs. It is now an accurate statement, Mr. Speaker, at least in 
federal terms, that the NDP is the voice of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that apparently hasn’t been lost on members 
opposite who now see fit to punish the voters. The $45-an-acre 
program appears to have evaporated on November, on election 
day, when the voters of rural Saskatchewan didn’t vote for 
them, punishing the voters of rural Saskatchewan with this 
niggardly program which is woefully inadequate, which is 
woefully inadequate. As many farmers have observed, it isn’t 
enough to put in . . . it won’t pay for the gas to put in the crop. 
 
Added to that is the green feed program, and if the Premier 
doesn’t understand what he’s done, then he ought to get out of 
his farm on south Albert and get out and talk to some of them 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, he ought to stop farming in 
the flower-bed in his backyard and get out and talk to some of 
the real people, because this is really an outrage. 
 
They were told last summer in unmistakable terms it didn’t 
matter whether they contributed . . . whether they participated in 
the green feed program, they wouldn’t be discriminated against. 
And of course they have been. If they had left the crop standing 
— for many it was a marginal decision — they might well have 
got the same amount of money if they’d left the crop standing 
and taken it off. Those who let the crop stand and took it off, 
get the deficiency payment. Those who in the balance decided 
to participate in the green feed program, lose it and don’t get a 
thing. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

49 
 

That isn’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if the member 
wants an opportunity to explain the green feed program, I can 
arrange a meeting in various parts of the province, particularly 
the south country where this is going to cause some very real 
hardship. If you think I don’t understand it, then I can find any 
number of farmers who don’t understand it as well, and who 
would greatly appreciate your explaining it to them. So if you 
want an opportunity to explain it to them, we can arrange it. 
 
Just as, even more serious, Mr. Speaker, is the announcement in 
the throne speech of the equity financing. Let’s understand what 
this is, Mr. Speaker; this is turning farmers from landowners 
into wage-earners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Esterhazy finds this speech 
amusing. I’m pleased. Anything I can do to lighten the burdens 
carried by members opposite, I’ll certainly do. I know you 
people are carrying a heavy burden these days, being 
Conservatives, and if I can lighten your load I’m happy to do 
so. 
 
I say to the member from Esterhazy that probably, although I 
don’t know your circumstances, probably your grandparents or 
great-grandparents were like my grandparents; they left Europe 
in the last century to avoid . . . and travelled half way around 
the world, braved incredible hardships, with no opportunity of 
ever returning to the land of their birth, all for one reason, one 
word: land. There was land available. They wanted to own their 
own land. 
 
Now, less than a century later, right-wing governments . . . now, 
less than a century later, right-wing governments seek to set up 
virtually the same land holding system whereby those of 
affluence, those with money, the privileged, own the land, and 
those who work the land do not own it. That’s the system they 
left in Europe over a century ago. And I say to members 
opposite, if you think you can sell that to the farmers in 
Saskatchewan, then you’re dreaming; you are really dreaming. 
 
(1445) 
 
I know that you’ve sold it to the banks because they’ve got land 
they want to unload, they can’t sell. They get to liquidate their 
security. If you think the banks are motivated by any other 
motive, you’re naive. 
 
It may appeal to farmers in trouble because it allows them to 
carry on farming. But the vast bulk of rural Saskatchewan will 
reject equity financing, and come the next election they’re 
going to reject more than equity financing, they’re going to 
reject those who are proposing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to talk for a moment about the 
finances of the province. I don’t intend to spend a long time on 
this subject. We’ll have an opportunity to do that in about a 
couple of weeks. 
 
I do want to say to the members opposite and to the Minister of 
Finance . . . It’s a shame the Minister of Finance was unable to 
stay. One charitable assumption  

today was that he wasn’t feeling well. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s the time-honoured 
tradition in this House not to mention the presence or absence 
of members. 
 
The Speaker: — That certainly is the rule that’s abided by in 
the House, and certainly the point of order is well taken and all 
members should adhere to it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I think I can safely say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the member who just spoke need never worry about being 
the victim of that rule, because nobody would know whether 
he’s here or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I was going to say of the Minister of 
Finance that the most charitable assumption I can make about 
his behaviour today was he wasn’t feeling well. Indeed I was 
going to ask you, Mr. Speaker, if we might get some medical 
attention for the Minister of Finance. 
 
I wanted to draw to the Minister of Finance’s attention the fact 
that . . . and I wanted to ask the Minister of Finance what steps 
he has taken to deal with what I think is a very serious question, 
the plans that the federal government appear to have to reduce, 
if not eliminate, transfer payments between the federal 
government and the provinces. 
 
In one sense, Mr. Speaker, this government richly deserves that 
treatment. That’s what you’ve been doing to the municipalities 
and the hospitals and the school boards for many years. You 
have been passing your tax burdens on to them. You have 
passed them on to the cities in a major way. The hospital 
waiting lists are dramatic evidence of it, and so are the 
conditions of our schools and universities. So this government 
opposite richly deserves to have the federal government balance 
their budget at their expense. The problem is that the public of 
Saskatchewan don’t deserve it. They really do not deserve this 
government’s programs or policies. 
 
And I would hope the Minister of Finance would take some 
steps to bring to the attention of the federal minister the 
inadvisability of reducing transfer payments. I would hope that 
the Minister of Finance . . . the Minister of Finance has never in 
the past been bothered by hypocrisy, so I don’t suppose this 
argument would bother him. But he might say to the federal 
minister: for goodness sakes, don’t do to us what we’ve been 
doing to the cities and the hospitals and the universities and the 
school boards over the last seven years. It’s one task that the 
Minister of Finance is amply suited for. The rest of us might 
find it hypocritical, but I think you’ll get through it. 
 
I want to mention, for a moment or two, the levels of taxation in 
this province. Mr. Speaker, the fiscal policies of this 
government since 1982 have simply been the height of 
foolishness. I ask members opposite just to look at what you’ve 
done over the last seven years. You took  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

50 
 

off the gas tax, reduced the sales tax, ran up a huge deficit, and 
now you’ve imposed them both to pay the interest. I ask 
members opposite: what earthly sense could that possibly make 
to you? 
 
I don’t know whether or not the members opposite thought they 
were immune from the laws of gravity in 1982. You took the 
taxes off with no thought of where you were going to get the 
money. Again, Mr. Speaker, an illustration of bad management 
— a short-term gain at the expense of long-term pain. 
 
Well the long-term pain is here, Mr. Speaker. The electorate in 
this province are groaning under an ever-increasing tax burden. 
All of us had an opportunity last fall to reacquaint ourselves 
with the electorate. Those of us in urban municipalities, many 
of us were involved in three elections. One of the things we 
heard most frequent . . . I see the member from Albert south 
was only involved in two elections. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t campaign in the municipal like 
you did. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll tell you, you did. I’ll tell you, the 
former minister of Social Services did so poorly in the 
municipal election that I wouldn’t admit having anything to do 
with it either. I wouldn’t admit being anywhere near that 
campaign. It was a disaster. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How did you make out on our other 
two? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, how well did the member make out 
in the federal election? You only won four of them. I wouldn’t 
call that a great victory. I wouldn’t call that a great victory. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, one of the things we heard, without 
attempting to talk sense to the member from Albert south — I 
know that’s an impossible task, and I was foolish to have 
started it — without trying to talk some sense to the member 
from Albert south, one of the issues we heard most frequently, 
Mr. Speaker, was the issue of taxation. Every man, woman, and 
child in this province, paying an extra $500 in direct taxes. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re beginning to feel it, they’re beginning to 
complain about it, and they ask themselves, how on earth can 
this be? 
 
Services are deteriorating. Municipalities don’t have the money 
they need to keep the streets in decent repair; hospitals have 
long waiting lists; universities — the condition of the 
universities embarrasses anyone who’s familiar with it; schools 
are deteriorating. They ask, how can this be? 
 
Well I say to members opposite, you took off the gas tax; you 
reduced the sales tax. Now you’ve reimposed them, and all they 
do is pay the interest. And indeed they don’t pay the interest 
any more. 
 
I think it’s going to be a fact this year, Mr. Speaker, that for the 
first time in the province, for the first time since the war, the 
interest will be the second largest expenditure in this province’s 
budget. Only in health and education will we spend more. That 
has all been accumulated under the  

brilliant auspices of basically the member from Kindersley, 
who’s now given the job to someone else. 
 
The same comment can be applied to oil royalties — the height 
of foolishness. We took off — this government took off oil 
royalties at a time when the industry was booming, force-fed an 
industry which couldn’t operate at any higher capacity. That 
extra money went to line the pockets of big oil. We’ve pumped 
out more oil and got less from it last year than we did in 1982. 
We pumped out a larger volume of oil and got a lot less in 
royalties. That again, Mr. Speaker, contributed to a large deficit 
and interest payments which are now creating a serious dent in 
the provincial budget. 
 
When members opposite vote for the budget, keep in mind 
you’re voting for an administration which has, at a time when it 
wasn’t needed, run up a huge deficit; now has as its second 
largest expenditure, interest payments. And maybe that’s some 
of the reasons why you don’t have money for deficiency 
payments, why you don’t have money for urban services. 
 
I want to, in the period of time that’s left — and it’s not a long 
period — I want to say a word or two about privatization. Mr. 
Speaker, this is simply a new word for, and a new method of, 
conducting an old practice, and that’s patronage. This is 
patronage in its richest form. 
 
Let me give the member from Wilkie a little assistance with this 
issue, since he seems to be having some difficulty. Let me give 
him a couple of examples: DirectWEST . . . well if it must be 
understood by the member from Wilkie, it’s going to take an 
awful long time, and I haven’t got that long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me give you a couple of illustrations. 
DirectWEST — you transferred to a company called 
DirectWEST, made up of some employees but also of the 
owners of Brigdens Printing Company . . . You gave them the 
most lucrative segment in SaskTel’s business. You gave them 
an asset of enormous value, the right to print and publish the 
province’s telephone books. 
 
I will venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that when the time comes in 
Crown corporations, they will not give us the details of the 
contract that Brigdens got. I’ll bet you until after the next 
election we will have no idea what it’s costing us, what the 
terms of the contract are, what, if anything, they paid for this. 
 
That is what they did with respect to another company, 
WESTBRIDGE. They transferred to WESTBRIDGE assets of 
enormous value. Not only did WESTBRIDGE get a great deal 
of computer equipment, but what is more, it got something 
much more valuable than that, and that’s a contract to provide 
computer services to this government. We have no idea what 
the contract is. We have no idea what they paid. 
 
But let’s have a look at SaskCOMP just for a moment, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s assume that WESTBRIDGE has the same 
contract that SaskCOMP had. If that’s the case then if they  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

51 
 

paid SaskCOMP . . . the last annual report of SaskCOMP stated 
the province had an equity of $10 million. Let’s assume 
WESTBRIDGE paid $10 million — I’m not prepared to assume 
that for a moment because I suspect they got it for a lot less 
than that. Let’s assume, however, they did pay $10 million, and 
let’s assume that they have the same contract SaskCOMP 
enjoyed. They would enjoy a 34 per cent rate of return on their 
investment — very, very lucrative contract. But these are all 
assumptions; we don’t know. We don’t know what, if anything, 
WESTBRIDGE paid. We don’t know what their contracts with 
the government are. That’s the fashion in which this 
government operates. 
 
And the only conclusion which I, and members of the 
Saskatchewan tax-paying community, the only assumption we 
can make is that those contracts will not bear public scrutiny 
and that’s why we haven’t got them. There is, in other words, 
something to be ashamed of. 
 
Privatization with this government has involved selling off the 
most profitable parts of the Crown corporations, leaving the 
taxpayer to carry the burden with respect to the balance. This is 
certainly true in the case of the telephone directory in SaskTel. 
The annual report doesn’t give us separate figures with respect 
to the directory. It is generally known and appreciated, 
however, that the directory was a real money-maker. 
 
Let me tell you something, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t a real 
money-maker, and that’s the telephone system itself. The 
telephone system in rural Saskatchewan does not break even; it 
doesn’t in urban Saskatchewan. What we have in SaskTel, or 
what we had in SaskTel, was something we used to call 
cross-subsidization. The computer side . . . the telephone 
directory subsidized the little black telephone which sat on your 
desk, and you got that at a price which was less than what it 
would have cost to provide it, and less than what you would pay 
elsewhere. If you think telephone systems are expensive in 
Saskatchewan try North Dakota or Montana, they’re a great 
deal more. 
 
We subsidized the telephone system because we said people do 
not necessarily need computers, but they do need the black 
telephone, and everyone should get that at the lowest possible 
cost. It’s an almost certainty, Mr. Speaker, that telephone rates 
are going to go up, and go up fairly dramatically now that they 
have sold the computer side of the company, now that they’ve 
sold the directory. It’s almost certain that rates will go up. 
 
It’s also the case, Mr. Speaker, with respect to SaskEnergy. I 
invite members to check the last annual report of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. That annual report breaks down the figures. 
Members can see for themselves that SPC has made a lot of 
money over the years on the sale of natural gas, and has lost 
money over the years with respect to the selling of electricity. 
 
(1500) 
 
I think these figures are accurate. Since the company has begun 
to sell natural gas, they have accumulated net profits of $248 
million in the natural gas side, and losses of about $15 million 
on the electrical side. We have  

always subsidized electricity and natural gas. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, it is a case of urban Saskatchewan 
subsidizing rural Saskatchewan. Natural gas up until very 
recently has been sold in urban Saskatchewan. Rural 
Saskatchewan gets by with electricity and heating oil which 
they buy privately from private vendors. I don’t think many 
people in urban Saskatchewan were quite ready to do that. 
 
We all enjoy benefits of a strong agricultural economy. The real 
losers with the privatization of SaskEnergy is going to be rural 
Saskatchewan. It is rural Saskatchewan which has had the 
electrical side subsidized. It is they who are the big users of 
electricity. When they sell SaskEnergy, it is rural Saskatchewan 
which is going to face it; it is the people in rural Saskatchewan 
who pay the largest electrical bills. 
 
This government is also, Mr. Speaker, selling off money assets 
which are making money. One of the really . . . There are any 
number of examples. Let me pick a couple that come to mind 
— Sask Mining. The last annual report I had in my office 
downstairs at least, was 1987, and I think that’s the last one 
that’s been . . . I don’t think the ’88 one’s been filed. 
 
In the 1987 year, SMDC reported profits of $60 million. The 
year before that they’d reported profits of $40 million. 1988 
was a banner year in the mining industry. The profits of most 
mining companies doubled or trebled. That 60 million, or 120 
million, or 180 million dollars, which is not available for 
hospitals in Saskatoon, streets in Regina, for any number of 
projects needed in Moose Jaw and elsewhere . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Downtown revitalization. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Downtown revitalization. It’s money 
which is not available, but badly needed for a deficiency 
payment, and that’s one company, Mr. Speaker. We have given 
away 60 million and probably two or three times that when that 
company was privatized. 
 
In bowing as they do at the altar of private ownership, they 
short change the public of this . . . the public of this province in 
the services they get. That is distressing. What is heartening, 
though, is that the public are coming to realize that, and 
members opposite will understand that in a very direct way 
when you have enough nerve to call an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the time is going on and many members want to 
speak. I want to close by saying to members opposite that when 
you have enough nerve to call an election you’re going to find 
out, if you haven’t already, some things the public don’t like. 
 
All of us last fall participated in at least one election, and most 
of us participated in two or three. As we went door to door, we 
found out some things; we reacquainted ourselves with the 
electorate. We found out that the electorate don’t like the 
changes in the dental plan. We heard it everywhere. 
 
I suspect even members opposite found out that the  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

52 
 

public don’t like the changes in the drug plan. I suspect 
members found out — opposite — found out what we’ve been 
telling them all spring, and that is that the hospital waiting lists 
are unacceptably long. And when they’re dealing particularly 
with older people, or with families who have older people as 
one of their members, they’re concerned about the shortage of 
nursing homes. Right? What members are going to find out is 
when they have enough nerve to call an election that the public 
have come to the conclusion they don’t much like Tories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s apparent that I will be voting against 
the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure indeed to rise in my place in this Legislative Assembly 
once more to participate in this debate on the Speech from the 
Throne. And certainly, sir, I want to extend to you my best 
wishes for this session. I hope that your job will be a relatively 
easy one. I know that there are some dire prognostications in 
terms of the route that this legislature is going to take, but 
certainly you have our pledge as well, I think, that we will, in 
the spirit of lively debate, also offer you as much co-operation 
as we possibly can. 
 
I would further, Mr. Speaker, like to add my words of 
congratulation, as well, to our Lieutenant Governor as she read 
so effectively the throne speech for the first time. I just want to 
wish her the best in a very, very exciting period of time in her 
life over . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m wondering if the member would 
permit a question? 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member permit a question? I have no 
indication, therefore I just assume that the member will not 
permit a question. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, I think in the 
speech that I have prepared for the hon. member’s digestion, 
some of those questions that he has will certainly be answered 
in no uncertain way. 
 
But I was saying about the Lieutenant Governor, I want to 
extend my remarks, Mr. Speaker, to include a most hearty 
welcome to the newest member of this legislature, my newly 
found friend and colleague, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — In the short period of time that he has joined 
us in our caucus and in this legislature, he already is having his 
impact felt. And in the course of my remarks I want to make 
sure that I draw it to the attention of all the people of 
Saskatchewan, and particularly to the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, to the vibrant, vigorous individual 
whom they have elected. And it is just my great deal of pleasure 
that I will be able to work with this man for the next good long 
time. 
 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I want to reflect a good portion of 
my remarks on the short, the relatively short period of time that 
the Leader of the Opposition did speak to us. And I must admit 
that although I was tremendously impressed with his short 
period of remarks in terms of presentation, style, and so on, I 
have to admit that I was deeply disappointed in the artistry that 
he displayed, in the sophistry of his remarks, which make us 
wonder in terms of what really goes on in the mind of the 
member from Riversdale in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I spoke in the throne speech last year, I 
made a point of pointing out to the members opposite, and 
indeed to all members of this House, the nature and meaning of 
the process that we go through in these privileged halls. And I 
repeat again this year, Mr. Speaker, that these are indeed 
privileged halls. They’re privileged in many ways. 
 
There’s freedom of speech here, freedom of debate for every 
member to stand in his place and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what he believes in and what the government 
should be doing. And this freedom is protected by a powerful 
thing, Mr. Speaker, an extremely powerful thing unique in 
parliamentary procedure. And of course, Mr. Speaker, I am 
talking about the absolute immunity, the absolute immunity that 
members of this Assembly enjoy in law for any comments that 
they would like to make in this place. 
 
And last session, Mr. Speaker, I urged the members to show 
respect and have a sense of just how powerful that immunity is. 
Show respect for the people you represent, and don’t go on 
witch-hunts after individuals who cannot defend themselves in 
this Assembly. Show respect, and make use of your free speech 
to tell your constituents what you believe. Tell them what your 
policy is on important issues of the day. All I asked, Mr. 
Speaker, was for all of us to treat this institution and the people 
of Saskatchewan to the respect to which they are entitled, and 
of which the Speech from the Throne is symbolic. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we review the last session, we find out 
that the members opposite would not accept this advice. We 
find that they continue to slander people in the House, and they 
know that these people cannot defend themselves. They 
continue to refuse to tell the people what policy they have on 
any subject. They continue to use their powerful privilege of 
unfettered free speech to persecute individuals and to hide from 
the people of Saskatchewan, to refuse to explain any policy that 
they might advance. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think it is a shame, a crying shame, 
when the leader, when the leader of a political party — and yes, 
I’m referring to the member of Saskatoon Riversdale — it is a 
crying shame that he would stand up in an honour-bound 
institution such as this Legislative Assembly and use the debate 
on the Speech from the Throne to engage in character 
assassination of people who cannot be here to defend 
themselves. 
 
He stood in this House on Thursday and he attacked the 
reputation of individuals who cannot defend themselves, and 
I’m going to list some of those individuals. He  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

53 
 

attacked Mr. Archambault; he attacked Jack Cennon; he 
attacked George Hill; he attacked Dr. Schwartz; and he attacked 
John Gormley. He attacked all those people and many more, 
Mr. Speaker, but he did not tell us one thing he would do if he 
was Premier. 
 
These people that he is attacking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are not 
here. They can’t defend themselves. So this man who would be 
Premier, in an act of rare courage . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He will be premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I think the people, they are going to hear this 
phrase. They are going to hear this phrase from me quite a few 
times, because this man who would be Premier is going to find 
out. And oh, how brave from the member of Riversdale; oh, 
how brave to attack people who cannot answer themselves in 
this House. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to call that man on 
those attacks, and I’ll deal with that as we go along. 
 
But he did more than that. He attacked members also, members 
on this side of the House, and he attacked, particularly, 
back-benchers. But that’s part of the game, and we will defend 
ourselves. I am a back-bencher, and I take offence at that form 
of attack from the Leader of the Opposition. I am offended by 
being called anaemic. I resent being characterized as atrophied. 
And your canned speech remark is an insult to all politicians 
whose existence depends upon their ability and their 
communicative skills. 
 
I resent this indignity, particularly from a party leader, from a 
party man, a party leader who would be Premier. That is 
unbecoming. It is not the respect that this man should have for 
this institution, a man who should, in his position, rise above 
that type of fray. And you will find that our back-benchers 
certainly are quite willing and quite capable to defend 
themselves. 
 
And I can assure you members opposite that this speech is 
going to be one that is not anaemic, not atrophied, and it will be 
one back-bencher’s speech that you would wish was canned. 
 
(1515) 
 
But I want to speak to the vision contained in the Speech from 
the Throne, Mr. Speaker, a vision that escapes the NDP, totally 
escapes them, because they are too busy looking at the past, 
dreaming of the past, living in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a need to be forward-looking and to have a plan for 
action, and this government, Mr. Speaker, has just produced 
such a plan. This government, Mr. Speaker, this PC 
government, is the government that has acted and is acting on 
behalf of agriculture. The depth and the breadth and consistency 
of support for agriculture demonstrated by this government 
goes beyond, goes way beyond anything that the NDP can 
understand — six per cent money, ag credit, livestock advance, 
livestock investment tax credit, livestock facilities and tax 
credit, deficiency payment, and much, much more, Mr.  

Speaker. 
 
We have listened to the NDP gang over there stand up and tell 
us how much they care about agriculture. What utter hypocrisy 
— hypocrisy. Let me ask, Mr. Speaker, let me ask: what is the 
source of debt crisis in rural Saskatchewan today, in 1989? 
What is the source of our agricultural problems? You know, 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP knows, and the people of Saskatchewan 
know that the source of the problem in ’89 is the policy of the 
NDP in 1980, ’81, ’82. 
 
When interest rates were shooting up in 1980 to 1981 and ’82, 
the member from Riversdale and his cronies and the family of 
Crown corporations, what did they do? Nothing. They did 
nothing, Mr. Speaker, and it is sickening. It is just sickening 
that he has the gall to stand in this House and to assault the 
agriculture policy of this government. What gall, and the 
hypocrisy of the Leader of the NDP is audacious; it’s beyond 
audacious, the height of hypocrisy. 
 
The member for Riversdale had the gall — as you recall on 
Thursday, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the member for Riversdale 
had the gall to talk about the Canadian Wheat Board. And I’d 
like to revert for a moment to my previous and honourable 
tradition of teaching. Let me be a teacher for a moment for the 
member from Riversdale and his NDP caucus: a history lesson, 
a brief history lesson. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, was founded by a 
Progressive Conservative government. It was no wide-eyed 
NDPer who created that institution. It was a progressive 
government that created the wheat board, and let us never forget 
that. 
 
And another piece of history for the NDP, Mr. Speaker, another 
piece of history. It was not — was not, Mr. Speaker — an NDP 
government that brought medicare to the nation as a national 
plan for all Canadians. There has never been a federal NDP 
government — never. There has never been a prime minister 
who was an active NDPer, although I suppose Mr. Trudeau 
came close. The NDP like to claim him for their own, and I say 
they can have him. 
 
Still, the NDP has never, never enjoyed the confidence of a 
majority of Canadians, so don’t sit there across the floor and 
claim you did it all alone. Don’t get on your soap-box and 
pretend to be the only ones around who had anything to do with 
medicare because, Mr. Speaker, that kind of statement is a lie. It 
is a lie pure and simple. And this nonsense that the PC 
government, that I am proud to be a member of, that we are 
opposed to government involvement in the economy. That 
statement would be a lie, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me ask: what is the rural natural gas distribution program? I 
wonder how many members opposite know that? Well, I’ll tell 
you. It is a program to bring natural gas to rural families at a 
huge cost to the government, Mr. Speaker. It is government 
acting to provide service to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
What is the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
a Crown corporation created by this  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

54 
 

Progressive Conservative government. And in a couple of years 
we’ll have the NDPers over there standing on their soap-box 
once more, saying they created it and claiming it as their own. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we heard the member for Riversdale, we 
heard the member of Riversdale talking about stupidity, talking 
about stupidity. I was shocked, Mr. Speaker, to hear that kind of 
terminology from a leader, from the would-be premier, that he 
would demean himself to that degree. 
 
Well let me educate him a little bit about stupidity. He talks 
about the stupidity of our agricultural policies. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it was the farmers of our province who turfed 
him out in 1982, 1986, and in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — When you want to talk about stupidity, all we 
have to do is take a look at the death taxes, the succession 
duties that the NDP government put in. It was when a farmer 
died and his land had to be paid for and it was reverting over to 
his wife. She had to come up with the money to pay for those 
succession duties that those members across placed on that 
land. And how many wives and how many children and how 
many families in this province suffered, lost their farms because 
of the stupidity of the succession death tax instituted by the 
members opposite. 
 
And it is also the height of stupidity for the NDP minister of 
Agriculture in those days to tell farm families in 1980 that they 
should get out of everything except grain. Can you imagine? To 
get out of everything except grain. Don’t diversify; growing 
wheat is enough. That was the advice that he gave them. They 
told farmers, and I quote: 
 

To change over to straight grain is necessary. We are 
diversified enough. 
 

That was the NDP policy, Mr. Speaker, a policy of stupidity. 
 
And then when you throw in the land bank, is it any wonder 
that they were turfed out in ’86, ’82, and again in ’88? And will 
be once more in 1990. We are still, Mr. Speaker, trying to 
restore the damage ravaged upon the farmers of this province in 
the last administration of the NDP. 
 
And so, perhaps, I must admit that it is a blessing in disguise 
that members opposite and the leader of the party opposite do 
not have an agricultural policy, because if that is the policy that 
they have, it is indeed a blessing that they do not have, and we 
cannot afford any more like that. 
 
And it is not bad enough that farm families have to fight 
droughts and floods, grasshoppers, Mr. Speaker, but they have 
to fight the NDP too. They have to fight the member for 
Riversdale, the man who today says that he is so interested in 
farm families, but that he had made a career of throwing them 
off their land. 
 

First, he tried to nationalize all the farms in Saskatchewan with 
the land bank. And then when farm families threw him out in 
’82, he decided that he was going to get them. He decided that 
he was going to get even with the farm families of 
Saskatchewan. So this leader, who now claims to care, decided 
to get even with farm families in Saskatchewan, and he went 
after them with a vengeance. And what a hypocrisy, what a 
hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He took up a career on 
foreclosing the farms. 
 
And they don’t like to hear that, Mr. Speaker. But I echo the 
words of my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. It’s about 
the NDP, and it’s time for them to tell the truth, the whole truth, 
and nothing but the truth. Farm families in this province 
suddenly found not only did they have to fight the weather, not 
only did they have to fight the banks, but they had to fight the 
leader of the NDP. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you 
to the members in this Legislative Assembly, and to the 
members opposite and particularly to the Leader of the NDP, I 
would like to introduce to you a family — a man and his wife 
— that the Leader of the Opposition foreclosed on, a man who 
fought this member’s firm, a man who fought the weather, 
fought the banks, and fought the Leader of the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, this man is in the gallery right 
now. I would like him to stand and be greeted by the Assembly. 
I introduce to you Evelyn and Allan Gaudet, their son Terry. I 
understand Terry is 16 years old today but he’s looking forward 
to his birthday tomorrow. I’m certainly glad to see him here. 
And their son Keith and wife Jo Anne are also in the building. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want the Leader of the NDP to 
have a look, not at a statistic, but rather a family, a family that 
has been brutalized and savaged by this man who cares, this 
man who says: I work for the families of this province. 
 
Mr. Gaudet was forced off his farm, Mr. Speaker, by the 
member for Riversdale. He met him in a court of law, and the 
member for Riversdale did not have concern for this farm 
family that he suddenly claims to have today. The member for 
Riversdale not only did not have any concern, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but he had no mercy. I’ll take my revenge, said the 
member for Riversdale, I’ll take my revenge on this farm 
family. 
 
What do we have to do, Mr. Speaker? What do we have to do to 
make the point? Do we have to use the NDP tactics of filling 
this whole auditorium . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to 
refrain from using unparliamentary language even from their 
seats. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the concern of the members opposite. A nerve has 
been struck, a nerve has been struck . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Appreciate their embarrassment. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

55 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — And the embarrassment, as my colleague 
says, is something that they are trying to hide by trying to shout 
me down, but I will not be silenced. I will stand up for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan like my colleagues on this side, and 
you can do all the hooting, and you can do all the hollering that 
you want, but the fact remains that there is a family that has 
been foreclosed on. 
 
And I ask again: what must we do to make this point? How 
many must we bring in? Do we fill all the galleries up? That 
member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has never come clean. He has 
never come clean with the people of Saskatchewan. How many 
families did you make homeless? How many families were 
caught in the 20 per cent and 21 per cent interest freeze? And 
nothing was done. 
 
And I ask the member from Riversdale, I ask the Leader of the 
Opposition, the man who would be premier; the man who says, 
I am the farmers’ friend; the man who says, trust me — I ask 
that man across: how much money did you make from the 
bank? How much money did you make from the foreclosing on 
this farm family? 
 
I asked this gentleman, I asked him: what did it take to get you 
off the farm? He said, I fought, I fought with all the resources 
we had. I spent $18,000 on legal fees, another 7 or $8,000 for 
consultant fees. I put everything into it that I had to fight this 
Leader of the Opposition and to fight the bank. I spent $25,000 
in fighting. 
 
(1530) 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this man spent $25,000 trying to 
regain and to keep his farm, his family farm, how much did the 
lawyers for the bank, how much did the opposition member 
make on this deal? I ask him, as a winning lawyer, because they 
were successful — he is a good lawyer — did he make $50,000 
on one foreclosure? How many foreclosures have we got? I 
have a list of seven or eight. I have a list of foreclosures here 
that I have knowledge of. How many more were there, I ask the 
member. Come clean, quit your hypocrisy. Quit saying that you 
are for the small guy when you line your own pockets and 
feather your bed at the expense of Saskatchewan farm families. 
I say shame, shame. And this is the man who cares. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, have no hesitation, no hesitation whatever, in 
calling the Leader of the Opposition, the man who would be 
Premier, to order. He is in this House. He spoke in this debate. 
He slandered us. And that is fair game because I’m a 
back-bencher; I can defend myself. And my colleague can 
defend himself, and I’m sure that he will be able to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — This is the man who throws families off the 
farm. I say this is hypocrisy. Talk about tough love, Mr. 
Speaker. This man is tough all right, and he says, I care; trust 
me. Hypocrisy. Those men and ladies over there were caught, 
they were caught with their hands in the cookie jar. They were 
caught with their hands in their cookie jars, and now they are 
embarrassed, and they’re trying to shout themselves to be heard. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can see why they’re getting red about the 
ears. I can see why they are blushing. I can see . . . In fact, I 
would suggest that you’re not only blushing around the ears, but 
that you’re red all over. You’re red all over. There’s no anaemia 
there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to invite the member from 
Riversdale, I’m going to invite the Leader of the Opposition, to 
meet Mr. Gaudet and his family after my remarks. I would like 
him to meet this family and discuss his concern of the 
Saskatchewan farm families, discuss the plan that he has to save 
the Saskatchewan farm families. Let’s meet in the hall outside 
after my remarks, and let’s just discuss this. 
 
I would like the member from Riversdale to be able to meet this 
farm family face to face. They’re not just figures; they’re not 
just facts; they’re not just a way to fatten one’s bank account 
and then say, let me be leader. I want to be Premier, trust me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is offensive. It is offensive to listen to a man 
that will do anything to get power. He will tell people almost 
anything, except the answers. And when he meets this couple 
and their family, is he going to answer by saying, well, you 
know, somebody had to do it, and it might as well come into my 
bank account as somebody else’s. Or is he going to say, well 
now that I’ve been exposed, I’ve cut my tie with that bank; I’m 
not doing it any more. Sorry folks, trust me. 
 
You weren’t directly involved. Is that what he’s going to say. 
Oh, I wasn’t directly involved. It was my company that did it. It 
was some of our other lawyers that did the dirty work. Or is it 
going to be all of them, all of the above. Is he going to say, 
sorry, but trust me. I want to be your leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is offensive. It is offensive to listen to a man 
that will do anything to gain power. He will tell the people in 
hospital that they will be thrown out in the streets if they vote 
for a PC government. If they vote for a PC candidate in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, he will frighten them as much he can. 
 
He announced in the House on Thursday that he’s going to tell 
the people that medicare will be destroyed, medicare will be 
destroyed. People will die, people will be sick with nowhere to 
go. That’s the line of the NDP. They have to blackmail people 
into voting for them because the people cannot win. The NDP 
cannot win the confidence of the people any other way than 
through blackmail — the party of blackmail, the party of fear, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m going to go a step further, Mr. Speaker, and make a 
very blunt observation. Socialism is a policy and a philosophy 
that only wins through some kind of tyranny. There are some 
socialist countries where people actually take their life in their 
hands when they criticize. And in this province, Mr. Speaker, it 
is still in the tyranny of fear. It is even a tyranny that presents 
the face of death. I will never forget and I will never forgive the 
NDP, in the last federal election, telling the people literally that 
they would die if free trade came to pass. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

56 
 

Remember the commercial on TV, Mr. Speaker, remember the 
actor in a nurse’s uniform telling Canadians that if free trade 
became a reality "entire families" — and that’s a quote — 
"entire families" would be wiped out. Well, free trade has come 
to pass and the people are not dying in the streets. The NDP 
tried to use the tyranny of fear and they failed. And the member 
for Riversdale that he says that he is proud of his letter to the 
people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg; he is proud of his tyranny of 
fear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to ask for a page, please. 
 
I want to make a point, Mr. Speaker, and I want to make this 
point abundantly clear. Thursday last, during the discussion 
when the Leader of the Opposition was making his reply to the 
address from the throne, an hon. member asked him  
_- and it’s recorded in Hansard, it’s recorded in the Hansard 
— and the member asks on page 21, "What about your letter?" 
And I quote the Leader of the Opposition’s answer. "I’m going 
to come to my letter in just a moment," he said. 
 
He went through his entire speech. There was no mention of a 
letter. He made no mention of the letter. He did not address that 
concern, the letter for which the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has thanked the Leader of the 
Opposition so graciously and allowing him to win the election 
thus. But I want to quote a little bit of a letter that the Leader of 
the Opposition sent to all the constituents in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and it begins . . . it’s dated November 
24, 1988, just approximately two and a half, three weeks prior 
to the by-election, and it says: 
 

Dear Friends: The central issue of this 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election is the record of the PC 
government in Regina. 
 

Do you notice that? 
 
The Leader of the Opposition said the main thing in this 
election is the record of the PC government in Regina, but we 
fought that by-election on our record. We fought on our record. 
And I ask the people of Saskatchewan, in whom did the people 
of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg put their trust? — on the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who is now my colleague. 
 
And the letter goes on further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
Leader of the Opposition states: 
 

And the latest PC proposal to close down all five hospitals 
in this constituency is unacceptable. 
 

That’s a quote, policy of fear. They’re using fear, the fear of 
death in the minds of many people to win an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 
 

The people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg are telling me that 
they want to send a message to the PC government in 
Regina. 
 

And are we grateful that they did, because along, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with the message, they sent the  

messenger, and again we are very, very grateful for that. 
 
The message should be abundantly clear — tell the truth, the 
whole truth, and nothing but the truth. 
 
And that letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is signed: 
 

Yours sincerely, Roy Romanow, Leader of the Opposition. 
 

I’m going to continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on another letter. 
It’s a letter that I also sent across to the member from 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition. This letter is dated 
February 17, 1989. It’s within two days of being two months 
after the election, after the by-election. And this letter is headed 
to a Mr. Maurice Filson, chairperson of the board, Lafleche 
Union Hospital. 
 

Dear Mr. Filson: I am writing to you concerning your 
integrated facility hospital, which has been approved in 
principle. On behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, I am 
pleased to advise you that the planning process for your 
project can now proceed. I would like to take this 
opportunity to wish you well with the project and to thank 
you for your continued interest in improved services for 
Lafleche and district. (Signed by the Minister of Health.) 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, two months after the election of the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, there is now a hospital 
going to be built in Lafleche. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the tyranny of fear, it does not work. 
But there is this letter; there is the matter of that threat that was 
handed down; there is a lack of an answer to that tyranny. 
 
Now imagine that you are an elderly patient, Mr. Speaker, and 
you’re in a hospital in that constituency, and the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg tells you that if you vote for a PC 
candidate, that your hospital will be closed, that you have no 
place to go. What will happen? 
 
Well of course you’re going to be frightened, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Of course you would. That’s why this is such a 
reprehensible, unforgiveable tactic. In fact, the NDP have 
scared so many so often, have issued so many false alarms, 
have cried wolf so many times, that finally the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has sent us one. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s supposed to be some honour 
among people who would seek the trust of the people of 
Saskatchewan. In this Assembly we are required to refer to 
another as honourable members because it is a given — it’s a 
given that you must have some honour to represent the people 
of Saskatchewan. It is not an honourable thing to go around 
blackmailing the sick, the elderly, and, in the words of the NDP 
leader himself, it’s sickening. It’s sickening that he would stand 
in this House and continue to do so. 
 
And I’m going to make another blunt observation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I believe that it would be the honourable thing for that 
member to resign from this House and let someone else take 
over that party — someone who  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

57 
 

understands the word honour, someone who understands that 
you do not engage in a tyranny of fear. Yes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I believe he should resign. Send him to Ottawa. I 
understand there may be an opening for him there. Send him 
back to the Bank of Nova Scotia. I understand he does well 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
moved the address in reply, he suggested that we listen 
carefully to the remarks for the member from Riversdale to see 
if there would be any solutions. Well I took that advice; I 
listened very, very carefully. And what did he have to offer? 
Well he told us that he was opposed to public participation, but 
that he had flip-flopped from his position of 1982. He told us 
that he has flip-flopped on his concern for farm families, and 
again I ask him to meet with Mr. Gaudet after my remarks. 
 
He has told us that he has changed his spots on all manners of 
issues, but he did not tell us one thing what he would do. He did 
not tell us, Mr. Speaker, how he would help farm families. He 
did not tell us how he would help families. He did not tell us 
how he would meet the challenges of the 1990s in trade, in 
economic development, in recovering the frail economy. 
 
(1545) 
 
He did not tell us how you would do anything, Mr. Speaker. I 
ask him, and I ask him plainly, what is your agriculture policy? 
And don’t tell me you don’t like it. You don’t like anything 
that’s not your own. And don’t tell me that you would make it 
better. Tell me and the people of Saskatchewan how you would 
make it better. How? However you look at it, Mr. Speaker, his 
predicament is a little pathetic. No options, no policy, just 
hypocrisy and fear. 
 
But let’s talk about policy for a moment, Mr. Speaker. Here’s 
what we know about NDP policy — the now famous leader’s 
flip-flop policy. They are in favour of uranium mining and they 
are opposed to uranium mining. But trust me! They are in 
favour of a gas tax, yet they oppose a gas tax. They are in 
favour of Meech Lake, and they are opposed to Meech Lake. 
But the member from Riversdale says, trust me Canada, trust 
me Saskatchewan. Trust me! 
 
And they are in favour of unrestricted abortion, but yet they 
oppose unrestricted abortion. They are in favour, Mr. Speaker, 
of the family farm, and they are opposed to the family farm. 
Trust me. Trust me, the Gaudet family. That’s what they are 
saying — trust me. 
 
And now we see, Mr. Speaker, that they are in favour of 
privatization, but they are opposed to public participation. We 
are witness to the destruction of a once great political 
institution, a political party that had creativity and energy, and 
today is represented by the politically ailing, the weak, the loud, 
and the hypocritical. 
 
We are witness, we are witness to the intellectual bankruptcy of 
the NDP and the loss of faith of that party within the people of 
this province. 
 

We are witness, Mr. Speaker, to a party that believes it can ride 
to power with fear alone and no policy to back it up. 
 
And since, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP have no policy of 
their own, let’s talk about the policy of this government. It’s the 
policy of this government to encourage economic growth and 
diversification through public participation. And that’s a pretty 
clear statement of policy, I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And perhaps the NDP might use it as a model on how 
they might develop their own policy. 
 
But let me flesh it out a little bit; let me put some details on this 
policy. It is part of the government’s public participation policy 
that employee ownership be a priority. We have seen that 
reflected in the sale of Saskatchewan Government Printing 
Company to its employees. And in the absence of any policy, 
the NDP simply oppose our policy, so they opposed the sale of 
their government printing company. Yet three months, three 
months before they were defeated in 1982, they established the 
Saskatchewan Holding and Reinvestment incorporation, SHAR. 
 
And I would just like to take a look at a Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
article dated on March 2, 1988. In part, the article says that this 
is from the minutes of the Saskatchewan Crown Investment 
Corporation Directors meeting for January, 14, 1982. 
 

The cabinet ministers of the day stamped their seal of 
approval on privatization. These were the elite of then 
Premier Allan Blakeney’s NDP government. 
 
Finance Minister of the time, the present member from 
Regina North East; Urban Affairs Minister, Walter 
Smishek; Environment Minister, Ted Bowerman; and 
Co-operations and Co-operatives Minister, Don Cody 
Ex-Highways Minister, Eiling Kramer also gave the nod. 
(And it goes on to say) If voters hadn’t tossed Blakeney 
out of office just three months later, Saskatchewan’s New 
Democrats likely would have led the world in 
privatization. In office, (it goes on) NDPers secretly plan 
to launch a massive privatization program. Out of office, 
they savaged their own ideas. 
 

Today they opposed the sale of the government printing 
companies. They say that we have sold the company to our 
friends. Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree that the employees of the 
Saskatchewan printing company are my friends. I have yet to 
meet them, but I’m proud to call them friends, and I’m 
embarrassed that the NDP would disown them simply because 
they want to participate in the ownership of their own company. 
It rankles the NDP, it rankles the member from Saskatoon 
South, it just drives them up the wall that every single 
employee, every one, 100 per cent of the employees 
participated in the purchase of the printing company. 
 
The NDP are totally unable to deal with the idea of employee 
ownership. They can’t handle the idea that employees might 
like to own the business that they work for. They don’t 
understand. They do not understand that  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

58 
 

people naturally want to have a stake in their future, that they 
want to build it for themselves. So the member from Riversdale 
and his colleagues, his caucus, resort to insulting the 
employees. They result in calling them names, in calling them 
down. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I welcome those employees. I 
welcome them with open arms. But it is beyond my 
understanding why the NDP would reject them, reject them out 
of hand. And why, Mr. Speaker? Why is so important to the 
NDP that the government be in the printing business? It boggles 
my mind. Why is it so important that the government has to be 
in control of the printing business? 
 
On that, Mr. Speaker, I find it strange how the NDP have 
framed this debate. Have you noticed? It’s not surprising, but 
strange. They ask: why private ownership? Why private 
enterprise? Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you, shouldn’t the 
question be: why state ownership? And that is important, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s very important because it reflects what you think the norm 
should be. And the NDP wants this debate to be in terms of the 
norm being state ownership. Even the socialists of the world do 
not think that that should be the norm any more. From Sweden 
to Austria to Denmark to China, Soviet Union — all of them are 
questioning, why state ownership? They’re all recognizing 
throughout the world, socialism is sick; socialism is dying; 
socialism cannot sustain itself. 
 
Why would Saskatchewan want to go back to the ’70s? Why 
would the people of this province vote for a party that wants to 
relegate them to a back seat on this train that is heading along 
and advancing in the economy of the world? Why, I ask? It 
doesn’t make sense. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s the only way they can control them, 
if they keep them ignorant. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — My colleague from Regina Wascana hit it on 
the nose. It’s the only way that they can control the people. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the NDP is hanging 
on to their Regina Manifesto. They are hanging on to the glory 
days of the 1960s. They are hanging on to an ideology that is 
obsolete. The world is changing. The world is changing, but not 
they. 
 
So I ask, why should the government be involved in a printing 
company? I look also, I look further, to the sale of the Meadow 
Lake pulp mill, or the Meadow Lake Sawmill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And the NDP say that the government sold the mill to 
its friends. And I say to the employees of the saw mill, and I say 
to the Indian bands that purchased that saw mill, that I welcome 
you as my friends. I do not know why the NDP would not want 
you as their friends, but I welcome you. 
 
And I say to the employees of WESTBRIDGE, I welcome you 
as my friends. And speaking of WESTBRIDGE and friends, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to bring to your attention how the 
NDP think that they can make friends. You will remember 
about a year ago that the member  

from Battlefords stunned and offended the entire province when 
he tried to blackmail the Battleford’s chamber of commerce into 
being his friend, and he told them . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I remember that. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — You remember that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — The people of Saskatchewan remember that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the people of North Battleford will 
never forget it. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — The people of North Battleford remember 
that. And he told them: I’m going to be in cabinet some day, so 
better be my friend, or else. Policy of fear; policy of 
intimidation. Well, Mr. Speaker, he never learned; the NDP 
never learns. 
 
At an occasion last week that is intended for non-partisan 
fellowship, the Premier’s dinner, it wasn’t bad enough that the 
NDP booed the Consul General of the United States, the 
Lieutenant Governor’s speech. That wasn’t bad enough; that 
wasn’t boorish enough. They had to engage further in their 
favourite friendship game of blackmail. 
 
The member for The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, met an 
employee of the WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, and he 
said to that employee: we are going to be in government, so 
you’d better be friends with us. He also told the WESTBRIDGE 
employee, and I quote: you’d better do business with me. And 
the two exchanged business cards and separated. 
 
This is how the NDP makes friends, Mr. Speaker, through 
blackmail and intimidation. And I say, shame. I say shame on 
them and shame on the member from Battleford because he had 
better realize, as my caucus colleagues were saying, the people 
of Battlefords do not accept this kind of behaviour, and shame 
on his leader for allowing something like that to happen and not 
to keep it in line. 
 
And I have a message for that member, Mr. Speaker, a clear 
message, and that is that he and his gang will not be 
government, and the people of Battleford are going to have the 
final say as to whether you are going to be in this Assembly 
again. 
 
The NDP says that we sold a computer company to our friends, 
and I say welcome to those new friends. We on this side do not 
need blackmail. When the NDP thinks employees are not 
worthy of friendship, why they would do that I do not know. 
 
I do not believe you and WESTBRIDGE, or in the printing 
company or in the Meadow Lake Sawmill or in any of the 
others, I do not believe the NDP when they say that you are bad 
people trying to destroy the province, trying to destroy 
medicare, trying to destroy anything. I believe you are good, 
decent people who want opportunities for  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

59 
 

your families, good futures for your children, and I congratulate 
you on your initiative, your effort, and your confidence in this 
great province. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I say to the Gaudet family, I welcome you as my friends. 
And I say to all the families in Saskatchewan, to all the farm 
families in the province, I consider you my friends. And I will 
say to you that I and this government will do everything 
possible not to let you down. And why the member from 
Riversdale would treat you with spite and go after your family 
farm, well, he can explain that in person. But I will welcome 
you, and every member of this government will welcome you. 
After he has savaged and ravaged and brutalized these families, 
he says, trust me, trust me. 
 
This province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was not built by attacking 
people the way the NDP do. It was not built on the concepts of 
divide and conquer, as they’ve tried. It was not built by 
politicians who lacked the courage to tell people where they 
stood on issues. And I can say this, Mr. Speaker — everyone 
knew where Tommy Douglas stood. Everyone knew where 
John Diefenbaker stood. 
 
But I ask the people of Saskatchewan and anyone who is 
listening, take a moment and think; take a moment and think 
and ask yourself, where does the leader of the NDP stand? No 
one knows. He is hiding. The leader of the NDP is hiding. The 
great Houdini of the Saskatchewan legislature. Now you see 
him; now you don’t. 
 
He first hid behind his party and said that the convention would 
speak for him. The convention has come and gone. Then he said 
he was too busy fighting a federal election. The federal election 
has come and gone. Then he said, wait until after the 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election. That has come and gone. 
Then he hid behind the legislature and said, wait until the 
opening of the House. The House has opened; he has spoken. 
And did we hear a word of policy. Nothing. Then he said, once 
the House is open . . . well just one more minute, I have to form 
a task force. I have to form a task force. 
 
In spring when we commissioned the health Commission on 
Directions in Health Care, what was the NDP answer? We don’t 
need task forces; they are a waste of time. We tried it once 10 
years ago. What does the Leader of the Opposition do? 
Flip-flop. Did he establish one task force? No. Two task forces? 
No. Three? No. He established five, five task forces to go 
around the province. And he is still in hiding. He says we must 
wait. We must wait for these task forces to come back, then we 
will develop a policy. 
 
Well the people have given him time to come out of hiding. The 
people have listened with close attention and they have hoped 
that a leader in this province might show some courage, and 
they have hoped in vain, Mr. Speaker. This man is the most 
adept in hiding. He hides from the people and seeks excuses. 
And his response to the throne speech can be characterized as 
nothing . . . I was going to say nothing less than disappointing, 
but I think I’ll come to a full stop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — His MLAs are bound to continue the tradition 
of hiding. They will continue character assassination. And 
somehow I feel, Mr. Speaker, that after I sit down and after I 
give up my place in this Assembly, that I might be a target for 
this type of filibuster. That is all right, I’m prepared for that. 
But in the words of a famous rabbit, Mr. Speaker: two 
half-nothings make a whole nothing. And all the half-nothings 
of the characters across the floor make a whole nothing. 
 
And I say again, in closing, to the member for Riversdale, I 
suggest to you that quit hanging out the member from 
Humboldt to dry. I ask again, what is your agriculture policy? A 
whole nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I suggest to you that this throne speech is a whole plan, a 
complete vision for the future, and I will be supporting it with 
all of my conviction. It has a plan for the future and not an 
obsession with the past. It provides for increased protection of 
rural farm families; it provides for advances in health and 
education; it provides protection for children and families. It 
addresses the environment fully and effectively; it focuses on 
trade and economic development; it prepares the way for the 
year 2000, Mr. Speaker. And I, this anaemic, atrophied member 
of the legislature, am proud to vigorously support it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the critic for 
seniors’ issues and as an MLA for Saskatoon, I’ve been eagerly 
awaiting this opportunity to respond to the throne speech. 
 
But first of all I comment on the remarks made by the member 
from Rosthern who’s obviously been appointed a keynote 
speaker for the PC government. And I was shocked by the 
viciousness of his speech. Perhaps I shouldn’t be shocked by it, 
Mr. Speaker, because he represents the most corrupt 
government in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — In nearly one hour of haranguing, he spent two 
minutes defending the throne speech in this throne speech 
debate. He can’t defend the government policies; that’s why he 
had nothing to say. Those government policies can’t be 
defended, and I was shocked to hear the member from Rosthern 
talk about gall and then talk about freedom of speech in this 
legislature. That’s the government opposite that’s failed to call 
this legislature into session in nine months. We have had no 
opportunity to speak in this legislature for nine months and he 
very self-righteously says he supports freedom of speech. And 
when he was in the legislature nine months ago, he and the 
back-benchers in the government opposite had very little to say, 
very little to say. 
 
The government opposite has failed to call the legislature into 
session in nine months. They failed to speak when they were in 
here, and they have failed to consult with the people of 
Saskatchewan both when the legislature was sitting and from 
the times in between. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

60 
 

It’s a government in hiding, Mr. Speaker. They won’t talk to 
people and we will. We’ll meet with the farmers any time; we’ll 
meet with all the people in Saskatchewan any time. And we are 
also meeting with the constituents of the government 
constituencies opposite whom they will not deal with. 
 
They’re phoning us and they’re coming to us to talk because 
that government will not speak to them. That’s how much that 
government values freedom of speech and values its 
constituents. And I want to register again my shock at the 
comments and the member for Rosthern. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want first of all to say that as the member 
for Saskatoon Centre I am going to be deeply affected by the 
election boundaries changes as Saskatoon Centre is proposed to 
be broken into three pieces. And while I have only served one 
term in this legislature, I have served the people of Saskatoon 
Centre with pride and with deep honour in representing those 
people. And what I say here today and what I’ve said in the past 
has been a reflection of what the constituents have said to me. 
 
Even though the seats will be changing, I will continue to be an 
MLA from Saskatoon, and I will continue to be in the 
legislature after the next election, but I will be on the 
government side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the throne speech 
the other day, this Chamber began to take on an 
Alice-in-Wonderland quality and I felt like I was 
Anne-in-Wonderland because, like Alice, we were encountering 
a series of strange characters and all of them had something to 
say but very little of it made any sense. Like being at the Mad 
Hatter’s tea party, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same with this throne 
speech. 
 
Reality has been warped and the result is bizarre to say the 
least. Through the Looking Glass, the smoke and the mirrors, 
the PC government’s version of reality is weird and it’s 
frightening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The throne speech is obviously a poor attempt by a cruel 
government to cloak itself in sincerity. It’s an obvious attempt 
by a scandalous government to dress itself up in respectability. 
And it’s a failed attempt by a corrupt government to cover itself 
with credibility. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, that this speech does not pull the wool 
over anyone’s eyes. The people of Saskatchewan are not that 
gullible, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan have 
come to recognize the wolves in sheep’s clothing. And the 
people of Saskatchewan now know that no matter how hard this 
government tries to disguise its intentions, it is a callous, 
corrupt, and conniving gang of pirates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And no matter how hard the PC government 
tries to pretend to be what it is not, the people of Saskatchewan 
see it for what it really is. The mantles of sincerity, 
respectability, and credibility have fallen off this government, 
Mr. Speaker, and the emperor has no  

clothes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to look at the section of the speech 
called "Quality of Life," because that refers to seniors, and 
seniors are approximately 20 per cent of the voters in this 
province. Seniors are the people who have built up this 
province. And the seniors are one of the largest groups in the 
province who have already been attacked viciously by the 
wolves in sheep’s clothing, the PC government opposite. 
 
So when seniors hear the government say in the throne speech, 
and I quote, "My minister’s efforts to protect senior citizens will 
continue," when they hear the government say that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll tell you what the seniors do. They run for cover. 
They grab their hard hats and they cringe. 
 
Does this government believe for one moment that the 
destruction of the prescription drug plan protected senior 
citizens? The senior citizens know that it didn’t protect them. 
The destruction of the drug plan has caused and it continues to 
cause tremendous hardship and stress on seniors, especially the 
many seniors in this province who live on fixed incomes. 
 
The PC government allows the cost of drugs to seniors to 
sky-rocket and then it abuses them by calling them drug 
abusers. Some protection that is! I assure you that no senior 
wants that kind of effort to protect them to continue, Mr. 
Speaker. Not at all. They want that kind of effort to stop, and to 
stop right now. 
 
Now the government says in its throne speech that it’s 
committed to building more enriched housing units for seniors. 
And if these are subsidized units, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine, but 
the reality is that the PC government is emphasizing what it 
calls innovative housing for seniors. And this is the program 
where the PC government is allowing public money to be spent 
on housing schemes that charge seniors anywhere from 60,000 
to close to $100,000 for what’s called a life-lease apartment. 
And on top of that they have to pay monthly maintenance fees. 
Only a few of these units are subsidized. Those on low income 
who can’t get into them, have to go elsewhere or they’re out of 
luck. 
 
Innovative, enriched housing is really housing for a few 
enriched seniors. It is not housing for the majority of seniors. So 
I ask you, what kind of protection is that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
An Hon. Member: — None. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Right. It’s no protection at all. That’s what it is 
— it’s none at all. 
 
And what’s happening in nursing homes? The PC government 
has consistently failed to provide adequate staffing needs. And 
I’ve heard many stories of people who have been hurt and who 
are concerned about the level of staffing needs in the nursing 
homes. Some protection that is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

61 
 

This PC government wants us to think that it cares about 
families. Well shortly after I was elected, I got a distressed 
phone call from a senior who told me that the government was 
forcing her to get divorced to help cover the costs of her 
husband’s nursing care and her own living expenses. And I 
looked into it, of course, because I couldn’t believe it. 
 
But it turned out not to be a divorce, but what’s called an 
involuntary separation. And it’s made necessary so that that 
couple could get more income as two single people, from the 
guaranteed income supplement, than they could get as a couple. 
She, like many seniors living on low income, needed every 
penny she was entitled to. But to her, the government was 
telling her to get a divorce. 
 
And there are many seniors who are suffering from this forced 
separation. It feels to them like they’re abandoning their mate, 
their mate of many years. And some of the seniors won’t do it. 
They don’t want to have to go through that sort of process. And 
so they’re forced to struggle on less income, as the costs of the 
goods and services that they have to buy, escalate. 
 
They escalate because of the government’s policies, Mr. 
Speaker. The government’s policies are not controlling the cost 
of goods and services. So what kind of protection is that? That’s 
no protection. 
 
And on top of all this, the PC government’s actions are 
systematically destroying the programs and the services which 
the seniors themselves have worked so hard for so long to build 
up in this province. The gang of demolition experts opposite are 
not building on the co-operative foundation of this province; 
they are jackhammering it into oblivion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the gang of demolition experts opposite are 
swinging their wrecking ball of privatization against the very 
social structures which the seniors themselves have created. 
And they are dynamiting not only the history of this province, 
but the future of Saskatchewan. And that’s how this 
government protects senior citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say, with the seniors of this province, spare us from any 
more of your bulldozing. Spare us from your sledge-hammers. 
And above all, spare us from any more of your destructive 
protection. 
 
But unfortunately there’s more bad news in the throne speech 
for the seniors of this province. After cutting off the funding to 
the senior citizen volunteer projects like the evergreen 
neighbourly services in Saskatoon and the services for seniors 
in Regina and drastically reducing the power of the seniors 
provincial council — in fact, the term that’s been used has been 
emasculated, for the provincial council — this government 
says, and I quote from the throne speech: 
 

My ministers will encourage seniors to participate actively 
in various community activities and will provide them 
with the opportunity to contribute whenever possible. 
 

That is just a prime example of the patronizing, arrogant  

attitude of this government towards the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that those seniors 
who enjoy good health and that have transportation and they 
have extra spending money, they’re already participating 
actively in this province. They are already contributing and they 
have done so for years, and they will continue to do so in spite 
of the attacks of the PC government opposite. 
 
Seniors all over this province have been telling me, Mr. 
Speaker, that the PC government doesn’t encourage seniors; it 
discourages them. It doesn’t provide them with opportunities; it 
destroys opportunities, not only for seniors, but for the majority 
of people in Saskatchewan. In the throne speech the 
government said, and I quote again: 
 

The protection of individuals, families, and children is the 
foundation upon which my government’s policy agenda is 
built. 
 

But there is no protection of ordinary people, young or old, in 
this government’s policy agenda. There is no foundation to 
build on. If this government’s policy foundation is on any 
foundation at all, it’s a foundation of quicksand, and you can’t 
build on that. 
 
This government bulldozed the children’s school-based dental 
plan. It demolished the prescription drug plan, Mr. Speaker. It 
dynamited our financial security and it’s buried us under a huge 
deficit. 
 
And I say, what arrogance for the Devine government to claim 
that it is protecting people. That claim won’t wash with the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. They see the fangs 
beneath the façade, and they feel the bite every time there’s an 
announcement of more job losses in this province. And there 
have been many such announcements in the last few months, 
Mr. Speaker, many such announcements. 
 
But what did this government say? It says not to worry. It says 
its privatization scheme is going to take care of all that. And yet 
the more the province privatizes, the more we lose jobs — 25 
per cent of the workers lost from Saskoil, workers losing their 
jobs all the time in Saskatchewan. The privatization scheme 
doesn’t work one bit to support job creation in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Unless you’re a Tory cabinet minister, 
defeated. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Right. For a few people it’s working. The 
patronage system works, but the solid job creation does not 
work. 
 
In the throne speech the Devine government says that the 
economic development and diversification of Saskatchewan 
will contribute to the development of families and children as 
priorities. Now when I heard that, Mr. Speaker, I wondered 
what would happen if I took that message back to the brewery 
workers at the Carling O’Keefe plant in Saskatoon Centre. I’ve 
met with those brewery workers. I know how heart-broken they 
are about the announcement that the Carling O’Keefe plant is 
going to close. I know how worried they are. I know how  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

62 
 

anxious they are, and what stress they’re under. 
 
Do you think for one moment that you could fool them with 
that kind of pap if I was to tell them that? They work at a plant 
which is based on economic diversification. The Carling 
O’Keefe plant, the brewery industry, processes what we 
produce here in Saskatchewan, right here in this province, and 
it’s going down the drain. 
 
The Carling O’Keefe plant was recently renovated. It’s a 
business that paid good wages so the workers could afford 
families and mortgages on their homes and the cost of goods 
and services. Mr. Speaker, it’s good jobs that protect 
individuals and families and children. 
 
And yet, what did this Devine government do? It turns its back 
on families by supporting job lay-offs. The Cory workers, the 
potash workers, are another good example. And it scoffs at 
people when they protest this cruel treatment, and it fails to 
implement policies which would provide real protection. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are going to see the Carling O’Keefe plant 
in Saskatoon Centre gutted of its equipment and bulldozed into 
a parking lot. And that’s how the Devine government builds up 
Saskatchewan. And we are going to see more workers forced 
into those mickey mouse job retraining programs which lead to 
work at minimum wage if there’s any work at all. That’s how 
the Devine government protects workers. And we are going to 
see more and more people leaving this province. That’s how the 
Devine government develops the economy. 
 
And I find it very cruel, and I find it very distressing to meet 
with the workers such as those of the brewery workers and the 
people in the canned drinks industry and all the others who’ve 
lost their jobs, and look them in the eye and realize what it 
means, that they have to face the kind of system that this 
government is putting in place. 
 
But what does the throne speech say about the overriding 
problem of unemployment and of job loss? It says nothing. It’s 
silent. The silence is deafening. It’s terribly cruel. 
 
And what does the throne speech say about the problems faced 
by the urban areas like Saskatoon when hundreds of people lose 
their jobs? The mayor of Saskatoon has expressed his concern 
about the closing of the Carling O’Keefe factory. 
 
What does this government say about the loss of our municipal 
tax base when people’s incomes fall so sharply and so 
drastically? Nothing. It’s silence in the throne speech about this 
mammoth problem that’s facing Saskatchewan. There’s no hint 
in the throne speech of concern about the problems facing our 
cities, our towns, our villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these communities desperately need support from 
the provincial government. They need support for jobs and for 
workers. They need support for transportation costs, for sewer 
costs, for roads, for sidewalks, for all the urban infrastructure 
that’s necessary even in the smallest communities — support 
from the provincial government so that the costs will be kept  

down, so that municipal governments don’t have to increase the 
service costs and the property taxes and put that burden on the 
people of the province, particularly the people on fixed incomes 
and low incomes. 
 
These costs hurt seniors, Mr. Speaker, and they hurt families. 
They hurt communities. And they don’t protect them; they 
don’t protect them at all. But the PC government sits back and 
does nothing while the communities suffer. The PC government 
sits back and does nothing while good-paying jobs are lost and 
the families lose their homes. 
 
And then the government attacks these same families if they go 
on social assistance. And with the proposed changes to The 
Labour Standards Act, it attacks these same families if they do 
find a job at minimum wage. 
 
Attack, attack, attack, Mr. Speaker. That’s the Devine 
government’s foundation for its policy agenda — nothing else. 
It’s certainly not the protection of families. It’s not at all the 
protection of families. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know from talking to people in this 
province that a great deal of the burden of the Devine 
government’s policy of attack is falling on women. Many 
family lives are being wrecked, and many children are hurt and 
hungry, and that is a reality in Saskatchewan — one of the 
realities that the throne speech did not touch on at all. 
 
Women have to be able to participate in the paid labour force, 
but we suffer continuing discrimination and we earn much less 
than men. And yet the PC government refuses to implement pay 
equity legislation. It refuses to support strong labour standards 
which would help women and men. And it refuses to support 
the requirements for good quality child care. 
 
And the PC government forces single-parent women to go back 
to work when their babies are only four months old. And I 
wonder how many people are aware of that particular little 
burden that the Minister of Social Services has put on the 
people — and I say little, only because it hasn’t received the 
spotlight of attention. But it is not little for the women who are 
struggling to find care for their infants, because when the babies 
are four months old those single-parent women are defined as 
employable, and their incomes are cut and they’re told, go out 
and find work. That’s really looking after children and families. 
 
That is really shocking, Mr. Speaker. And I think that people all 
over the province should realize what this government is doing 
when it does things like that; when there is so little support for 
children and for women, that women with babies only four 
months old are put on the work-for-welfare programs that the 
Minister of Social Services loves to brag about. It’s a forced 
labour camp for those women, Mr. Speaker, nothing more. 
 
There’s very little infant day care in this province, and anyway I 
don’t think that women, when their babies are four months old, 
should be forced out to the work place like that. They’ve 
already got a full-time job looking after their children, and we 
must value that parenting as work and make sure that people get 
adequate incomes to do  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

63 
 

that work properly. 
 
If this government thinks that taking families who are living on 
social assistance and giving them nutrition education is going to 
solve the problem, they are really in Alice-in-Wonderland, Mr. 
Speaker, because what will solve that problem is a guaranteed 
adequate income to those families. And what will solve that 
problem is having a government, which a New Democratic 
government would be, that recognizes the value of parenting 
and that puts in place real support systems for that hard work 
and that very important work. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the burden that farm women carry is incredible, as 
they work on the farm, off the farm, and as care givers to their 
families. And, young and old, women are the army of 
volunteers who keep our communities running, Mr. Speaker, 
and women everywhere carry the lion’s share of the burden as 
primary care givers. 
 
And now, more than ever, women are being forced to pick up 
all the services dropped by this uncaring PC government, from 
children with special needs to health care and home care for 
seniors. 
 
The women know that this is what is happening to them. And 
women know that they’ve always been dedicated workers and 
care givers, and that we will continue to be. But I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we cannot be used as beasts of burden, carrying 
all the extra work generated by the Devine government’s failure 
to support adequate social services. 
 
Every time I hear the government brag about how it will use 
volunteers to carry out essential services, I know the women of 
this province are being targeted for yet more pressure, to pick 
up the pieces from a corrupt government that chooses to fund 
scandalous patronage rather than provide decent, living wages 
for useful public service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this brings me to my last point. In the throne 
speech, the Tory government wolves appear to be trying to hide 
themselves behind our New Democratic economic policies, 
referring to our history of co-operative ownership in business, 
community involvement, and the delivery of public services as 
if they valued it. They do not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Tory government’s action and policies have clearly 
indicated that the kind of co-operation it supports is 
co-operation with international business interests — and I refer 
you to the Carling O’Keefe plant for one. Molson’s Australian 
is what we have now in Canada. The total thrust of the PC 
government’s decisions has been to demolish both the 
co-operative system and the public system of ownership. 
 
Their scheme to give away our resources to foreign interests 
shows how little they value the long history of struggle against 
such foreign control, a struggle which this province has 
undertaken very successfully in the past and will have to engage 
in in the future. And we will continue to do this under a New 
Democratic government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there is no caring in this throne speech, and there 
is no compassion in this throne speech, and there is no 
comprehension of the reality of the lives of the majority of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The gang of demolition experts opposite are no friends of 
Saskatchewan, and they are no builders of Saskatchewan, and 
they are no protectors of individuals, families, or children in 
Saskatchewan. They have earned our contempt and our ridicule 
by their bizarre postures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the day when a New Democratic 
government, working with the people of this province, will 
restore true democracy and build a better tomorrow for all of us. 
It will be a tomorrow based on an economic policy of real 
support for co-operatives, for small business, and for public 
ownership here in Saskatchewan; a New Democratic 
government that will work with the people to develop strong 
support systems and real security, opportunity, and protection 
of both our past and our future, our young and our old, our 
families, our communities, and our beloved province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously I will be voting against the throne 
speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m humbled today, 
Mr. Speaker, with the opportunity, indeed with the honour and 
the privilege of being able to rise in this Assembly and to 
endorse the excellent throne speech which was delivered last 
week by Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
I’d be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I did not take this opportunity to 
extend my warmest congratulations to Her Honour on her 
appointment as Lieutenant Governor for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Hers is a vital role in the smooth operation of 
our democratic process and a role as steeped in tradition as the 
Legislative Assembly itself. I trust that she will find her new 
position a challenge, yet at the same time a richly rewarding 
experience. 
 
My first speech this session, Mr. Speaker, must begin with the 
acknowledgement that it is a special privilege to be representing 
the good people of the Nipawin constituency, and I wish to 
thank them for their strong support which permits me to 
represent them in this legislature. I want to assure those people 
that I will continue to listen to their concerns and their ideas, 
and I will make sure that they will be heard where it counts. 
 
While it is a special privilege to represent this constituency, it 
is, too, an honour and a privilege to be a representative of the 
Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. This 
government, Mr. Speaker, has displayed great vision in the 
building of our province. It’s introduced innovative and 
effective programs that benefit every resident of the province, 
and I think of some recent examples. 
 
In the field of health care, for instance, the new plastic health 
care card. It’s surprising how many comments that we’ve heard 
in the short time that it’s been in place as to  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

64 
 

how effective it is, how efficient it’s made the program, and the 
good that it’s doing. And also, to read the letters from 
pharmacists and others who are telling us that the people who 
are coming in with double prescriptions and who are being 
challenged on that, who’ve been using the system for their own 
means and abusing the system, Mr. Speaker, and it’s helping to 
deal with that problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the field of education we’ve had changes to the 
core curriculum, another example of changes that this 
government’s made to improve the services for the people of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a part of that vision, a great part of the vision of 
this government, is recognizing the special needs of rural 
Saskatchewan as an integral part of the successful future of our 
province. Prior to 1982, Mr. Speaker, the residents of rural 
Saskatchewan apparently had no voice in the government. They 
were not listened to. Their concerns were not heard. They 
seemed to be considered unimportant and not worthwhile. 
 
However, after 1982, once this government came to power, the 
voices of the people of rural Saskatchewan were finally heard. 
Their concerns were addressed, and addressed in various areas, 
not only in the agriculture sector but in various areas that 
affected them. 
 
Several of those areas that I’d like to draw attention to, first of 
all, would be the educational initiatives, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
working more and more towards a highly technological society. 
This government is making sure that the people of rural 
Saskatchewan have the same opportunities for education as all 
other residents. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, the first phase of the reorganization 
of the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology and the regional colleges is over. The major 
provider of skilled training in university courses in rural 
Saskatchewan is a system of eight regional colleges in the 
southern part of the province, and the Northlands Career 
College in the North. 
 
I’d like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan regional 
colleges are unique in their service, their brokerage and 
collaboration with the two universities and Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology. One of the main 
intentions of this government in changing the college mandate 
was the ultimate benefit of rural residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look at the results beginning to come in, I 
think we can say that indeed that mandate is being met. And as 
I met with the people of the community college in my area over 
these past several months, I find that they’re very pleased and 
very excited with the changes in the direction that they’re 
heading in that program. 
 
But that’s not all in education, Mr. Speaker. A new era is 
opening up with the application of distance education 
technology by which people across the province can be reached 
through very sophisticated programming. We are just 
embarking on the development and implementation of the 
Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network program 
which will be the most  

important development since the beginning of those colleges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to put educational programming at the 
disposal of Saskatchewan citizens in their own communities 
where they don’t have to leave to participate in formal 
education, but are able to have it in their home areas and to get 
it without leaving a job. They can take it while still being 
employed or being at home. I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
I have been a part of the government that has brought this 
opportunity to the people of this province and to my 
constituency. 
 
Another major concern of the residents of rural Saskatchewan is 
the future of health care. Well I can say that this government is 
indeed working to ensure that the future health care needs of 
rural Saskatchewan will continue to be met. Health care is a top 
priority of this government, and the Saskatchewan Commission 
on Directions in Health Care is an example of that. 
 
In June of 1988, the Premier of this province appointed the 
commission to conduct a review of the Saskatchewan health 
care system. One-third of that commission’s focus is on 
community services. The commission has investigated a full 
range of issues impacting on the quality, availability, 
accessibility, cost of health care services, paying particular 
attention, Mr. Speaker, to the differences between rural and 
urban communities. 
 
Some of the challenges the commission is addressing are an 
ageing population, increasing public expectations, trends 
toward increased urbanization, accessibility for rural 
Saskatchewan, and the distribution and availability of health 
care professionals. 
 
And in order for all Saskatchewan residents to have a say in the 
future of health care in this province, meetings were held in 
various areas to encourage the input of our Saskatchewan 
residents. Mr. Speaker, I view that as a very real commitment to 
the future of health care. The people from my constituency who 
participated in the hearings when they were in that part of the 
province were very appreciative of the process and of the 
opportunity that had been afforded to them to make their views 
known and to see that somebody was interested and was 
listening to their concerns. It’s a commitment to every 
Saskatchewan resident and, indeed, to the special needs of rural 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government of this province recognizes that 
the issues governing the future of rural Saskatchewan cover a 
wide range of areas. For instance, many of the people of rural 
Saskatchewan have never had access to a pension plan to help 
plan for their retirement years. Well this government responded 
to that need with the Saskatchewan pension plan, the first of its 
kind in North America. Mr. Speaker, for the first time, 
home-makers, employees of small business, farm families who 
are not covered by any pension plan have been provided with 
the opportunity to contribute to a voluntary pension plan. The 
Saskatchewan pension plan has been enthusiastically embraced 
by the people of this province, and rural residents, I believe, 
have been the most enthusiastic in their support of that program. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

65 
 

Out of the more than 48,000 people enrolled in the plan, 57 per 
cent are from communities with a population of less than 5,000 
rural residents. Fifty-seven per cent, Mr. Speaker, certainly tells 
me that there was a great need for this plan in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But more than that, Mr. Speaker, this plan has helped bring 
equality to a lot of other people as well. Ninety-two per cent of 
the applicants are women. Over 65 per cent of our contributors 
are over the age of 50. Fifty per cent are home-makers; 20 per 
cent are part-time workers — people who didn’t have an 
opportunity to contribute to a pension plan in their place of 
work or because of not being employed outside of the home. 
Those figures prove to me, Mr. Speaker, that there was a 
genuine and great need, and I believe it’s a need that’s been 
successfully addressed by this government. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government was elected in 1982, the 
people of rural Saskatchewan knew that they were not being 
treated fairly by our predecessors. These people had to deal 
daily with substandard service, service from government 
utilities such as SaskPower, SaskTel. They didn’t have access to 
the same services available in the urban centres. For instance, 
they had to devote large amounts of their family income to 
more inefficient energy sources like oil and propane as their 
alternatives for heating and on their farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people knew that the technology was there 
for alternative services to be made available to them. The 
question was: why wasn’t it? Well, their opinion was that it was 
because the government that was there was not concerned about 
their needs and didn’t care to respond to them. However, when 
this government was elected, it responded to those concerns of 
the rural residents. It responded with individual line service, 
rural underground power, and rural natural gas programs. 
 
By 1990, Mr. Speaker, approximately 74,000 rural 
Saskatchewan homes will have private telephone lines. Once 
that program is complete, Saskatchewan will be one of the first 
jurisdictions in North America to convert to a universal private 
line system. Mr. Speaker, those individuals will benefit from 
individual line service and the privacy — no more party lines. 
 
He’ll benefit from the convenience — there won’t be waiting 
for the telephone line to be free. He’ll benefit from a full access 
to a wide range of communication services and products that 
were never before available to him. They’ll now have access to 
custom features: electronic mail; national and international data 
transmission; products such as extension phones, cordless 
telephones, telephone answering machines, telephone sets that 
can handle both voice and data transmissions. Individual line 
service opens a door of opportunity for farm families, Mr. 
Speaker. They can now use computers in their operations as 
part of the telephone service. They can also receive information 
on markets and prices. They can gain access to numerous other 
sources of helpful information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to date this Government of Saskatchewan  

has spent $141 million bringing the residents of rural 
Saskatchewan the same benefits enjoyed by their urban 
counterparts in telephone use alone. By 1990, that amount will 
have reached $264 million and, as I said before, almost 74,000 
Saskatchewan homes will have benefitted. 
 
Another program that is in direct response to the needs of rural 
residents is the rural underground electrical lines. Ultimately, 
Mr. Speaker, our entire single wire overhead system will be 
replaced with underground facilities. That means important 
advantages for our rural families, Mr. Speaker. Farm safety will 
be improved with the removal of the potential overhead hazard 
of high voltage lines. Farming operations will become more 
convenient when poles are removed from their fields. And Mr. 
Speaker, service reliability will be increased and maintenance 
costs will be reduced as the lines become protected from 
Saskatchewan’s severe weather conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individual line service program, the rural 
underground service electric program are working 
simultaneously with another program this government 
responded to the direct needs of rural Saskatchewan with. Prior 
to 1982, Mr. Speaker, residents of rural Saskatchewan had no 
option but to heat their homes with oil or propane. Well, 
because of our natural gas distribution program initiated by this 
Progressive Conservative government, and implemented I 
might add, over the opposition of members opposite, over the 
derision of those members opposite, farms and small 
communities across the province have access to a more 
convenient, less expensive heating fuel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that in one year a family converting 
from propane to natural gas heating saves 40 per cent of their 
previous cost. Those converting from oil heat can expect to 
reduce their costs by half, and that is a significant cost for many 
of our rural residents. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t only been a benefit to the 
rural part of the province, but this initiative has created 
enormous spin-off benefits in the plumbing and heating 
industry, the transportation industry, pipe and materials 
manufacturing, heavy machinery purchases, and the service 
industry such as hotels, restaurants, and service stations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the residents of my constituency tell me that they 
are concerned about the role of rural life in this fast-changing 
world. They also tell me that they appreciate these programs 
that this government has initiated — the rural natural gas, the 
individual line service. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, because of those initiatives, I can go back and 
say that yes, this government is working to ensure that rural 
Saskatchewan remains competitive, that it can continue to 
survive and to thrive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the residents of Nipawin constituency know that 
their voices have been heard. They know that we’re committed 
to ensuring the viability of rural Saskatchewan. We’ve shown it 
by our actions, not just by our words. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

66 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the members opposite what they did 
for rural Saskatchewan when they were in power. I’d like to ask 
those same members exactly what their platform for rural 
Saskatchewan is today. It seems to me they’ve been silent. 
They’re thinking about it. Perhaps they want to go back to what 
they had before. They’re just not quite sure. They’d have to set 
up a task force and check it out. I’d like to suggest that they 
can’t answer those questions. They can’t answer them because 
they don’t have a cohesive policy for the survival of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The only policy that I have seen come forth from the members 
opposite, I’m sorry to say, in almost seven years in this 
Legislature, is a policy of attack and criticize; nothing positive 
put forward as alternatives to provide for the needs of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the examples I’ve given of this government’s 
commitment to bring equality to and ensuring the viability of 
rural Saskatchewan, I’d like to suggest that the members 
opposite cannot compete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a saying that one person with a belief is 
worth 99 with a reason. I think we see on this side of the House 
many members with a belief, many members who put their 
beliefs into action. They don’t have reasons why it can’t be 
done, but we’ve shown that it can be done. 
 
We believe in rural Saskatchewan, and we believe that the 
success of all of Saskatchewan rests on keeping that part of our 
province alive. And I think that the Speech from the Throne 
outlines the commitment we have to leading this province to 
being the best that we can. This throne speech makes a 
commitment to our environment, for instance, an issue that’s on 
many people’s minds as they have a concern to see that we have 
quality environment left to the future generations in this 
province. And this government has made commitments to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re appreciative of the programs that we put in 
place last year to deal with the problems of rural Saskatchewan, 
the drought, the small communities, the individuals. We had 
enhanced drought relief programs that were there to provide 
ongoing source of supply of water or to provide for those in the 
future. 
 
In my work with the water corporation I meet with many people 
who are appreciative of the initiatives of this government in 
helping to see that those problems don’t re-occur, that the 
impact of them is lessened in their communities. They’re 
appreciative of the initiatives of this government in the field of 
irrigation and this stable economy that it helps to provide in 
those areas that have access to that. They appreciate what we’ve 
done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech has made commitments to 
increased protection and assistance to the family farms. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s made commitments to strengthening our health 
care system and our education system — help for the real 
people of Saskatchewan, for the rural people as well as the 
urban, and I’m proud to be a part of the government that has put 
this throne speech forward. Mr. Speaker, I fully endorse it, and I 
would urge every sincere member of this House to endorse it. 
It’s a document that  

clearly shows the way to the future of this great province. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the applause, 
but I note that it’s five minutes before 5, and my remarks will 
go for considerably longer than five minutes, and I wonder if I 
might have leave to call it 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


