


















































March 10, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 10, 1989 
 

27 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
legislature, four scholars visiting here from China, visiting in 
our province and at the University of Regina, and I would ask 
them to stand as I call out their names. 
 
The first is Mr. Fu, who is really the counterpart to an education 
minister in this province. He’s the Chief Secretary, Foreign 
Affairs Office of the Education Commission of Hunan 
Province, as well as Senior Program Officer, China Education 
International Exchange Association, Hunan branch. As well, we 
have Mr. Yang, who is a visiting scholar from China, a teaching 
research fellow, Department of Shandong Province, and as well 
a senior teacher in a middle school there. As well, Mr. Song, a 
visiting scholar from China as well, and vice-principal of the 
No. 1 Middle School of Linqing City, a senior English teacher 
in that school. And as well, Mr. Huang, who is from Beijing, 
the North China Institute of Computing Technology, Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory. 
 
I have met with them this morning. We’ve looked at having 
them have a broader look at our education system here. It was a 
very good meeting. 
 
I hope you enjoy your studies and your stay here yet in Regina 
and in Saskatchewan. We look forward to even more 
co-operation in the future. And I’d ask all members of the 
legislature to welcome these guests to our legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Employment Situation in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, many would argue that one of the 
most important responsibilities of government is to create an 
environment, a healthy environment of employment for the 
people of our province. When I take a look at the statistics 
released today, the employment statistics released today, I find 
the trends, to say the least, disturbing. 
 
Since November of last year the province of Saskatchewan has 
consistently had a higher rate of unemployment than the rate in 
Canada — consistently — for the first time since statistics have 
been kept in this province — for the first time. Over the past 12 
months, over the past year, Mr. Premier, the labour force in 
Saskatchewan has dropped by 10,000, the number of people 
working in this province has dropped by 12,000, and the only 
reason that the unemployment rate is limited to 9.1 per cent, one 
out of 11 in this province, is because people are leaving this 
province. 
 

In light of the facts, Mr. Premier, in light of the facts, I ask you: 
why the stony silence about jobs in your Speech from the 
Throne? Your record is sad, your approach has clearly not been 
working, and I ask you: why no new plans for jobs for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
hon. member’s question, let me point out that Saskatchewan has 
the fourth level of unemployment in Canada. Ontario is first, 
and we were second for most of 1988, and now the other two 
prairie provinces are a little bit better than we are. 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that the drought in western 
Canada was most severe in Saskatchewan. And if you look at 
the fact that we have 10,000 less people working in agriculture 
than we did a year ago, you can see the consequences of the 
drought. There is less grain to haul, elevators are closed, custom 
truckers, custom operators, grain cleaning — all those things 
that would be going on in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, are not 
going on. Why? Because there isn’t the grain to haul. And when 
the grain is hauled, you see all kinds of economic activity 
associated in agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I point out, I point out to the hon. member, the 
unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan is largely due 
to the result of 10,000 less people working in agriculture linked 
to the drought. Let me also say, Mr. Speaker, let me add, in 
terms of a policy, unlike the members opposite we are not 
anti-business, and we’re not anti-trade, and we’re not 
anti-American, and we’re not anti-economic development, Mr. 
Speaker. You’re going to see more and more economic 
diversification, as we heard yesterday, with a brand-new 
expansion in jobs in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Unlike the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we 
are not anti-business, we are not anti-Weyerhaeuser, Mr. 
Speaker. We encourage business and diversification in the 
province of Saskatchewan because that’s where the real jobs 
come from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Premier, the fog in Regina doesn’t just exist 
outside this building today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — There was a time in the province of 
Saskatchewan when we proudly led the nation in our record of 
employment. Mr. Premier, the facts I bring to the Legislative 
Assembly today are just that. They’re facts which paint the 
picture of the record of your government — 10,000 fewer 
people in our labour force, 12,000 fewer people working in 
Saskatchewan. That’s been your record over the past year. 
 
I ask you once again, will you please assume  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

28 
 

responsibility for the number one issue for the people of 
Saskatchewan today. And I ask you, why no new legislative 
agenda to deal with this pressing problem? — not just more of 
the same old stuff that’s not working; obviously it’s not 
working. Why is it that your economic policy is simply to sell 
off and get rid of the assets of this province? When are you 
going to start putting the people of Saskatchewan first on the 
agenda of the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks me 
about our policy. Well let me say again, our government is not 
anti-business, and it’s not anti-trade, and it’s not 
anti-Weyerhaeuser, and it’s not anti-American. Even as late, 
Mr. Speaker, as just a few nights ago, just a few nights ago we 
heard the anti-Americanism come up again by the NDP. And 
it’s embarrassing. 
 
People in this country believe in business; they believe in trade; 
they believe in doing good business with our neighbours like 
the United States; the Pacific Rim, like the Chinese. We are not 
anti-Chinese; we’re not anti-American; we’re not anti-business, 
and we’re not anti-Weyerhaeuser, and we’re not anti-public 
participation. 
 
We have now over a million people in the province of 
Saskatchewan for the first time, Mr. Speaker. And you’re going 
to see the forecasts now are for the best growth rate in all of 
Canada being in Saskatchewan in 1989 because of trade and 
because of business, because of Weyerhaeuser and because of 
public participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — So I ask, what is your policy? Where is 
your agriculture policy? Where is your business policy? Where 
is your diversification policy? You don’t have one, you haven’t 
had one in the past, and I don’t see one for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, this sounds like 1982 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — You’re going to bring the kids home. You’ve 
been driving them away every year since 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Despite your rhetoric, Mr. Premier, you’re 
anti-family, you’re anti-youth, and you’re anti-jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Let’s deal with the facts, Mr. Premier. 
Saskatchewan’s labour force fell by 6,000 people — 6,000 
people — from January of this year to February, and the 
number of people with jobs fell by 7,000 in one  

month, Mr. Premier — fell by 7,000. This is a new record, even 
for your government. 
 
This is a deplorable situation and our youth continue to bear the 
brunt of your failed economic policies. They want security that 
you keep talking about. They want job opportunities and they 
want hope for the future. Mr. Premier, why is it that the only 
way that your throne speech dealt with the future was to talk 
about a self-indulging, $9 million birthday party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Before the Premier begins his 
response, I’d like to ask members to please allow him to 
answer. I know it’s Friday morning; however, if we just 
co-operate, we’ll get through this question period in a 
reasonable manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we 
did in 1982, and we continue to do, and we certainly did in 
1986 that the previous administration would not do to help jobs, 
is to protect people against high interest rates. Mr. Speaker, we 
looked at 20 per cent interest rates in 1982 and we said, we 
won’t put up with that, and we came in with thirteen and a 
quarter and 8 per cent for farmers. That helped create jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, and protect jobs. Now we’re the only place in Canada 
that locks in mortgages at nine and three-quarters no matter 
what the interest rate is on the first 50,000. We did that; the 
opposition didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If you want to talk protecting jobs, what 
we’re saying is that we will take on the banks; we will take on 
the international interest rates; we will protect people. We don’t 
contract with the financial institutions, like some members 
opposite, to foreclose on people. We protect them against high 
interest rates. 
 
We are for more businesses opening here. We can look at a new 
paper mill. We looked at the Meadow Lake pulp mill. We can 
look at upgraders in Regina; we can look at a new upgrader in 
Lloydminster. We can look at new packing plant capacity, Mr. 
Speaker. You will see the best growth rate in Canada in 1989 in 
the province of Saskatchewan just because of our policies, and 
particularly because of our interest rate and pro-business 
attitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, is 
that the best you can do is go back to the interest rate thing in 
1982? You answer that way to every question. The fact is, Mr. 
Premier, this is 1988. 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’89. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — It’s 1988 for you, Mr. Premier. Correction. Mr. 
Premier, seriously, I wish you would start taking this  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

29 
 

issue of unemployment seriously. It’s beyond a joke, and I’m 
quite concerned that the government is not taking the issue 
seriously. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you look at the figures you will see that the total 
loss of 12,000 persons from the job market in the past year fell 
within the age range of 15 to 24 years. Those are our province’s 
life-blood, our future, our young families that you like to talk 
about supporting. Yet you’re content to drive them away from 
Saskatchewan in record numbers. Even your own former 
cabinet minister, Rick Folk, has given up on you and moved 
away. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to develop a workable 
economic plan and a legislative program designed for giving 
young people new jobs and opportunities, rather than casting 
them into the well of despair? Please answer the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me add three points to 
the hon. member. The hon. member is from the city of 
Saskatoon. Saskatoon’s unemployment rate has dropped 2.9 per 
cent since last year, and it’s one of the fastest growing cities any 
place in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second point I want to make and remind the 
hon. member, that the unemployment rate has increased by 
10,000 people in rural Saskatchewan in the last year as the 
result of drought. You can look at the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool closing elevators; you can look at the fact that there’s no 
grain being hauled any place, Mr. Speaker. That has a 
tremendous impact. If you look at rural Alberta, look at rural 
Manitoba where they had more rain, you don’t see those kinds 
of problems. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, let me point out to the hon. member that the 
plans for diversification and processing and manufacturing and 
public participation that we have and we’ve outlined in the 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, are the very same plans 
that the NDP planned to do in 1982. And the member from 
Regina North East was there and he signed on the line and he 
said, let the public invest in Crown corporations, and we can 
diversify and protect ourselves against high interest rates. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are going to implement those plans 
because in fact they do diversify the economy, and we will lead 
the nation in growth in 1989 — not in ’88 — 1989. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier will give, has given, every excuse in 
the book about our high unemployment. The Premier can, and I 
suppose will, do more cheer-leading about how we’re all going 
to improve things. But the fact remains that investor confidence 
in Saskatchewan economy is at an all-time low — it’s at an 
all-time low. No one has any confidence in the future of 
Saskatchewan. That’s why we have high unemployment. 
 
Now all rhetoric aside, just what are you going to do to improve 
things, all rhetoric aside? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. members 
that I’ve just returned from the Pacific Rim, and investor 
confidence has never been higher in the province of 
Saskatchewan than it is today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about 
investor confidence, the opposition comes out and says, well, 
they’re against the Japanese and they’re against Americans, 
they’re against Europeans, they’re against other people 
investing, and he stands up and says, well what about investor 
confidence? Well I can tell you, Canadians have confidence in 
Saskatchewan, offshore people have confidence in 
Saskatchewan, and I say to the hon. member, you just watch 
Saskatchewan in 1989 and 1990 and through the next decade, 
Mr. Speaker, because you’ll see more confidence than you’ve 
seen in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Shillington: — One would expect you, Mr. Premier, to 
claim that investor confidence is high in Asia, in Saskatchewan. 
We note you make no such claim about the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question has to do with one of the reasons for 
that; it’s the unacceptably high interest rate of the Bank of 
Canada pegged yesterday at 12.12 per cent. Mr. Premier, one of 
the pearls of wisdom which you were kind enough to share with 
us a month ago was that these high interest rates are caused by 
provincial governments who run unacceptably high deficits. It 
would be tempting to agree with you, Mr. Premier, were it not 
so irresponsible. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you’ll admit the nonsensical nature of 
that comment, and if you’ll admit that these high interest rates 
have everything to do with a federal government which is 
obsessed with the needs of central Canada and is ignoring the 
rest of Canada. Will you admit, Mr. Premier, that your 
responsibility and the responsibility of your government is to 
draw to the attention of Mr. Mulroney that there is more to 
Canada than Ontario? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, two points. One, with respect to 
Saskatchewan investor confidence, I think you probably know 
that we’ve just received $105 million in TeleBonds. And if you 
look at the Power bonds, TeleBonds and shares, it’s close to a 
billion dollars in investment that has taken place in the last few 
years as a result of the change in policy which you outlined, Mr. 
Speaker, and they put forward as the plan in 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Secondly, with respect to interest rates, 
let me just point out that the deficits west of Ontario are very, 
very small compared to the deficits in Ontario  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

30 
 

and Quebec. B.C. has a balanced budget. Alberta has a balanced 
budget. We’ll be very close to a balanced budget, and Manitoba 
will be very close, 4 or $500 million in total, Mr. Speaker, west 
of Ontario. You go into Ontario, where the boom is, and they 
have a deficit of $1.5 billion — 1.5 billion. 
 
I have said to the Premier there and I said to the federal Finance 
minister, maybe you could start to lean on Ontario and Quebec 
and Central Canada to balance the books, not on the western 
provinces, because we’re the provinces that have the balanced 
budgets and we’re the provinces that have growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. member in final now: we 
protect people against high interest rates no matter who’s in 
power in Ottawa. We did it in ’82 and ’86, and you’ll see it in 
1989 as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I will just once more remind the members that 
it’s difficult to hear answers and it’s difficult to hear questions. 
And I’m sure that the guests here this morning would also like 
to hear what the hon. members are saying, and I just ask the 
members for their co-operation. I think it’s a reasonable request. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, your per capita 
deficits since you’ve been office have been a good deal higher 
than Ontario’s during the same period of time, Mr. Premier, but 
I want to turn to another one of the brilliant achievements in 
your economic record. 
 
In November, Mr. Premier, you went to Ontario, to Ottawa, to 
lend your assistance to Governor Crow with respect to interest 
rates. You met with him and you said as you left: he appeared 
positive. Well, he may have appeared that way, Mr. Premier, 
but the interest rates have risen one and a half per cent since 
you met with him. 
 
Mr. Premier, we ask for your assistance that you will never 
again seek to advise Governor Crow on interest rates. Do we 
have that assurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will continue to 
raise the very legitimate concerns about high interest rates in 
Saskatchewan and across Canada and at first ministers’ 
meetings, and any opportunity that I get to talk to the Finance 
minister or to the governor of the Bank of Canada. 
 
We stand, and our record is very clear, low interest rates are the 
right way to go. We have put our treasury right there to make 
sure we protect home owners, farmers, and businesses and 
others. And there’s not a better record in Canada, Mr. Speaker. I 
will argue time and time again for lower interest rates for 
Saskatchewan and for Canada, and particularly when we don’t 
have inflation across the country — it’s a spike in the middle, 
Toronto, or within 100 miles of Toronto. 
 
Let Toronto go. Let it have inflation. Let houses go for a 
million dollars. It’ll resolve itself. The law of diminishing  

marginal returns can take place in Toronto. Keep interest rates 
low for the rest of the country, and we can help grow out of the 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I suspect, Mr. Premier, that your record in 
managing this province’s economic affairs has something to do 
with your lack of credibility in advising the federal government 
of how they should manage theirs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Premier, the interest rates aren’t 
the end of the punishment which your federal namesakes have 
in store for us. We learned yesterday that Michael Wilson . . . 
he spoke of an intention to introduce a tax on mortgages and 
consumer loans that would have the effect of increasing, by a 
fair amount, the real interest rate which Saskatchewan farmers 
and business people and consumers pay. It’s with great 
trepidation that I ask you this, after your success in meeting 
with Governor Crow, but have you met with Michael Wilson 
and . . . or have you discussed with him the effect that this 
would have on Saskatchewan business men and farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
the Minister of Finance for Saskatchewan, and the other 
ministers of Finance, are meeting with and have met with Mike 
Wilson yesterday, and I believe they’re still in Ottawa going 
over those very points. 
 
I will say that the credibility of the opposition with respect to 
interest rates and business, Mr. Speaker, is among the lowest in 
the country because they haven’t done a thing when they were 
in power to protect us against 20 per cent interest rates, and 
they’ve been anti-business, anti-trade, anti-economic 
development diversification for as long as they’ve ever had a 
party, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wait for Surgery 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, and it concerns a very serious case which 
has been brought to my attention, and which I understand has 
been brought to his government’s attention. 
 
On October 5 of last year, Mr. Bill Batten, a Prince Albert man 
who was otherwise in good health, was informed that he needed 
open-heart surgery to repair a faulty heart valve. In that month 
he was told he was considered an urgent case, and in November 
he was informed that, in all likelihood, he would have his 
surgery before Christmas. 
 
On February 2 Mr. Batten died of a heart failure while he was 
waiting for a bed in Saskatoon — for a hospital bed, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask the Premier how he explains this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Health, I’ll take notice on the question. 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier,  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

31 
 

the Minister of Health, as far as I’m aware, has been advised of 
this. He knows of the case. I would like to quote to you from a 
telex that was sent to me by Leslie Tomporowski, the daughter 
of Mr. Batten, in which she says: "I feel that these unnecessary 
deaths are your responsibility — she’s talking about the 
government there, Mr. Premier — as tax-paying citizens, we 
rely on your judgements." Mr. Minister, you indicate that health 
care is your number one priority, and you say that you care for 
people. What do you have to say about this family’s grief and 
feelings of betrayal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Minister 
of Health was in the legislature yesterday when the hon. 
member could have addressed these questions to him, and I 
believe the hon. member was in the House yesterday, and the 
minister was prepared with a full detailed response because I 
understand that he has been in contact with the family. Now if 
the hon. member was sincerely concerned about this, and the 
minister was here and she was here, at least you could have the 
opportunity and take advantage of the opportunity to ask the 
Minister of Health. But you wait until he’s not here. Now if the 
matter was urgent, it was just as urgent yesterday as it was 
today. I say, with greatest respect to the hon. member, I 
understand the minister’s been in touch with the family. And I 
understand that he has more to say about it because he is the 
Minister of Health and he would be quite prepared to respond, 
but he’s not in the House today. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Premier, it’s your government and you’re 
responsible for your government’s policy order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Premier, in your throne speech, you spoke 
glowingly about the need to improve our preventive health care 
services, and in early October, Mr. Batten’s doctors were telling 
him that surgery was preventive in nature. Now are you aware, 
Mr. Premier, that preventive medicine means preventing 
diseases and not preventing people from getting the services 
they need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I believe the Speech from 
the Throne pointed out, that we have more surgeries per day 
and more surgeries per month and more surgeries than in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan, that’s why we made 
health care a priority. We’re spending more and more money. 
We’re building new hospitals, with complete co-operation, Mr. 
Speaker, of the medical profession, of the College of Physician 
and Surgeons, so that in fact that we can continue to have, and 
continue to improve health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just raised with the hon. member again, that if this was a 
sincere, legitimate concern on her part, that at least she could 
have brought it up when the Minister of Health was in here. 
And it’s not the first time this has happened, Mr. Speaker, and I 
draw this to your attention. 
 

Green Feed Program 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is  

to the Premier. Mr. Premier, during the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
by-election you told farmers and participants in the green feed 
program would not be short-changed by the drought program. 
And I’ll just read from your press release of November 14: 
 

All types of green feed program participants will be 
examined carefully to assure that everyone is treated 
fairly. Green feed program participants can be assured that 
they will not be short-changed by the drought program. 
 

Mr. Premier, is that still your opinion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In answer to the 
member’s question in regards to the green feed program, the 
green feed program, Mr. Speaker, was set up to assist those who 
needed to have feed for the winter. It was set up on a $15 per 
acre basis, and it was set up to assist particularly those in the 
south who would have a shortage of feed, who had cut their 
feed. It was over five bushels per acre. Take it off, put it up, and 
it would keep the cost of feed down for the next year. 
 
There was, Mr. Speaker, about 11,000 applicants that got over 
20 millions of dollars in the green feed program, and I believe it 
brought on almost a million tonnes of extra feed. So it was 
really a successful program. It was designed to assist those 
farmers who needed feed or those who could supply the other 
ones with feed. And it was really a successful program, well 
received by all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Sale of the Saskatchewan Government Printing Company 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
announce to my legislative colleagues and the people of 
Saskatchewan that an agreement has been reached to sell the 
Saskatchewan Government Printing Company to its employees. 
 
A major part of the government public participation initiative 
promotes employee buy-ins. Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to 
giving provincial government employees the opportunity to 
become entrepreneurs. When I announced cabinet’s decision to 
negotiate the sale of the company last December, the employees 
were enthused and optimistic. Today I am pleased to report that 
every employee has converted their excitement into a share in 
the new company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, that’s 100 per cent 
employee ownership, and it’s 100 per cent public participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, this agreement is good for 
employees, it’s good for the government, and it’s good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. The employees now  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

32 
 

have an opportunity to share in the company ownership and in 
its profits. The government received fair market value for its 
assets, and Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars can now be 
redirected towards more essential areas of government than the 
operation of a printing company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, when we last met in this 
legislature, I spoke of exciting things to come. Today I’m 
speaking of exciting things we’ve done. Public participation in 
action is building a stronger Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate very much the 
minister’s reannouncement of something that was announced 
months ago, and I wonder why the House allows things to be 
announced underneath ministerial statements that have been 
announced in the press and everywhere for months and months, 
but I will be talking to you about that later, Mr. Speaker, 
because I would question whether or not as it is in fact a 
ministerial statement. 
 
I guess it’s interesting today that we would be dealing in fact 
with privatization, talking about how employment is being 
created using privatization as the tool and the driving force, 
when the basic principle of question period today and the main 
theme in question period was the fact that we have 10,000 
fewer people working in the province today than we had one 
year ago, which includes the privatization that has taken place. 
 
What we’re seeing here, Mr. Speaker, in this province is a 
madness to attempt to get rid of people who work in 
government industries and drive the economy of this province 
on one engine, namely big business. That’s what we’re talking 
about. 
 
What we’re seeing here, Mr. Speaker, is a government that will 
go to the Pacific Rim, the oriental express, as it’s known by 
many people in the province, the Premier of this province going 
to China, Japan, and India, and offering the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan — which is owned by the people through their 
Crown — to the government of communist China. This is the 
Premier of the province’s attempt to sell off the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in the throne speech we see equity financing which will 
allow foreign money to come in to the equity financing program 
and buy up the farm land. Not only are we intent on selling off 
the resources of this province to the people in Taiwan, Japan, 
but now we’re seeing an attempt to sell off the farm land to 
people from outside of the province. I say it’s not going to 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I’ll tell you, your economic strategy has 
failed, Mr. Premier, it’s failed miserably. Every indicator of 
economic growth in this province is a miserable, miserable 
failure. What you’re trying to do now is hide behind the skirts 
of Maggie Thatcher with  

some convoluted argument of privatization to try to hide the 
economic record of this province. 
 
We have a deficit here that is now $12 billion — $12 billion in 
debt in this province. Twelve billion dollars that this Premier, 
the majority, over 75 per cent, he has run up in seven years. We 
have unemployment rates higher than they have been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member is using the 
occasion to enter debate and introducing a wide range of topics, 
and I think that he realizes that’s not the intent of replying to a 
ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister did talk about jobs and 
creating jobs and I’m trying to talk about the failure of the 
government to create jobs. I will listen to your ruling, but I 
don’t agree with it because the minister, I think, was way out of 
line in his speech which was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I just once more ask the 
hon. member to reply to the statement, reply to the statement. I 
don’t intend to enter into a debate with him. This is my ruling, 
and I ask him once more to reply to the statement and not use it 
as an occasion to enter a wide range of debate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to complete my 
remarks by saying this: that what the minister of piratization has 
said today is total nonsense — total and absolute nonsense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister of piratization . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the member has 
the right to complete his remarks without interruptions as well, 
and I’d ask for your co-operation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to conclude my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, by saying that this government’s economic attempt to 
privatize everything in this province has been a failure. The 
unemployment numbers prove that, the out-migration prove 
that, everything in terms of economic standards prove that the 
economic development of this province is in shambles, and no 
longer can they hide behind the skirts of Maggie Thatcher 
trying to copy what has happened in a foreign country, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It simply isn’t working. All the 
indicators prove that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, on June 29, 1988, 
the Legislative Assembly of Ontario adopted the report of the 
Select Committee on Constitutional Reform on the constitution 
amendment 1987, and also adopted a number of resolutions 
relating to the issue, which, at the request of the Ontario 
Legislative Assembly, I hereby convey to this House by tabling 
of them at this time. 
 
I also have a further document to table. I now take this 
opportunity to table the final report of the Electoral  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

33 
 

Boundaries Commission, 1988. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to move a motion of condolence that, as I 
understand, will be seconded by the member from Regina North 
East. In fact, a couple of motions. The first one, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly unites in paying tribute in the memory 
of His Honour Cameron Irwin McIntosh, who died 
September 24, 1988. 
 
Mr. McIntosh was born in North Battleford on July 1, 
1926. After graduating from North Battleford Collegiate 
he attended the University of Saskatchewan where he 
studied history and political science. He returned to North 
Battleford and began a career in journalism at his father’s 
newspaper, the North Battleford News-Optimist. 
 
As well as becoming the paper’s editor, Irwin McIntosh 
held the post of president and publisher of McIntosh 
Publishing Company. He was a past president of the 
Canadian Community Newspapers Association and a 
prominent member of the Saskatchewan Weekly 
Newspapers Association. 
 
Mr. McIntosh was very involved in community affairs. He 
served the North Battleford school board for 11 years as a 
trustee, including two years as chairman. He was a past 
president of the North Battleford chamber of commerce. 
He supported many organizations including the Jaycees, 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the Saskatchewan 
Ski Association, the Saskatchewan Motor Club, the Royal 
Canadian Legion, Outdoor Writers of Canada, just to 
name a few. 
 
As Saskatchewan’s 15th Lieutenant Governor, Mr. 
McIntosh took a special interest in rural Saskatchewan, 
education, and the province’s cultural groups. He also will 
be remembered for his commitment to national unity and 
to the monarchy. 
 
His Honour’s commitment, energy, and style in fulfilling 
his duties as the Queen’s representative have endeared him 
to the people of every corner of this province. 
 
Recording its deep sympathy in loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its sincere sympathy to the members 
of the bereaved family. 
 

Perhaps if I could just add some of my own. I suppose that we 
all in our own way as members of this legislature perhaps came 
to know Irwin McIntosh. I think that he was certainly full of 
life, certainly had the interest of this province at heart, and 
certainly was a very dedicated Canadian; strongly supported the 
function of his office,  

and strongly supported the unity within Canada. 
 
It is therefore, with leave, that I move this motion, seconded by 
the member from Regina North East. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
honoured to second this condolence motion on behalf of the 
official opposition. Irwin McIntosh was someone who I knew 
well, as did many members of this House, and for whom all of 
us had a great deal of respect. 
 
As the member opposite has indicated, Irwin McIntosh served 
Saskatchewan and Canada in a very exemplary fashion 
throughout all of his life, and he will be missed dearly by his 
friends and his family, as well as many people throughout 
Saskatchewan who came to know him. 
 
He served as Lieutenant Governor from 1978 to 1983, and his 
term coincided, it is well-known, with a very difficult period in 
Canadian history. During this period, the Quebec referendum 
brought into question the very existence of Canada as we know 
it. Mr. McIntosh was committed to Canadian unity and spoke 
with common sense and eloquence about this need for a strong 
and united Canada. He travelled this province and outside this 
province, and spoke very compassionately about those issues. 
 
Irwin McIntosh also had an enduring commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan. He believed rural communities to be the 
corner-stone of our province’s way of life. His lifelong 
commitment to the McIntosh Publishing Company in North 
Battleford was an example of that belief. 
 
And in addition to his important role in Saskatchewan’s 
newspaper and publishing industry, Irwin McIntosh will be 
remembered as a dedicated leader of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, an active patron of many cultural groups, a trustee 
of the North Battleford school board, and a committed member 
of the Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
Throughout all of his life, Irwin McIntosh could be counted on 
for his commitment to his community, his province, and his 
country, and he will be missed by all of those who knew him 
well. 
 
He made an important contribution to Saskatchewan and to 
Canada. We on this side of the House join with all members in 
extending our sympathy to the family and friends of the Hon. 
Cameron Irwin McIntosh. 
 
I said earlier that I knew him well because of many occasions in 
which I had to travel with him to attend at functions and 
ceremonies. And one incident that stands out in my mind was 
when I . . . one of the first opportunities in which I had to spend 
some time with Mr. McIntosh was the enthusiasm and the 
excitement and the pride when he took us around, myself and 
some other people, on a tour of Table Mountain ski facility near 
North Battleford, which he was very instrumental in 
developing. 
 
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

34 
 

So I have that personal memory. And on behalf of members 
opposite, I join with members . . . on behalf of members on this 
side of the House, I join with members opposite in extending 
again our sympathies to the family and friends of Irwin 
McIntosh. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
offer a few words. I served as Irwin McIntosh’s member of 
parliament and also as his member of the Legislative Assembly, 
and I would like to add my words to the condolences in honour 
of Irwin McIntosh here today. 
 
Certainly Irwin McIntosh served many organizations that were 
concerned with conservation and history and freedoms. He 
often promoted these community causes that he held dear 
through the News-Optimist, a paper that was owned by the 
McIntosh family through McIntosh Publishing Company. And 
Irwin McIntosh always held a keen interest in politics. He never 
did hesitate to express his political views to other people. 
 
Irwin McIntosh was a proud man. He was proud of his family, 
his community, and his province, and also proud of his country. 
 
I know that Irwin McIntosh held his father in very high regard. I 
never had the honour of knowing Irwin McIntosh’s father, but 
Irwin McIntosh’s father served as a Liberal member of 
parliament. Irwin, I know, was proud of the fact that the 
community of Dorintosh in north-western Saskatchewan in part 
was named after his father. The name Dorintosh was derived 
from Mr. McIntosh as a member of parliament, well-known, 
and one of his political opponents, a lady by the name of Doris 
Nielsen. And therefore came about the name of Dorintosh. 
 
I would also invite people in the future to look at Irwin 
McIntosh’s portrait hanging in the gallery here in this 
Legislative Assembly. Irwin McIntosh has the only portrait that 
has in fact two portraits within the portrait. He has his own 
portrait, and over his shoulder is a picture of his father as a 
young man. 
 
I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that Irwin McIntosh was 
dedicated and loyal to the many groups that he honoured by his 
association. And today, Mr. Speaker, I know that the emotions 
of sorrow at such a loss cannot be denied, but the life of Irwin 
McIntosh should be celebrated for his greatness. 
 
And today I would like to join in the official condolences to the 
McIntosh family — to his wife Barbara Lee, to his son Bill, and 
to his daughters Jean Anne and Becky. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with my colleagues of this Assembly in passing on 
condolences to the McIntosh family. 
 
I do not pretend to have known Irwin McIntosh all my life. I 
basically came to know him when I first became elected to this 
legislature. Irwin was a neighbour to my constituency in The 
Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. And as I  

came to know him, I always looked at Irwin as kind of a fairly 
prestigious type of person; that I can remember as a rookie 
member, that I felt, should I approach this man or should I not 
approach this man. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to indicate to you 
that Irwin made that particular decision fairly easy for me. 
 
As I said, I regarded him as a very prestigious individual. But 
although he had that prestigious outline about him, Irwin liked 
to consider himself as a very ordinary individual. He could stop 
and talk to anyone, carry on a conversation about just about 
anything because of his involvement at the very local level and 
the very grass root in the community in which he served, 
actually throughout Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
It’s always regrettable to lose people such as Irwin, and it’s 
regrettable to this fact, that he was never a person to sit down 
and take anything lightly. He enjoyed people, he enjoyed 
working, and he enjoyed serving the public. 
 
I guess probably if there’s any success that any one man or any 
one individual can have, it’s that respect of his friends and the 
public that he served. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that Irwin 
McIntosh, as he may be listening to us speak, I’m sure he’s got 
that smile on his face because I know in my heart that everyone 
that he’s ever touched on this face of the earth has had a total 
dedicated respect towards this individual. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, would like to pass my condolences on to the 
family and indicate to them that we will miss him. All the 
people of this country will miss him. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to take a 
few moments to contribute some words of recollection on 
behalf of Irwin McIntosh. Irwin McIntosh’s term as the 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan overlapped in great part 
with my term as a speaker of this Legislative Assembly. And 
therefore during that time when I was a speaker, he was the 
Lieutenant Governor. We met on many occasions in a formal 
way, and it was always a pleasant experience to meet with Irwin 
McIntosh. 
 
Someone else has previously mentioned that he enjoyed skiing 
and in fact was one of the proponents of Table Mountain skiing 
area. And I can recall on many occasions skiing with Irwin 
McIntosh and Barbara Lee at Table Mountain. It happened that 
we coincidentally arrived there and we met on the slopes and 
skied. And I know that Irwin McIntosh enjoyed the Table 
Mountain facility. He had a part in its creation and flowering, 
and it was always a pleasant experience to meet with Irwin 
McIntosh on an informal basis as well. 
 
The life of a Lieutenant Governor and a speaker of any 
Assembly would have some parallels. Each occupant of the 
position must strive, as much as it is possible within their being, 
to reach a degree of impartiality which will be acknowledged by 
the people they serve. That’s not an easy task but I know that 
Irwin McIntosh accomplished that in his service as a Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
Irwin McIntosh was a person who enjoyed a good story,  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

35 
 

and if I was able to communicate, if I am able to communicate a 
story to Irwin McIntosh, I would say to him — Irwin, every 
time you visited this Chamber, I got up and gave you my chair. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move, seconded by the member from Regina North East: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the 
transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 
be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, again with leave of 
the Assembly, I move, seconded by the member from Regina 
North East, and in this motion will be a condolence order, or 
motion, involving four previous members that sat in this 
Chamber. And I will go through those in order and then we will 
deal with each, and each member can speak to the entire motion 
or to various individuals. 
 
This is the manner by which this motion has been prepared, and 
I just wanted to advance that to the House before I moved it that 
way. Perhaps if there’s any comments . . . As I understand it the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I understand this is the proper 
motion. I’ve simply been handed this motion to deliver. 
 
What I would do is one motion. We will deal with each 
individual as we go, but still in the same motion. 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of four former members of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions they 
made to their community, their constituencies, and the 
province. 
 
Mr. Isidore Charles Nollet, who died in Kelowna, British 
Columbia, on April 29, 1988, was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly representing the constituency of Cut 
Knife from 1944 to 1967. Better known as Toby, Mr. 
Nollet was born in Sentinel Butte, North Dakota, on 
November 18, 1898. 
 
He was educated at St. Thomas College, St. Paul, 
Minnesota. During the First War, he enlisted in the 
American army and served overseas as a 
non-commissioned officer. After the war, Mr. Nollet and 
his father immigrated to Canada, first to British Columbia, 
and then in 1921 to Saskatchewan. Mr. Nollet established 
a ranch at Freemont. In 1933, he married Peggy Chicilo of 
Glenwood City, Wisconsin. 
 

Mr. Nollet belonged to the wheat pool, various 
co-operative associations, and the Royal Canadian Legion. 
He began his public life as a reeve of Hillsdale, being 
elected three times. In 1941 he ran unsuccessfully as a 
candidate for the federal seat of The Battlefords. In 1944 
he was elected to this Assembly and named as deputy 
speaker. In 1946 he was appointed minister of Agriculture, 
a post he held continuously for the next 18 and one-half 
years. When he retired from politics in 1967, he moved to 
Kelowna. 
 

This is the first part of a four-part motion, and I would propose 
that I would stop at this point in time and allow members of the 
Assembly that wish to speak to this part of the motion, to speak 
to the motion now. And perhaps in so doing the transcript, as it 
would be presented, will be in a common body. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wanted to 
be speaking to this motion. All members of the Assembly on 
this side join with you in offering our condolences to the family 
and friends of the late Mr. Nollet, a man of co-operative ideals, 
his life’s work aimed at achieving these ends. 
 
Mr. Nollet was actively involved in the United Farmers of 
Canada and organizing the Canadian Co-operative Implements 
Limited. Mr. Nollet was a founding member of the farm labour 
party, and when the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) was founded, became an active member. He was 
first elected to represent the Cut Knife constituency in 1944, 
and served as its representative until 1967. 
 
During his lengthy term as an MLA for Cut Knife, Toby Nollet 
was a true friend of the farming community. For many years he 
held the post of agricultural minister. His contributions to the 
farming industry were innovative and have helped to shape the 
industry into its present-day form. 
 
The list is lengthy and aptly reflects the lasting difference Mr. 
Nollet made to this province’s farming community. They 
include crop insurance, extension of water and sewage system 
to farms, water conservation and development, forage and 
pasture development, and the South Saskatchewan River dam, 
as well as many, many other important and lasting 
contributions. 
 
Always an innovator, and always a man that stood for the 
co-operative ideals that built this province and made it into the 
place so many of us are proud of to call home. 
 
We join with the Premier and the members opposite in 
extending our sympathy to family and friends. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join again with all members of this Assembly in passing the 
condolence on to the Toby Nollet family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will admit that I have never met the man, Toby 
Nollet, and in representing the Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
constituency in which it is now, I do  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

36 
 

know this much: Mr. Speaker, as member of Cut Knife and 
area, I know that when I ran as a member of this Legislative 
Assembly, that Toby Nollet’s name came up on several 
occasions. I know, Mr. Speaker, that when Toby was mentioned 
to me in conversation, he was a person’s person is what was 
related to me. 
 
Toby was an individual, from my understanding from the 
people that have met him and the people he represented, that 
again, whenever he himself was in his riding away from the 
legislature here, he would take the time of day to stop and speak 
to anyone and everyone about anything. He had time for people, 
and he enjoyed that particular part of his public life. 
 
He served the people well. In fact, when I talk to people of 
various persuasions in politics and party affiliations, individuals 
have always and often told me that they weren’t quite sure of 
Toby’s politics because of the fact that he could understand and 
would chat with anyone about any concern, regardless of their 
political affiliation. He was, as I said, a person’s person, in that 
it didn’t matter what kind of a problem an individual would 
have had, he would have taken the time to try and help that 
individual. 
 
Toby was very sincere. He had brought about in that particular 
area a great love towards this Assembly, because he was a very 
professional individual. He brought the respect of his 
government at that particular time to that area. 
 
Toby and his family have made many sacrifices. Those 
sacrifices were long hours of Toby being away from his home, 
and through that, you know, when you talk about the serving, 
the family themselves made a great sacrifice. And now with 
Toby and his reputation in the particular constituency of Cut 
Knife, it’s fairly difficult to keep up with that type of a 
reputation. And I know that the people out in that particular 
district are going to miss the fact of a man that has served that 
area well, and miss the fact that they will no longer have him in 
their midst. 
 
I know that with the respect that he has brought about to 
himself, Mr. Speaker, is that I would like to salute Toby Nollet 
and pass on to his family the condolence on behalf of the 
residents in the Cut Knife constituency. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to rise and 
say a few words on behalf of myself and probably all members 
of the House, with regard to Toby Nollet. 
 
I knew Toby Nollet reasonably well, and as a matter of fact he 
was a contemporary of mine. He was also a contemporary of 
my father’s. The last three years of Mr. Nollet’s life as a 
member of the legislature and the last three years of my father’s 
life as a member of the legislature coincided with the first three 
years of my life in this Legislative Assembly. Therefore, I met 
Toby Nollet on a number of occasions informally, formally here 
in the Chamber, and politically, and learned to appreciate the 
qualities of Toby Nollet. 
 
I think it can be safely said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Toby 
Nollet was a landmark in Saskatchewan politics. He served 23 
unbroken years in this Legislative Assembly. He was the 
minister of Agriculture for about 18 years. I  

doubt if there are many former ministers of Agriculture that 
have served that long and held the confidence of the people of 
Saskatchewan that long, and held the confidence of the premier 
of the province that long as a minister of Agriculture. I would 
be surprised if there are any that would exceed that record of 
confidence. 
 
And that’s what people had in Toby Nollet. They had 
confidence in him, whether it was the people in his constituency 
or the Government of Saskatchewan. They recognized the 
sterling qualities of a person like Toby Nollet. 
 
I felt that I must say that about Mr. Nollet. I know that he was a 
participant in his community. He served in various capacities, 
volunteering his abilities to the people of his area of 
Saskatchewan. And that, I’m sure, contributed to making him a 
success as he moved, as we would say, up the ladder to a 
member of the Legislative Assembly and to cabinet minister in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to join with all other members in extending sincere 
condolences to the members of the Nollet family. I appreciated 
the opportunity to serve with Toby Nollet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the next former member I 
would like to refer to is one: 
 

Mr. John Harrop, who died in Creston, British Columbia 
on September 22, 1988, as a member of this Legislative 
Assembly for the constituency of Athabasca, from 1956 to 
1960. 
 
He was born in Alameda in 1910, married Myrtle Salter in 
1938. Mr. Harrop was an accountant who began his career 
with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 1927. After losing 
his job during the Depression, he joined the CCF Research 
Bureau. In the late 1930s he was an accountant and 
treasurer for the Regina Co-operative Association. He 
served five years with the RCAF during the war and 
returned to his accounting practice in 1946. 
 
After moving to Uranium City in 1953 to manage a hotel, 
Mr. Harrop entered politics and was elected in 1956. In 
1960 he did not seek re-election and moved to Ontario. 
Soon after, he returned to Saskatchewan to work for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation where he remained 
employed until his retirement in 1975. 
 
Mr. Harrop was an avid golfer and curler who belonged to 
many sports organizations. 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
join with other members of this Assembly in recognizing the 
contributions that John J. Harrop made to this Assembly and to 
his constituents. 
 
I did not know Mr. Harrop personally. I do represent a large 
part of the old Athabasca constituency, a constituency that 
covered one-third of the province of Saskatchewan, from the 
Alberta border to the Manitoba border, from the Northwest 
Territories border to south of La Ronge. As John Harrop said, 
and I quote, "I would venture to guess that it contains over 
one-third of the total  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

37 
 

wealth of the province." And he was right in that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
John Harrop, in his quiet and sincere way, worked very hard for 
his constituents and this province. Having a large northern 
constituency, John Harrop found out that getting his message to 
the southern politicians was not always an easy job. As he 
confided in two close friends and constituents, Lawrence and 
Murray Milburn of Beauval, and I quote, "Sometimes I feel like 
a voice crying in the wilderness." 
 
However, that never stopped John Harrop from fighting for 
what he believed in, and that was a fair and just society for all. I 
join with all members in extending my condolences to the 
Harrop family. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, wish to join my 
colleagues in honouring John Harrop today. John Harrop was a 
family man. He was a brother, father, grandfather, and a great 
grandfather, who was also for a period of time a constituent of 
mine. Mr. Harrop and his family were honoured and proud that 
John Harrop had been called to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan as the MLA for Athabasca. 
 
John Harrop was an MLA in the heady days when medicare 
was about to become a reality in Saskatchewan. In response to 
the throne speech in 1957, Mr. Harrop spoke with a great vision 
of the need for northern development that included people and 
funding for northern Saskatchewan. He was advocating job 
creation and other development of mining for the benefit of 
northern residents. He advocated, at the time, roads through 
northern Saskatchewan so that fresh fruit, fresh vegetables, 
fresh meat, and other supplies and necessities could be more 
economically supplied to the northern people, his constituents. 
As well, those roads would be used for opening up mining. 
 
It was very clear from the things I was able to glean from his 
speeches that he understood his constituency very well, and he 
cared and he spoke out for the people that he was elected to 
represent. 
 
I’m honoured today to join my legislative colleagues in 
remembering John Harrop. I wish for his family and friends the 
ability to keep the many good memories of John Harrop alive 
for many years. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
my colleagues, the member from Athabasca and the member 
from Regina North, in remembering John Harrop. I first met 
John in 1979 during the North West by-election nomination 
race. John was a constituent of mine from that point forward 
after I was elected. 
 
Prior to the by-election in 1979, I spent an hour or two with 
John and reminisced with him about some of the challenges that 
he had faced when he was an elected member in this Assembly 
in the 1950s. John was a very keen person. He was very 
interested in politics and in current affairs and ended up coming 
to the nomination convention in 1979. He didn’t indicate at that 
time who he was going to be supporting, but I found out later 
on from his wife Myrt that he and Myrt both supported me for  

the nomination, simply because of one statement that I had 
made during the course of my remarks in the nomination 
speeches, and that was a reference to the CCF. His roots were 
so deep into the community of Saskatchewan and so deep in the 
party that he felt that anyone who remembered and promoted 
the principles of the CCF was worthy of his support. His wife 
Myrt, who predeceased John, was also a very strong supporter 
of the party. She, in fact, worked for the New Democratic Party 
provincial office for about 10 years in the ’60s and early ’70s. 
 
And I would like at this point to convey my personal 
condolences to the Harrop family and express my deepest 
sympathies to them. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to say 
a few words on behalf of John Harrop. I knew Johnny Harrop. 
He was a contemporary of my father, and I suppose that’s 
primarily how I had met him. I’d met him on a number of 
occasions and got to know him well enough to understand that 
he was a sincere and dedicated person to his ideals, which 
happened to coincide with mine, and I know that he put faithful 
and dedicated service into the job of being a member of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1115) 
 
I, the same as the previous speaker, knew his wife Myrt, as 
well, and appreciated both of them. They were very nice people, 
and I felt that I could commend them to anyone. 
 
It’s with a feeling of regret that we arrive at this point when we 
must acknowledge that he has passed from among us; however, 
his memory will live on with many of us for a long time into the 
future. I appreciated the opportunity to know and visit with 
Johnny Harrop over the years that we knew each other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would deal with: 
 

Mr. Arthur T. Stone, who died December 31, 1988, was 
a member of this Legislative Assembly, representing the 
constituency of Saskatoon City from 1944 to 1964. He 
was born October 18, 1897, in Croydon, England, where 
he graduated from Selhurst Grammar School. In 1913 he 
immigrated with his parents to Saskatoon. 
 
He worked for the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway before 
moving to Winnipeg to apprentice as a machinist. In 1921 
he married Kathleen Walkling and returned to Saskatoon 
to work with the Canadian National Railway. He was 
active with the railroad machinists’ union and was elected 
vice-president of the Saskatchewan Trades and Labour 
Council. 
 
Beginning in 1944, he won the Saskatoon City seat in this 
Assembly and held that seat in five consecutive elections. 
 
In his youth, Mr. Stone was a noted soccer player, he was 
an avid golfer, and he enjoyed gardening.  

  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

38 
 

After his retirement in 1964, Mr. Stone did much 
community work. 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I want to join with the government in recognizing the 
contributions of Arthur Stone to this legislature and to our 
province, and join with the government in extending our 
condolences to his family and to his friends. 
 
Mr. Stone was a member of this legislature for 20 years. Art 
Stone was first elected along with Tommy Douglas in 1944 and 
represented the city of Saskatoon until 1964. 
 
His contributions to the city of Saskatoon and to this province 
were many. Those contributions were recognized by the 
provincial government when they named the Sturdy Stone 
Building in Saskatoon after Arthur Stone. He helped to shape 
and direct our province. 
 
One of his most lasting achievements was the fight to 
implement medicare here in Saskatchewan. Early on, he served 
as president of the State Hospital and Medical League. As such, 
he laid the groundwork for the implementation of medicare in 
Saskatchewan, a momentous contribution — the first publicly 
funded health care system in all of North America — quite an 
accomplishment, and Mr. Stone was one of the key individuals 
responsible. 
 
The plight of the average person was always Mr. Stone’s 
motivation, and the implementation of medicare was not his 
only contribution. He was a much loved MLA and was always 
accessible to his constituents. His home on Maple Street was 
always open to all, and he was the kind of person that had the 
common touch. 
 
He was a member of the labour movement. A member of the 
International Association of Machinists, he served as one of the 
strongest advocates in the legislature for improved conditions 
for working people in this province. His role in the creation of 
the best labour legislation in all of North America will never be 
forgotten. Art Stone was a man of integrity who fought 
throughout his lifetime to achieve the ideals he held close to his 
heart. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a personal note, when I first sought the 
nomination of my party in the constituency that I represent in 
1982, Art Stone was one of my nominators. And the 
competition for the nomination was heated; there was a lot of 
activity. And on the evening of the nomination, we were all 
assembled at Victoria School on 12th Street in Saskatoon with 
over 700 people in attendance, and you could actually cut the 
air with a knife because the situation was so tense. And Art 
Stone, being a commiserate politician, knew how to lighten 
things up and he, in introducing me and nominating me, he said 
that it was important that we send ladies to Winnipeg, and 
everybody started to laugh, and on reflection he said, I mean to 
Regina. 
 
Art Stone was a man who I think was quite ahead of his time. 
He was supportive of women being involved in politics. He was 
supportive of trade unionists being involved in politics, and he 
was somewhat suspect of people who’d been trained at the 
ivory tower, as we  

called it, the University of Saskatchewan, and I happen to be 
one of those people. But after a great deal of discussion and 
getting to know me, Art Stone decided that perhaps he would be 
one of my nominators and support me in my nomination. 
 
I think in conclusion, I can say that Art Stone was a man of 
conviction and principle. He made this province a better place 
for working people. I feel privileged to have known him, and I 
feel honoured to now represent the people of his former 
constituency, and I join with the members opposite in extending 
our condolences to his family and friends. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As an MLA 
from the city of Saskatoon, I’d like to add my condolences to 
those of my colleagues on the passing of the former MLA, Art 
Stone. 
 
His reputation as a hard working and dedicated legislator was 
very strong. He was devoted to Saskatoon city and to all his 
constituents. He was a working person with a deep commitment 
to those whose labour built this province. He was a man of 
principle to whom the goals of an egalitarian society meant a 
great deal. 
 
He was so well respected that the Sturdy Stone Building in 
Saskatoon Centre constituency was named in his honour as a 
well deserved memorial. And it is sad now, and I know it’s sad 
for his family members, to see that the name of the area has 
been changed to "the Mall on third Avenue." In spite of this 
change, the Sturdy Stone Building is there, and people know it 
as the Sturdy Stone Building, in memory of Art Stone. And he 
will always be a part of the history of Saskatoon, a fine person 
whose life has set us all an example to follow. 
 
I am honoured to be a part of the movement that included 
people like Art Stone, and includes them today. And I join in 
sending my deepest sympathy and my affection to his family 
members, whom I am proud to consider and to count as my 
personal friends. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to take 
this opportunity to contribute a few words about the passing of 
Arthur Stone. 
 
I knew Art Stone reasonably well. Art Stone was my MLA; I 
knew Arthur, his family as well. Arthur was a person who was 
fully involved in the community of his fellow workers, and that 
is how he was able to command their respect and votes and 
being continuously a member of this Assembly for 20 years. 
 
Art Stone was an avid golfer and enjoyed the sport very much. 
His daughter followed in his footsteps — Barbara. Members of 
the Assembly will recognize the name, Barbara Turnbull, as 
being a champion golfer in this province. And now Barb 
Danaher continues to be a champion golfer in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And on speaking to her about her father’s love 
for golf, she suggested to me that up until just a few years ago 
Art golfed a pretty good game. 
 



 
March 10, 1989 

 

39 
 

The termination of Art Stone’s career as a member of the 
legislature marked the beginning of my career as a member of 
the legislature, and therefore I had ample opportunity to 
interface with Art Stone as the previous MLA for Saskatoon 
City. My term began as a member of the legislature for 
Saskatoon City before the city was divided up into individual 
constituencies. 
 
The kind of service that Art Stone offered to the people of 
Saskatchewan is rare indeed when you consider that the 
political life of a person in the province of Saskatchewan would 
probably average out at about maybe five or six years. When 
you consider that Art Stone served the people of Saskatoon in a 
relatively strong growth period with a great influx of people to 
the city of Saskatoon continuously for 20 years, is an 
achievement of some sorts in the history of this province. 
 
And I join with other members of the Assembly in issuing my 
sincere condolences to his son Ken, daughter Barbara, and other 
members of the family. It was a pleasure to have served, 
following the term of Art Stone in the legislature of 
Saskatchewan. He set a good example. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s my privilege to say a few words about Art Stone, who was a 
friend and a neighbour to me, and a man who I held in very 
high regard. Art’s service to the people of Saskatchewan was 
based on his deep religious conviction and his commitment to 
the principles of democratic socialism. He was a highly 
principled MLA who urged his colleagues to stand by the high 
ideals of the CCF and the New Democratic Party, even when 
the going was tough. 
 
Art had a remarkable record of service in the legislature, as my 
colleague, the member for Westmount, has indicated. He was 
elected in 1944 and he served for 20 years, winning five 
consecutive elections. And knowing Art personally, it’s no 
surprise at all to me that the people of Saskatoon expressed their 
affection and appreciation for him by consistently returning him 
to the legislature. 
 
Art was an excellent constituency worker. He would travel 
throughout the city of Saskatoon, often by bus, calling on 
constituents who needed his help. And he served them tirelessly 
and humbly. 
 
Art’s record of service in the community and in the legislature 
will be remembered for a long time to come. 
 
As my colleague from Nutana mentioned, he made a major 
contribution to the development of medicare in this province, 
and he also made a major contribution to the development of 
labour legislation that made life easier for the average working 
person in Saskatchewan. 
 
Art Stone has set an example to all of us of what can be done in 
taking an important step towards the building of the New 
Jerusalem, an ideal that he held firmly to. And I want to join 
with all other members of the Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in expressing our sympathies to all members of Art Stone’s 
family. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr.  

Deputy Speaker, I would like to join with others in this 
Assembly, both on the government side and my colleagues on 
this side, in expressing our condolences to the Stone family on 
the death of Arthur Stone. 
 
Art Stone was a member of my constituency, the old 
constituency of Nutana South, when I was first elected in 1971, 
and Art sat on my executive for some time. I appreciated having 
Art on my executive because he was so committed to the ideals 
of democratic socialism and to the old CCF policies and 
programs, and also to the working people of this province. And 
he often reminded me that when I strayed from that philosophy 
that I was not keeping in mind the commitments that those 
people had made to this province. 
 
(1130) 
 
I want to join with others in congratulating Art on the work that 
he did in the areas of hospitalization and medicare, and maybe 
even more particularly in labour legislation, as my seat mate has 
indicated. Arthur Stone was very much committed to the 
welfare of the working people of this province. 
 
And there was a number of occasions when I visited with Art in 
his house, in renewing his membership and asking for financial 
contributions. Arthur never hesitated. But I knew I would be 
always in for a half an hour or an hour of reminiscing of the 
past and making sure . . . Arthur always made sure to remind 
me of why I was in the legislature, and that was to represent the 
ordinary people in the province of Saskatchewan. I appreciated 
that very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to join with others here in passing on our condolences to 
the family of Arthur Stone, but in particularly to Barbara and to 
Ken. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
want to join my colleagues in the Assembly in acknowledging 
the contribution and the passing of Mr. Arthur Stone. I did not 
personally know Mr. Stone, but I certainly am well aware of his 
work and have worked in the building, worked for many years 
in the building in Saskatoon that is named after Mr. Stone. I am 
aware of his long and dedicated contributions in this Chamber, 
in his community, and in the province as a whole. Mr. Stone’s 
son, Ken, and family live in my riding of Saskatoon Eastview, 
and they’re good friends of mine. 
 
Again to them, I join with all colleagues in the House in 
sending my condolences to the entire Stone family and friends. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. J. Herbert Staveley, who died in Victoria, British 
Columbia, January 6, 1989, was a member of this 
legislature for the constituency of Weyburn from 1961 to 
1964. Mr. Staveley was born 1909. He received his 
education in Weyburn where he won the Governor 
General’s Gold Medal for academic excellence. After 
graduation he took a position with the Staveley family 
business. 
 

  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

40 
 

Mr. Staveley was a member of the Saskatchewan Institute 
of Agrologists and the Agricultural Institute of Canada. He 
was a Mason and a prominent member of the Presbyterian 
Church in Weyburn. As well, he was a very active 
executive member of a variety of community 
organizations. Mr. Staveley served as chairman of the 
Weyburn hospital board. He was an alderman before being 
elected as mayor. He was involved with the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association. Mr. Staveley was 
elected to this legislature in a by-election in 1961. After 
retiring, Mr. Staveley moved to Calgary in 1972, where he 
resided at the time of his passing. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would like to spend a few moments in tribute to Mr. Staveley. 
 
He, as has been pointed out, served as member of the 
Legislative Assembly for Weyburn constituency. It wasn’t 
during a time that I lived in Weyburn or Weyburn and area, so I 
can’t say that I knew him personally, but certainly one didn’t 
have to know him personally to know that he was a highly 
regarded man in Weyburn and area. I moved to Weyburn in 
1973, and very soon thereafter I was well aware of how highly 
regarded this man was, what he meant to the business life of 
Weyburn, what he meant to the community and cultural life of 
Weyburn, and what he had done in public service. In fact, I 
think one could say genuinely that Mr. Staveley was a legend in 
his time in the city of Weyburn. 
 
His business roots and that of the family were widespread and 
deep, entailed a number of areas, but certainly farm land was 
part of that. His public service, as well, obviously had been an 
MLA, but prior to that time had served on the hospital board, 
had been active in community associations, had served as an 
alderman, and ultimately served as mayor of the city of 
Weyburn as well. 
 
So I think you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the man, 
because he was highly regarded, was looked to for this kind of 
public service and willingly took it on, even though he was a 
busy individual. 
 
So I would just join with other members of the legislature in 
extending our condolences to his family and the friends of Mr. 
Staveley. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. It’s a sign of the 
passing years in here that I think this is one member that no 
member of our opposition has actually served with. 
 
I had met Mr. Staveley. It’s also a sign, I guess, of how times 
change, that when he was elected he was then elected in what 
was hostile country for the Liberals — Weyburn. Weyburn had 
been represented by Premier Douglas, and on Mr. Staveley’s 
leaving, it was then represented by Auburn Pepper. He served 
an interlude, and in a very difficult period in Saskatchewan 
politics, during the medicare crisis, so while his term of office 
was not as long as some, he served during one of the most 
traumatic, perhaps is the word, period in Saskatchewan history. 
 

He had a record of community service that was enviable, had 
served not only on the city council in Weyburn, had served in 
the hospitals and served in his community, and was well 
regarded by the community in which he lived. Those in which 
he lived said of him, a fine man and a fine person. And so he 
was. 
 
He served in here and served for a few years; did not serve 
during a period of time when the Liberals were in office. They 
were in opposition then, so he did not experience the 
frustrations that sometimes go with government, and the 
limitations that are sometimes placed on electors when they 
actually get to hold the reins of power. 
 
I want to extend, on behalf of the official opposition, our deep 
condolences to the Staveley family, and to express our 
appreciation for his years of service to his community and in 
this legislature. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had met Mr. June 
Staveley two or three times, and that would be largely because 
he was a contemporary of my father in this Legislative 
Chamber. Other than that, I did not have any more personal 
knowledge of Mr. Staveley than that. That makes no less 
sincere my message of condolence to the Staveley family on his 
passing. 
 
He was a person that would be recognized, by and large, by his 
community effort in the community of Weyburn, rather than his 
short stay in the Legislative Assembly. That is being recognized 
today, that he did serve here, and all people who put in service 
in this Assembly and have a long record of community service 
deserved to be acknowledged for the contribution they’ve made 
here. Had his term been longer, I’m sure it would have reflected 
the kind of participation and involvement he had in his own 
community, and therefore I would extend my condolences to 
the Staveley family. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 
Assembly, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Regina North East: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of the 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On a point of order. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
today a document was tabled in the Assembly, namely, the 
report from the boundary commission. Members of the 
opposition have not got copies of that report. And I would ask 
you now whether or not this is, as we assume, a very unusual 
procedure, where a document is tabled in the Assembly before 
there are reports and  
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

41 
 

copies made available to members of the opposition. 
 
I’d ask you for a ruling on that right now, because there could 
be a suspicion that this is being tabled late in the day on the last 
day of the week to avoid scrutiny by the members of the 
opposition and members of the press because of some of the 
things, in a negative sense, that we would want to comment on 
before the weekend. 
 
I’m not saying that is the reason they aren’t here; there may be 
other technical reasons. But it’s very, very unusual that a report 
that is going to become a basis of a major Bill in this Assembly 
in this session would be tabled late on a Friday, shortly before 
adjournment, with no copies being made available to the 
members of the opposition. And I would like, one, that you 
would rule on that note; but as well, that copies be made 
available before we adjourn the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — On to the point of order raised by the 
member from Regina Elphinstone, I understand . . . It’s my 
understanding that the copies are in fact in the process of being 
couriered over, and will be tabled and delivered very shortly. 
Nothing ulterior about it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
we’ll hold back on adjournment if you want, until that time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — On the point of order, I want to, for the 
record, make this comment, and we look forward to your ruling. 
But it is highly unusual that the Chief Electoral Officer would 
provide to the Speaker of the House, one copy of the report for 
tabling, and not provide adequate copies at the same time for 
distribution to members of the legislature. 
 
If that is what has transpired, and my understanding is that that 
is what has happened, then there should not have been the 
tabling of that report until copies were also provided for the 
purposes of distributing to the members of the House. 
Otherwise the role of the Chief Electoral Officer who, it is 
well-known, is politically appointed and also is a member of the 
Electoral Boundaries Commission, is in some very serious 
question here. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — On the point of order, it is the 
courtesy to the House that copies are available when the 
document is tabled. However, there is no rule or legal 
requirement that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I am 
informed now that they are being couriered and are on their way 
over. 
 
(1145) 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Names on Committees of the Assembly 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to make some changes to committees of the 
Assembly that would affect our caucus, and I would ask to do 
that now. 
 
The first motion that I would move is: 
 

That the names of Mr. Lautermilch and Mr. Lyons be 
substituted for those of Ms. Atkinson and Mr. 
Tchorzewski on the Standing Committee on  

Crown Corporations. 
 

I would move that, seconded by the member from Regina 
Centre. 
 
Oh, I guess I need to have leave to proceed on this. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the name of Ms. Atkinson be substituted for that of 
Ms. Smart in the Standing Committee on Education. 
 

I move that, seconded by the member for Regina North East. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move: 
 

That the names of Mr. Kowalsky and Mr. Solomon be 
substituted for those of Ms. Simard and Mr. Tchorzewski 
on the Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 
 

Seconded by the member for Saskatoon South. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
mentioned member from Elphinstone and the member from 
Regina South. Did you mean, member from Saskatoon South? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — If the Chair made a mistake, I will 
review it tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Pringle be substituted for that of Mr. 
Rolfes on the Standing Committee on Private Members’ 
Bills. 
 

Seconded by the member for Regina Centre. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Lingenfelter be substituted for that 
of Mr. Koskie on the Special Nominating Committee. 
 

Seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
  



 
March 10, 1989 

 

42 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move: 
 

That the names of Mr. Lingenfelter and Ms. Smart be 
substituted for those of Mr. Van Mulligen and Mr. Koskie 
on the Standing Committee on Communication. 
 

Seconded by the member for Moose Jaw South. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would move: 
 

That the names of Mr. Lyons and Mr. Rolfes be 
substituted for those of Mr. Prebble and Mr. Lingenfelter 
on the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Seconded by the member for Regina North. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would move: 
 

That the names of Ms. Atkinson and Mr. Lingenfelter be 
substituted for those of Mr. Koskie and Ms. Simard on the 
Continuing Select Committee. 
 

Seconded by the member for Prince Albert. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Lingenfelter be substituted for that 
of Mr. Koskie on the Standing Committee on Privileges 
and Elections. 
 

Seconded by the member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave, and 
finally: 
 

That the name of Mr. Lyons be substituted for that of Mr. 
Prebble on the Standing Committee on Non-controversial 
Bills. 
 

And it’s seconded by the member for Regina Centre. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:53 a.m. 
 


