


















































March 20, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 20, 1989 
 

271 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave I’d like 
to introduce some guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 28 Cubs in the Speaker’s gallery. They 
are from the 80th Walsh Acres Monday Night Cub Pack in the 
constituency of Regina North West, Mr. Speaker. They are 
accompanied by Michael Ryan, Al Molander, Jude Horinek, 
and Tim Desrochers. I’d like to welcome each of you to the 
Assembly this evening and I hope that you enjoy the visit this 
evening. I look forward to meeting with you about 7:30 for 
some pictures and refreshments and to answer any questions 
you may have. Enjoy the evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Prior to our break at 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I was discussing 
the throne speech and the positive outlook that this government 
has with regard to the province of Saskatchewan for the coming 
year; also, the positive blueprint that has been set out with 
regard to programs that we really feel will be important in 
leading this province into the 1990s and beyond. 
 
I’d also indicated that I was very happy, Mr. Speaker, to be 
representing the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. The 
northern part of Saskatoon is a very beautiful area and the part 
that I am proud to be living in. And we have many, many 
positive features of that particular constituency, and some of 
which I will be touching on much more later. 
 
I had indicated some of the positive approaches that this 
government has taken, Mr. Speaker, with regard to education, 
and health care, and the concern that we have with regard to the 
citizens of this province. We know that during the last few 
years that times have been relatively tough in so far as the 
economy is concerned. But this government has made a very 
good attempt, I believe, at ensuring that we protect our citizens 
whether it’s with regards to health care; whether it’s with regard 
to providing very, very good programs for our young people in 
education. And we’re doing the best that we can, we feel, and 
we look forward to very positive things with regard to 1989. 
 
The next area that I want to deal with, Mr. Speaker, is with  

regard to family support and children, because this is another 
area that many people in Saskatchewan are very concerned 
about. And this government, I feel, has made a very honest 
attempt at providing programs that will lead to more support 
and more protection for our families. The protection of 
individuals and families is certainly a priority with this 
government in much the same way that health and education 
are. 
 
One of the areas that we are going to be providing more 
programming for, and we’ve been providing, I think, some very 
good programs, is with regard to foster-parents. Now today we 
know that, for one reason or another, we have a growing need 
for foster-parents, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s important 
that we ensure that we have the best possible foster-parents 
available. 
 
In this regard, then, I am very pleased that the government, and 
through the Department of Social Services, is going to be 
providing more programming for foster-parents so that they in 
fact can be better trained and can in fact do a better job with 
regard to services for young children which need that type of 
service. 
 
The idea of restructuring programs and providing more training 
for foster-parents and at the same time recognizing the fact that 
with this training should go a higher level of compensation for 
them . . . As they learn more skills and get more training, I think 
it’s imperative that this area also be looked at. And I know from 
people that are involved with foster-parenting that I’ve talked 
with, they are very, very pleased with this initiative taken by the 
minister responsible for Social Services. 
 
Another area that’s a growing problem today, and one that I’ve 
been very pleased to be involved with the solution of, is the idea 
of care for those children of teens who still want to carry on and 
complete their high school programs. And I’m speaking 
specifically about the student infant care centre that was opened 
up this last fall at Mount Royal Collegiate in Saskatoon. 
 
In the city of Saskatoon today, we have in the neighbourhood of 
250 teen parents. Now many of these young people are 
interested in staying in school and finishing off their high 
school training, and at the same time they have made the 
decision to keep their child. 
 
Now the program that was started on September 1 in Mount 
Royal Collegiate is for 10 parents at this particular time who 
have small children, babies or infants. These 10 spaces then are 
giving 10 young people, 10 teenagers, an opportunity to stay in 
school and finish off their high school. This is something that I 
think is a reflection of our times, it’s something that we’re 
recognizing that this is a modern-day problem and that we have 
to do something about it. 
 
And I have visited that program on several occasions, and I 
have been very proud to have been involved in the setting up 
and getting going of this program. We’ve had a very dedicated 
committee of teachers and others who have been trying to get 
this program off the ground for some time, and I was very 
pleased to be at the official opening of it last fall. 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

272 
 

Now we know that this is something that we have to continue to 
address, but these young people at least now have the 
opportunity, even though the number is small, to stay in high 
school and finish off and then carry on. Some of them, I know, 
have plans to go on to technical school when they finish high 
school and some on into the university. 
 
Another area that I’m very pleased with that has taken place 
over the last few months is to do with our SARCAN 
development. The Saskatchewan Association for Rehab Centres 
in the province of Saskatchewan is involved with providing 
services for many, many people, men and women, who are in 
one way or another less fortunate than others. 
 
Through SARCAN, through the whole idea of working with the 
Department of the Environment, and the collection of aluminum 
cans, this has provided an opportunity for employment for 
many, many young men and women all over the province. I 
know that a workshop that I had a lot of involvement with, 
Mallard Industries in the town of Wadena, is involved with the 
SARCAN program, where they collect the aluminum cans from 
around the area and then they are turned over to a central 
agency where they are disposed of. And I know that this has 
meant a tremendous deal to some of the young people who are 
involved with Mallard Industries. It’s meant meaningful 
employment for some of those people who, in many other 
cases, were not able to have a job. 
 
I think also the young person from the town of Assiniboia that I 
encountered when I was working in that area and speaking to 
his parents, and about how proud they were of this particular 
program, and that their son, who was involved with the program 
in Moose Jaw, is very, very pleased to have a job. But he is not 
just looking at the job that he has now; he’s an individual who 
is looking ahead to doing something better. 
 
And the whole program of SARCAN, Mr. Speaker, has 
provided new hope, new opportunities for some of these young 
people who are in many ways destined to be on social 
assistance for the rest of their lives. Mr. Speaker, to me this is a 
very progressive step taken by this government and a very real 
concern about helping some of those people who need 
protection. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — At the same time, we know that this 
particular program not only provides employment but it also 
deals with an issue that is of great concern, I think, to many 
throughout the province today, and that’s with some of our 
environmental problems. So it’s a two-headed sword: we’ve 
got, then, employment for those who otherwise may not have 
had jobs but also is going a long ways in helping to clean up our 
environment. 
 
I’m also particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, with changes that 
are going to be made to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 
We know that within our society we have many individuals 
who are considered as being mentally disabled. This 
government has now taken that step to  

ensure that these people are no longer going to be discriminated 
against and amendments will be made this year to the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code which will do away with 
this type of discrimination. 
 
Another area that I feel very, very pleased about, a move that 
this government has taken over the last year, is with regard to 
the accessibility standards Act. I know that the members 
opposite like to make a big thing about how they are protectors 
of all, and you know that the accessibility standard was 
something that disabled and handicapped people within this 
province were trying to get moved forward for many, many 
years when they were in power, but nothing was done. It was 
this government, Mr. Speaker, then, that brought in the 
accessibility standards Act, but also went further than that and 
also brought in the regulations which would be put into place to 
implement the Act. And that was a very, very big step forward 
as far as helping out those who are physically disabled in this 
particular province. 
 
Another area which shows the concern and the care that this 
government has for people in this province is to do with welfare 
reform. The New Careers Corporation, Mr. Speaker, has given 
an opportunity for many, many people to work and develop new 
skills. Now those on the other side of the House might like to 
snicker, because they haven’t really done very much in this 
particular area. They’ve been very, very much clinging to the 
same old ways, that if they could keep people on welfare for all 
of their life, it didn’t really matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this government doesn’t view things that way. This 
government wants to move ahead and give people every 
opportunity that they can possibly have. I know that through the 
Meewasin Valley Authority in Saskatoon that the New Careers 
Corporation has provided many opportunities for young men 
and women who have never had a job before in their lives to go 
out and get a type of training, learn particular skills that they 
can move ahead and go out and get permanent jobs, which they 
are very, very happy about, Mr. Speaker. But the members 
opposite, not too happy about that particular situation. 
 
Now they don’t believe, they don’t believe that we should be 
doing things like this. They think that these people should be 
staying on welfare. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the 
members opposite on more than one occasion hold up the 
country of Sweden as being the ideal country. The country of 
Sweden, that’s what they all like to look to. 
 
Well let’s take a look at what happens in Sweden with regard to 
how they look at people who are unemployed. Another NDP 
notion is that Sweden has created a full employment economy. 
Yes, the country has succeeded in lowering its official jobless 
rate, but only by being tough on the unemployed. When offered 
any job or training by the monopoly state labour office, no 
Swede can refuse to accept without losing all unemployment 
benefits. The system is one of workfare, not welfare. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, whenever we attempt anything like 
the New Careers Corporation, where we give opportunities for 
people to go out and get training, get particular skills, and get a 
job, they don’t think that’s a  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

273 
 

good idea at all, Mr. Speaker. Well they like to have double 
standards, Mr. Speaker, and that of course is another example. 
 
They also talk a lot about the idea of single parents and the fact 
we have a growing number of them today. That’s a concern. All 
of us have that concern. But let me point out that one-third of 
the people that are involved with the New Careers Corporation 
are single parents. So this, Mr. Speaker, is meeting a real need 
out there as far as helping people to get off the welfare rolls and 
get into meaningful employment. 
 
Another area that is a first, not only in this province, not only in 
this country, but in North America, is the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan. Today, Mr. Speaker, we have no fewer that 
47,000 members, 80 per cent of whom are women — a program 
that has been very, very widely accepted. It’s very, very 
popular; it’s growing every day. 
 
And we have more and more provinces and states in the United 
States that are looking at our program as far as the pension plan 
is concerned, and looking at it with the idea of adopting it in 
their own home jurisdiction. So a very positive step. So for the 
members of the opposition to say that this is the government 
that doesn’t care, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that that is just a 
lot of boloney. 
 
We’ve heard, in the last few days, members on the other side of 
the house talking about the growing interest rates. I think it was 
the end of last week that we heard the member from Riversdale 
talking about the high interest rates and wondering when the 
Premier was going to do something about it. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a fair bit of respect for 
the Leader of the Opposition, but when he starts talking about 
interest rates and what the government should be doing, I think 
that that’s where his credibility goes down substantially. People 
realize that here in this province, to own a home today and to 
carry a mortgage . . . And I’m sure that members on the other 
side of the house are in this particular situation. I certainly 
know that many members in my constituency are very, very 
pleased with our program, that for the first $50,000 they know 
full well that they are not going to be paying more than nine and 
three-quarters per cent interest on that mortgage. Now that, Mr. 
Speaker, is protection. 
 
(1915) 
 
Where were the opposition back in 1981 when interest rates 
were up in the 18 to 20 to 22 per cent range? And I know about 
those times, Mr. Speaker, because I know that in 1981 I had a 
mortgage that was seventeen and a quarter per cent. And I know 
that when this government was elected and brought in their 
mortgage interest reduction program, that I was very, very 
pleased. And I know that many other people, that were living in 
that same area, and in the city of Saskatoon, were very pleased 
with the mortgage interest reduction protection program that 
was provided. We’re still providing that program today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So let’s not hear about the opposition talking about interest and 
what this government should be doing.  

We’ve already got a track record with regard to what we do to 
help our citizens with regard to interest and high interest rates 
and protection. 
 
Another very positive program of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, is to do with the home program. In the city of 
Saskatoon alone, applications received to date number over 
53,500. The money spent on this program amounts to over $41 
million — $41 million, Mr. Speaker — jobs created, nearly 
4,300 jobs in the city of Saskatoon. Loans, with regard to the 
lower interest rate loans, 13,754 loans to a total of $83 million 
in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Now that to me is pretty powerful 
stuff when you consider the jobs that have been created, the 
goods that have been purchased. There’s no doubt about it, that 
this program has been very, very well received, not only in the 
city of Saskatoon but also throughout the whole province. 
 
There are other programs that we can look at when we talk 
about protection and certainly one of those is to do with seniors. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly concerned about programs 
that this government has for seniors because for one thing . . . 
And we hear the member from Quill Lakes chirping in his seat. 
And I know every once in a while he drops into the nursing 
home in Watson where my mother has been for the last six 
years, and he wanders around, and he talks to some of the folks 
there but in most cases, I’m sure, he’s probably trying to talk 
about the high rates they’re paying for drugs and all the terrible 
things this government’s doing. Well, Mr. Speaker, I know full 
well that those people don’t believe that member from Quill 
Lakes when he starts spreading this kind of gossip. 
 
The heritage program, for one thing, Mr. Speaker, is a program 
that this government brought in where today seniors are 
obtaining $500 per person or up to $700 for families — not 
something that they got when that party was in power, Mr. 
Speaker. Another thing with regard to the allowances that are 
given to seniors, with regard to their income supplement, today 
— today, Mr. Speaker — singles receive $80 per month extra in 
supplement, $135 for couples. Do you know what it was in 
1981, Mr. Speaker? This is the party that are the protectors of 
all. In 1981 do you know what the supplement was? 
Twenty-five dollars per month, Mr. Speaker — $25, and they 
did such great things. And under our government today, Mr. 
Speaker, $80 for singles, $135 for couples. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Other areas, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has moved into with regard to seniors. We now 
have many seniors’ day care and activity centres throughout the 
province, and I know that in the city of Saskatoon they’re very 
popular and very, very well received. And seniors who have 
relatives, seniors who may be there themselves, or people who 
have relatives in those centres, are very, very thankful for the 
programs that this government is providing for seniors. 
 
We’ve also had many examples of enriched housing in the city 
of Saskatoon. Bethany Manor — which is in my riding — very, 
very pleased with the programs of this government. Luther 
Heights, which opened not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, and 
McLure Place, which is going to be  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

274 
 

opening, I understand, within another few weeks, these are all 
programs that are very, very well accepted by the seniors in the 
city of Saskatoon. 
 
Another area today, Mr. Speaker, that I know that there is a 
growing concern about, is with regard to environment. Whether 
we’re talking about the increasing concern about the ozone 
layer or the greenhouse effect, we know that many people are 
concerned about some of the changes that we see taking place 
today. And this is something that this government is addressing. 
 
I am very pleased with the science and technology sector in 
Saskatoon, the work that’s being done by the Saskatchewan 
Research Council. They’re very involved with regard to studies 
dealing with the greenhouse effect. Chemical-free farming is 
also gaining an awful lot of attention. Agricultural 
biotechnology is leading to breakthrough in the development of 
bioherbicides, bioinsecticides and biofertilizers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another area that advanced technology must be very involved 
with in the years ahead is to do with the issue of hazardous 
wastes. So environment is an issue, it’s an issue that we’re 
addressing; and science and technology, Mr. Speaker, is going 
to play a very important role in dealing with some of these 
critical problems today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move on to another area that has been 
very much highlighted in the city of Saskatoon in the last few 
weeks, and that’s to do with tourism. We know that tourism 
today is going to provide many, many jobs in this province. It’s 
going to provide a lot of revenues. And over the last while, 
particularly with the Labatt Brier, which was held in Saskatoon, 
we saw what really can happen in a city that has a large number 
of volunteers, where everybody gets out, gets behind a project. 
It was just a tremendous success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had people in the city of Saskatoon attending the Labatt 
Brier from all across this country, and some from the United 
States. And the comments were all very, very positive about the 
very smooth way in which it was run, the tremendous support, 
and the tremendous reception that they had from the people in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatchewan Place, which is in my constituency, is becoming 
very, very popular with events that we’ve seen over the last 
year. And it’s only been in operation, Mr. Speaker, a little bit 
over a year. I want to commend at this time people like Cliff 
Wright and Mayor Henry Dayday and other members of the 
city council for having a vision for what this particular centre 
could be, not only for the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, but 
also for residents in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that in all 
cases the residents of Saskatoon realize the tremendous amount 
of response and participation that there was by this government. 
Do they realize that, of the total cost of $25 million for 
Saskatchewan Place, that this government, Mr. Speaker, 
contributed in the neighbourhood of $16 million? And without 
this support, this is a project that never would have been able to 
go  

ahead. 
 
Now I know that there are a lot of negative effects and I’m 
going to get to Joytec in a minute here, for some of the 
members from the other side of the House, because I think that 
there’s much more, Mr. Speaker, that the people in this 
province and the citizens of Saskatoon have to know about the 
actions of the members opposite as to how Joytec and a small 
business in the city of Saskatoon was treated. 
 
Saskatchewan Place is a facility that is going to . . . It is 
contributing many, many, many dollars to the coffers of the city 
of Saskatoon and to the province of Saskatchewan and it’s 
going to continue to do so. 
 
We’re very fortunate in the month of May, not too many weeks 
from now, that Saskatoon is going to be hosting the Memorial 
Cup play-offs, and this, as well, is going to bring many, many 
tourists into our city and into our province. I want to at this time 
as well acknowledge the many, many volunteers — 1,500 
volunteers, Mr. Speaker — who were involved with the very 
successful Brier that was held just a week ago. 
 
Later in August, in the city of Saskatoon, we’re very pleased 
that the Jeux Canada Games are going to be held. And this as 
well will provide not only a lot of excitement, but also many 
millions of tourist dollars into our city and into the province of 
Saskatchewan. And there’s no doubt whether ventures such as 
this, that volunteers are going to play a very, very vital role 
again. 
 
Another area that contributes to tourism in this province and in 
the city of Saskatoon, is the Wanuskewin heritage park, Mr. 
Speaker. This is going to be a very valuable addition to the 
tourist attractions in and around Saskatoon. The province is 
very supportive of this project and has contributed a million 
dollars to date. 
 
Meewasin Valley Authority is another area that contributes, I 
believe, to the tourism and the attraction with regard to the city 
of Saskatoon. It provides a lot of benefits, not only to the city, 
but also to many of the people who reside around the city of 
Saskatoon. And I’m very proud, Mr. Speaker, to be a member 
of that board. We’ve got a dedicated staff of many men and 
women who are committed to improving the quality of life in 
our city, and I think that’s very, very impressive. I’ve heard 
many, many positive comments about the beauty of our 
Meewasin valley and how it contributes to the splendour of the 
city of Saskatoon. And I might add also, Mr. Speaker, that the 
New Careers Corporation has been very involved with many 
projects in the Meewasin valley. 
 
Turning now, Mr. Speaker, to the economy, I’d like to make a 
few comments there, and we’re going to also get to Joytec, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m sure that the members opposite are going to 
enjoy what I have to say, particularly the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, whose riding this particular business 
has been located in. 
 
There’s no doubt that today that everyone would like to see a 
much better economy. We’d like to see more money for this 
program or that program, but considering that our major 
revenue generators like agriculture, potash, oil,  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

275 
 

and uranium have been really suffering in the last few months, I 
think it’s understanding, it’s understandable why we’re in the 
difficulty that we are today. And, you know, to listen to 
members opposite, you’d wonder if they could just get their 
heads out of the sand long enough to know what’s happened to 
the economy in this province in the last few years, they’d 
understand a little bit more about why we’re in some of the 
difficulty that we are. 
 
Do people really understand the tremendous drop in revenues 
that we’ve seen? Certainly the NDP don’t. But unfortunately, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there’s no corresponding drop in 
expenditures. It just doesn’t work that way. We find that our 
expenditures with regard to health programs or educational 
programs continue to go up. It has nothing to do, then, with the 
way revenues are going down. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, during the good times back in the 
’70s and up to 1982, the NDP spent money like drunken sailors. 
Potash mines — they went out and bought potash mines, 
uranium mines. They put millions of dollars into the land bank. 
 
But you know, an interesting part about how the NDP operated 
in those years, Mr. Speaker. Not only were the revenues strong 
— they were very, very strong — but you know, at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, we saw substantial increases in taxes. I don’t 
remember one year, Mr. Speaker, back in the ’70s when that 
crew was in power, when revenues were going up and taxes 
were going down. Taxes were going up at the same time. 
 
What were they doing with the money? They try to say that 
they left the province in such great shape in 1982. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if we really take a look at that, we can say that was not 
the case at all. 
 
You know, I shudder, and I know many people in my 
constituency shudder as well, to ever think what would happen 
if we had an NDP government in this province during tough 
economic times, tough economic times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, there’s no way that they can 
operate in tough economic times. 
 
Let’s take a look at what was happening over in our 
neighbouring province of Manitoba during those same years. 
Those same years, Mr. Speaker, their deficit was about three 
times the deficit here in Saskatchewan by the Conservative 
government. So they’ve got a pretty good track record as far as 
an NDP Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well there’s a vast difference as far as philosophy is concerned. 
There’s a vast difference between the philosophy of our two 
parties. You know, the NDP’s answer to everything is to simply 
nationalize everything. They don’t believe in building. They 
just simply believe in buying and taking over, like they did with 
other things. 
 
Now here’s an interesting thing, Mr. Speaker. They’re very 
opposed, they’re very opposed to small business. Now we’ve 
heard examples of that, certainly, today.  

Because it’s finally come to light; they’ve finally come to 
realize the impact that they’ve had with some of their negative 
actions on small business. 
 
And they want to hear about Joytec. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can 
certainly talk about Joytec. And I see them sitting back in their 
seats there now and some of them kind of sinking down in 
them, because they’re a little bit ashamed of their actions; just a 
little bit ashamed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, here was a company that was started in this 
province in 1983, started in 1983. And I think that there was a 
lot of potential there with regard to this particular company. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in the time that this business has been 
operating in the province of Saskatchewan, and the city of 
Saskatoon, they have employed anywhere from nine to 35 
employees, nine to 35 employees. 
 
We’ve got a company here that started out with the idea of 
providing a lot of good things in the city of Saskatoon, 
providing a lot of jobs in the city of Saskatoon, but, you know, 
members opposite could never accept the fact that with science 
and technology, or with advanced technology, that a lot of 
things don’t just happen overnight. They don’t realize, and if 
they’d only stop to think about it, that some of these companies 
need anywhere from 10 to 15 years, Mr. Speaker, before they 
get an idea to the commercial stage and to the production stage. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now here was a company that has spent in the neighbourhood 
of $8 million in the last six years; $8 million, Mr. Speaker. 
They took advantage of the venture capital program to get 
started in this province, they took advantage. They raised $3.75 
million through that venture capital program, and that was a 
program, Mr. Speaker, that was set up to get small business 
such as Joytec going. The province paid 30 per cent; 30 per cent 
of that was paid to the shareholders as far as a tax credit was 
concerned, Mr. Speaker. Thirty per cent, $1.125 million, and I 
hope that if the members opposite will just get those figures 
down — I can go over them again — because they like to play 
around with figures. 
 
The venture capital program netted them $3.75 million. The 
province paid 30 per cent; that was 1.125. I know some of these 
numbers are large, but if you’ll just try and concentrate over 
there, you should be able to get them down. They paid that 
amount in tax credit — not to Joytec, Mr. Speaker, but to the 
shareholders. Now that’s the money that they got to get them 
started. 
 
During the next period of time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And we hear the member for Rosemont chirping from his seat 
over there. If he’d just hold on, we’ll get it all to him; I know 
that he’s a little slower than some of them. Seventy-six 
thousand, five hundred and eighty-eight dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
was given to them from the Department of Science and 
Technology for research and development. And the last 
payment in that was back in the summer of 1986, and I know 
that they tried to make out that the Department of Science and 
Technology was  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

276 
 

giving them all kinds of money after I became minister, Mr. 
Speaker, but that certainly was not the case at all. They also 
received $60,000 in bridging capital, which they paid back, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the employment I have already indicated, but for the 
members of the opposition I’ll say it again, that the number of 
employees have ranged from what they have now of nine up to 
30 to 35 employees. I have indicated that approximately $8 
million was spent since 1983 — now not all of that in the city 
of Saskatoon. The company of Technigen took over Joytec in 
1986 and since that time has spent over $5 million on this 
project — over $3 million in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker — and that money has gone to taxes to the city of 
Saskatoon, because Joytec owns their building; it has gone to 
salaries . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a scam. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — And I suggest that if the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland would like to talk about it being a 
scam, we’ve heard him making these accusations before, but 
he’s just trying to be misleading. All of this money then, Mr. 
Speaker, has gone into taxes, salaries, goods and services. 
 
Now it’s understandable, Mr. Speaker, it’s understandable by 
all parties that this company, by the mere fact that they’re going 
to be moving out of the province of Saskatchewan, are liable for 
the tax credits that the shareholders received from the venture 
capital program. They realize that, and that money will be paid 
back to this province. So that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We 
hear the member from Sutherland chirping away there. I don’t 
think, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Sutherland ever even 
took the time to go out and visit Joytec to see what they were 
doing out there. I mean, all he does is talk. He has never been 
out there to see what they were doing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, considering the amount of money that has 
been spent on Joytec in this province for jobs, for taxes, for 
goods and services, I don’t think that it has been a bad 
investment whatever. 
 
I’m very, very sore . . . sorry that some — I’m sore too — that 
some of those members opposite have really been out there with 
the all-out attempt to destroy this company and to chase it out 
of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that now 
they have been successful in doing that, and here is a company 
that is just now starting to get going and any of those benefits 
that we could have had here in the province of Saskatchewan 
are now going out to the province of British Columbia, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think shame on some of those members over 
there who have been responsible for this vendetta on driving 
that company out of business. 
 
I think it’s particularly interesting, Mr. Speaker, when the 
Leader of the Opposition says that he is so much in favour of 
small business that he allowed this to happen in his own 
constituency, and never, ever had the decency to go out to 
Joytec and see what was happening. Never, ever did that; never 
did that. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen now how the NDP feels about 
small business so we don’t really put much credit in statements 
that they make that they are in favour of small business. 
 
Let’s look at another area that they’re opposed to. They’re 
opposed to public participation. Or are they? Are they, Mr. 
Speaker? That’s a question a lot of people in Saskatchewan are 
asking right now, because we know from all of the documents 
that have surfaced here in the last couple of weeks that they had 
their own plan to carry out public participation, or privatization, 
or, as the member from Moose Jaw would like to call it, 
piratization. They were going to do some of that themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — He finally woke up over there, Mr. 
Speaker. Well you know, we’ve got a double standard. I mean, 
it was all right for them back in 1981 to ’82 to start looking at 
public participation, but for this government to be moving 
ahead and doing it, well no, Mr. Speaker, that’s all wrong. 
 
Well another thing that they’re opposed to, another thing that 
they’re opposed to and we’ve heard the member from 
Saskatoon University talk about this, they’re opposed to 
uranium mining. But then again, are they? Because we’ve heard 
the Leader of the Opposition say that, well no, they’re not really 
opposed. Maybe some of them are, but he doesn’t really know 
where he stands. 
 
Another area they’re opposed to — free trade. But then again, 
are they? Well, Mr. Speaker, does anyone really know? Because 
it seems to me that it depends which member you talk to on any 
given day, because they’re all over the map on this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, you know, I think that if we really take a look at where 
the NDP in Saskatchewan stand, or the NDP in Canada for that 
matter . . . I’d like to refer to an article that was in the Toronto 
Globe and Mail back in October, and it’s entitled, “Along the 
red brick road to nowhere land,” Mr. Speaker. That’s where this 
bunch would have Saskatchewan go. And let me just say a little 
bit about that, because of whether they’re opposed to some of 
these things or whether they’re not. 
 
The model of a modern socialist government, Mr. Speaker, in 
France or Australia or Spain, is of a government that espouses 
free markets, pushes privatization and deregulation, and can be 
persuaded to cut corporate taxes to create jobs. Other socialists 
including those in power in Norway, Sweden, France, Spain, 
Australia, and New Zealand take a different view. All are 
self-confident members of free-trade pacts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well now does that sound like our NDP in Saskatchewan? I 
mean, talk about being out of step. Talking about the red brick 
road to nowhere land, Mr. Speaker, well we know where our 
NDP are. We know exactly where they are. 
 
Well let’s go on from there, Mr. Speaker, let’s go on from  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

277 
 

there, because there are a lot of other statements, there are a lot 
of other statements that these members opposite have indicated. 
You know, just to show you how they’re so much out of touch. 
We heard the other day . . . you know, when you really want to 
stop and think about the credibility of some of the statements of 
the members opposite. 
 
Well you know, we’ve got a new critic over there for 
Agriculture today, Mr. Speaker; it’s the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. When it isn’t the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, now it’s the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 
You know what he was wondering the other day? He was 
wondering who speaks for farmers. This is the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Well you know, they talk about people leaving the province. 
They don’t obviously . . . You know, if they had a few farmers 
over there on the other side, they’d have an understanding of 
what’s going on out in the rural areas of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. They obviously haven’t seen the impact of drought. 
They don’t know anything about impact of low prices, 
grasshoppers, any of those things. 
 
You know the one that really surprised me though was the 
rhinestone cowboy from Elphinstone. He talks of houses for 
sale, Mr. Speaker, in some of our small towns, and he can’t 
understand what’s going on. Well good grief, what is the matter 
with the member from Elphinstone? He can’t understand why 
there are houses for sale in some of our areas out in the rural 
part of Saskatchewan. And he talks about the Premier’s plan to 
get rid of farmers. How blind they are — how blind they are. 
What did the NDP ever do for the farmers in this province? 
They can’t even come up with a policy, for Heaven’s sake, for 
farmers in this province. 
 
Well let’s take a look at some other statements that they’ve 
made. You know, they’ve talked an awful lot . . . we’ve heard 
an awful lot in this place for the last few days about 
out-migration — out-migration, Mr. Speaker. Well you know, 
as long as I can remember . . . I can remember back in the days 
of when this party across the road here were in power, and I can 
always remember that we had young people leaving this 
province to go to Manitoba or Alberta or some place else to find 
jobs. And these were good times, Mr. Speaker. But they were 
always going and looking for jobs in other provinces. They 
weren’t all saying, by George, I’m going to stay here in 
Saskatchewan and work because we got an NDP government 
and they’re providing all these jobs. That wasn’t the case at all. 
Let me give you some figures. 
 
You know they like to talk about our record in the last few 
years, and we know the economy has been down. Well let’s 
take a look at some of the things that were happening in good 
years, Mr. Speaker, when they were in power — in the good 
years. 
 
You know, they talk about out-migration, and often, you know, 
they’ll give you the numbers of the people that are leaving the 
province. But they never talk about the numbers that are coming 
back in. Let me give you this, and this is for all the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan who will be watching tonight. Do 
you know that in 1978, Mr. Speaker, that 22,995 people left  

this province? Isn’t that terrible! Mr. Speaker, 22,995 people 
left this province in 1978. Terrible, terrible. Now if they were 
giving that figure, Mr. Speaker, you know, they’d leave it there, 
they’d leave it there. They’d break it down and they’d say how 
many are leaving every month. Well, I’ll give you the actual 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that the net out-migration that year was 
3,701. Now that makes them look a little bit better. 
 
Well let’s go on then down to 1979, because it was even worse. 
And you know if I remember rightly, 1979 was a better year in 
the economy here in Saskatchewan than ’78 was. No drought, 
good prices; everything was great. Do you know how many 
people left the province that year, Mr. Speaker? Do you know 
how many people left the province that year? 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Twenty-four thousand, six hundred 
and fifteen — 24,000. Good Lord! That’s a lot of people 
leaving the province in a good year. But again, I’ll give you the 
net figure, Mr. Speaker, because I am an honest person — 3,510 
people, that’s the net amount. Well now, here’s the real kicker. 
Do you remember 1980? — 1980 was just a great year in this 
province — 25,046 people left this province in 1980. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Twenty-five thousand and forty-six, 
for a net out-migration of 4,382. Now, you know, they’re the 
great saviours of the people of Saskatchewan, the great 
saviours. But we had a net out-migration of 4,382 people in 
1980 — a good year in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we know what has happened to our economy in the last 
few years. There’s no doubt about it, that we would like to have 
more jobs here. But when you consider that there are 10 or 
11,000 people that have left the farms because of the drought 
and because of low prices, I think that that goes a long way to 
explain some of the reasons why we’ve got people leaving the 
province at this particular time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, another thing that they’ve talked about, they’ve 
made such a big thing about all the young people that are 
unemployed. I’m concerned about that; everybody on this side 
of the House and in this whole House is concerned. But let me 
just tell you something that you haven’t heard from members 
opposite in this House, Mr. Speaker. Let me tell you this. Let’s 
go back to those good old years of the NDP government in this 
province, the good years. You know, for the life of me I can’t 
understand why they ever lost in ’82; they were doing such a 
terrific job. 
 
Well let’s go back, let’s go back to those good years. In 1976 to 
1981, Mr. Speaker, the percentage of youth unemployed was 
1.9 times the total unemployed rate during that period — 1.9 
times the total rate. Do you know what it was, Mr. Speaker, 
from ’82 to ’88, the time that this party has been in power? Mr. 
Speaker, the percentage of youth unemployed was 1.8 times the 
total unemployed rate — 1.8. Less during the last six years  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

278 
 

when this party has been in power, when we’ve had tough 
economic times, than when that bunch was in power back in the 
late ’70s when we had good times in this province. 
 
So let them stand up in this province and tell the people that the 
unemployment rate of our youth from age 15 to 24 is so tough 
today. It’s higher than it should be, but it’s not as high, Mr. 
Speaker, as it was back in the years when those people were in 
power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well they talk about how our PC 
policies aren’t working. I’ve heard the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview talking about this on more than one occasion. He says 
that it’s just terrible. 
 
Well I’d like that member over there, Mr. Speaker, to explain 
the fact that employment and manufacturing is up. Employment 
and manufacturing is up. And if our policies with regard to 
diversification and privatization are so terrible, why is 
employment up in manufacturing? 
 
Now I think anybody, anybody with half a sense in this 
province knows why the unemployment rate is higher in the 
agricultural sector. That bunch doesn’t. But we understand it 
over here, and, Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatchewan 
understand. 
 
Well they’re opposed to privatization, Mr. Speaker. Well we’re 
not really sure about that. They said it’s led to the loss of jobs. 
But what about Weyerhaeuser? What about Weyerhaeuser? 
You know, we’ve heard different things about Weyerhaeuser, 
but you know, we really can’t believe that bunch over there. 
 
Let’s take a look at what one of the members here says about 
Weyerhaeuser. This is what he says. This is our hon. member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland again, the great wiz over there. This 
is what he says about Weyerhaeuser. He says: 
 

But that was too much for the Premier to ask of his friends 
at Weyerhaeuser, the robber barons. 
 

He calls them, Mr. Speaker, the robber barons. 
 

Yes, what we have with Weyerhaeuser is a licence to rob 
the province of Saskatchewan, to rape and plunder 
Saskatchewan forests, and nowhere do we see the effects, 
the long-term effects of this feudal system, more than 
when it comes to young people. 
 

The robber barons — Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — This is our bright light from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Yes, how many jobs have been created? We can talk to our hon. 
member here from Shellbrook-Torch River, in  

which Weyerhaeuser is located. He knows how many jobs have 
been created at Weyerhaeuser. He knows the impact on the city 
of Prince Albert is concerned. You’d never hear the members of 
Prince Albert ever say one thing about Weyerhaeuser and all the 
jobs that have been created. 
 
And not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, we had another 
announcement about the expansion and more jobs that are going 
to be created about at Weyerhaeuser by the robber barons. Now 
isn’t that a joke, Mr. Speaker? And that’s how they look at 
public participation or privatization. 
 
What about WESTBRIDGE computers? What about the 
number of jobs that have been created there since that company 
was formed? What about the forest industry in Meadow Lake? 
Hey, I don’t think public participation is a bad thing at all, and I 
think the people living in those areas can certainly see through 
all the rhetoric that they hear from the members opposite. 
 
Well let’s take a look at a few other things. There’s no doubt 
about it, there’s no doubt about it, that when it comes to 
agriculture that we’ve got a lot of would be critics of agriculture 
on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker. They try to say 
who speaks for the farmer in this province; that the Premier of 
this province is trying to drive the farmers off the land. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t the most ridiculous thing you ever 
heard. 
 
Let’s take a look at some of the programs that this government 
has provided for farmers in this province. You know we heard 
about interest rates, but I don’t recall ever seeing the NDP 
around helping the farmers when they were in power. And I 
know — I’ve got a lot of connections with farmers and with the 
people that are out there — and I know full well that the support 
was not there by this party, a party who over the last six years 
since they got turfed out of office, still haven’t got an 
agricultural policy. 
 
Well let’s take a look at some of those programs. What about 
the production program that has paid out more than a billion 
dollars in low interest rate loans to farmers? Does that sound 
like a party that’s trying to get rid of farmers? What about the 
livestock drought assistance, the 1988 federal-provincial 
program provided by this government? How about the green 
feed program? Paid out more than $40 million to encourage 
farmers to turn land over to green feed production. And we 
could talk about the livestock cash advance program, Mr. 
Speaker — almost $150 million paid out to livestock producers. 
 
Now I know in some cases, Mr. Speaker, the people in the city 
have a little bit of a difficult time understanding about the 
support this government gives to farmers. But I think we all 
have to recognize that agriculture is the main industry in this 
province and that impacts on people. It doesn’t matter whether 
they live on the farm, in the small towns and villages, or 
whether they live in the city of Saskatoon. So any of these 
programs not only benefit the rural areas, not only benefit the 
farmers and the small towns and villages, but they also benefit 
our major cities, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

279 
 

Well another area that I have to mention here is about free trade 
— free trade. Now we’ve heard lots from the other side of the 
House about how they are opposed to free trade. Well, you 
know, I think that we’ve got a lot of members, as you know, on 
the other side of the House, in the city of Saskatoon, and I hope 
that’s going to change a lot in the next election. 
 
But do they ever stop and consider, do they ever stop and 
consider the impact of free trade on a company like 
Intercontinental Packers? And I can point to two or three 
members at least over there, Mr. Speaker, who have many 
constituents who work at Intercontinental Packers. But do they 
ever stop and consider the positive benefits for those people 
living in their own ridings who benefit from free trade, and yet 
they speak against it. 
 
You know, we had such a great speech the other night from one 
of my constituents. I’m sorry to say that, after his demonstration 
that he put on the other night. But I didn’t hear him saying too 
much about free trade although I know he is opposed to it. 
 
But here is a company, as I understand it, is in his constituency, 
and that’s the member for Westmount. And this was an 
announcement that was in the Star-Phoenix this weekend and 
it’s to do with “Wescott sold, 100 jobs saved.” Now these are 
the comments made by the company that bought Wescott: 
 

In announcing the acquisition, Chairman Peter Nygard said 
the company hopes to expand the Avenue D North plant, 
perhaps “employing up to 300 workers in Saskatoon within 
the next three years.” 
 

And he went on, and I hope that the member from Westmount 
is listening to this: 
 

“Free trade is a Canadian reality. We must position 
ourselves early to take advantage of the enormous 
opportunities which will become available to us in a much 
larger and vibrant market-place.” 
 

That’s a company in Saskatoon Westmount. I hope that some 
day I hear the member from that area saying hey, you know, 
free trade is a great thing; it’s helping people who live in my 
constituency; they’re going to have more jobs and it’s going to 
be great for the city of Saskatoon. Free trade. Now how do they 
stand up and say they’re opposed to free trade with something 
like that? 
 
Well they can’t understand what a diversified economy is all 
about, Mr. Speaker. They can’t understand why we need 
upgraders or paper mills or bacon plants, high tech industry. 
Their main concern is trying to shut down the high tech 
industry, Mr. Speaker; they’re not concerned about building it. 
They’re not concerned about power generator plants such as 
we’ve got with the new Hitachi-Marubeni plant up in my 
constituency. No, they’re not concerned about that at all. 
 
But these are all things, Mr. Speaker, that are going to go a long 
way to providing the stability in our economy that we need in 
the years ahead. 

Now I want to, before I go any further, talk a little bit about 
science and technology and the fact that Saskatoon is looked 
upon, not only in Saskatchewan, but also in the country, as 
being a very important centre for advanced technology. We’re 
very proud of what we’ve got there, and I think when you 
consider the fact that this is not a natural industry in 
Saskatchewan, it’s not a natural industry like forestry or like 
agriculture or any of those, it’s not a natural industry, it’s 
something that has grown out of the innovative and creative 
nature of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, we know, thrive on challenge. 
Saskatchewan has become known in three very, very particular 
areas, one of those of which is biotechnology. Another one is 
the area of computer software, and the third one is 
communications — very important areas, areas which we may 
not lead the nation, Mr. Speaker, but we certainly rank third 
behind the larger provinces of Quebec and Ontario. And many 
people, I know, in Saskatchewan don’t realize that. Certainly 
people in Saskatoon don’t realize the importance of some of 
those high-tech industries, not only to our city, but also to our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we can all take a great deal of pride in the 
fact that it was our Premier who first recognized the potential 
that this industry has in the province of Saskatchewan, and it 
was through his initiative that, in 1984, early 1984, that 
Saskatchewan became the first provincial government in 
Canada to form a separate department for science and 
technology — solely responsible for that. So it shows you the 
high regard that he had for that interest, that particular industry, 
and how it’s going to be important at leading this country into 
the 1990s and beyond, because the only way that we are going 
to be competitive with countries, whether it’s in other countries 
here or across on the other side of the world, is going to be 
through advanced technology. 
 
Some people, I’m sure, don’t realize, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatoon houses western Canada’s largest research and 
development park — not just Saskatchewan, but all of western 
Canada. We’ve got Innovation Place, which is located just 
adjacent to the university, that houses over 30 different 
organizations doing research or offering related services to the 
technology industry. Now that’s pretty important. It’s not only 
important because of the jobs that are created there, but it’s also 
important for the amount of research that is being done here that 
benefits not only people in Saskatchewan, but also people in 
Canada and beyond. 
 
Now when you take a partnership where you have the 
government involved, you’ve got all of the initiative of the 
Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, who have a lot of great ideas, and 
add to that the strong research and development component that 
we’ve got at our University of Saskatchewan, you’ve got a 
pretty powerful partnership that can go a long ways in helping 
to establish a very stable and very vibrant economy in this 
province. 
 
No one can say, no one can say that the advanced technology 
industry doesn’t have unique problems, and some of them I 
mentioned here earlier. I know that the members opposite feel 
that you can take an idea out of the 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

280 
 

lab and it can suddenly become a commercial product in a short 
period of time, but let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that in some 
cases it may take anywhere from one to 15 years before an idea 
can be turned into production. So it’s something that’s very, 
very unique. 
 
But another problem that’s of significant importance as far as 
the high-tech industry is concerned, Mr. Speaker, is the whole 
idea of financing. Because of this long period of time that it 
takes to get a product into the market-place and have cash 
flowing back into a company, it demands a fair amount of 
financing, and that’s unfortunately where some of our 
companies run into difficulty. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that I’d mention with regard to 
advanced technology is that they can’t rely on the expertise 
that’s been developed in the past. They have to fight a battle 
with innovation continually because they’re always looking at 
new things. They can’t always look back because there’s just no 
record there. 
 
So this partnership is very important. When you took scientists, 
the innovators, industry, and government, that’s a very, very 
powerful team that’s needed to develop this strong economy 
that we talk about. 
 
One other area that I want to touch on, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
with regard to the Saskatchewan Research Council, because we 
are so pleased to have the Saskatchewan Research Council in 
Saskatoon; and when one considers the tremendous benefits 
that the people of this province are deriving from SRC 
(Saskatchewan Research Council), it is just unbelievable. 
We’ve got many, many people there who are very dedicated 
scientists and engineers, who are involved in working with 
industry throughout this province — new ideas, new products, 
new processes, and providing a very, very valuable service 
under the direction of Mr. Jim Hutch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt advanced technology is the way 
of the future. It’s through new technology that our industries are 
going to become competitive in what we classify as the global 
village. But one thing that we have to ensure, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we make people in Saskatchewan aware of the importance 
of science and technology. We’ve not only got to make our 
citizens aware of it, we’ve got to make our industries aware of it 
and how it can be utilized. But I think something else, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have to do; we have to make sure that our 
young people are aware of the tremendous opportunities that 
exist in the advanced technology sector. 
 
And I’m very pleased that during the latter week of April, this 
year again, we’re going to be having our science and 
technology week. And this is going to be an opportunity for 
young people to participate all over the province, whether it’s in 
science fairs or whether it’s looking at exhibits or having 
representatives from high-tech companies come in and speak to 
them in their classes. It’s going to be a very important week in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I also look forward, Mr. Speaker, to that time when the new 
Saskatchewan science centre will be open, because this is going 
to be a real show-case for the province of  

Saskatchewan and certainly for the city of Regina, when young 
people are going to have an opportunity to see advanced 
technology at work. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a look at Consumer Affairs, 
another department that I’m responsible for, and point out that 
I’m very, very pleased to be involved with this department, 
because for one thing, with the Department of Consumer 
Affairs you touch every individual in the province of 
Saskatchewan — every individual. It doesn’t matter how old a 
person is in the province of Saskatchewan, he or she is a 
consumer. So we want to continue, Mr. Speaker, building that 
confidence in the market-place — building that confidence not 
only with consumers, but also with the business community, so 
that people can feel that they can go out and do business and 
that they are going to be treated fairly. 
 
Two of the areas that we’re very, very proud of within the 
department are the education communications branch. We’ve 
got many people that are involved as facilitators around the 
province providing a very, very valuable service to residents, 
whether they’re in remote areas or within our towns, within our 
cities. And it may be workshops that they’re providing, free of 
charge, to people who want to know more about advertising, 
people who want to know more about better use of money and 
wise shopping. All of these different things — good consumer 
education. 
 
And as well, as many, many people probably, Mr. Speaker, 
don’t realize that the Department of Consumer Affairs also has 
the mandate for providing life skills education in our school 
system. So we’re very pleased to be involved with the 
Department of Education in providing program materials, 
resource materials for our teachers. 
 
(2000) 
 
Another area that’s of equal importance, I believe, is the 
licensing and investigating branch, because it’s here where we 
have the opportunity to work with consumers and with 
businesses in helping to satisfy and work out problems that they 
might have. So a lot of good things happening there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I’m very pleased to be involved with the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
The one other area of responsibility that I have, Mr. Speaker, 
and you’re going to be hearing more about that as time goes on, 
and that’s with regard to the Gaming Commission. We know 
full well that we’ve had some concerns, we’ve had some 
concerns in the province of Saskatchewan with regard to 
gaming. A lot of people, of course, are involved with gaming in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and I might point out that it’s all 
legalized gaming, whether we’re talking about bingo, whether 
we’re talking about lotteries, whether we’re talking about 
raffles, or whether we’re talking about the casinos, Mr. Speaker, 
that are operated by our exhibition boards. And nothing is going 
to change in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I might point out that on some occasions the members opposite 
have indicated that they’re not totally in support of some of the 
things that are happening in the province. I  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

281 
 

know I’ve heard, on more than one occasion, that they feel that 
lotteries . . . Of course that’s a tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the 
poor; that’s the argument that I’ve always heard. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to point out to you that members opposite are 
certainly in favour of lotteries, because we see that that’s one of 
the main ways in which they have of raising money for their 
party. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that last year in 1988 . . . And we 
heard there too, Mr. Speaker, from the Leader of the 
Opposition, where he was encouraging people to, you know, get 
a chance in their lottery because it was a great thing and it’s 
going to help our party. You know, they only made about 
$150,000 last year, Mr. Speaker. So when the members 
opposite talk about lotteries being a tax on the poor, and then I 
see that they raised something like $150,000 last year on theirs, 
I kind of wonder if we’re not looking at a double standard here, 
Mr. Speaker. I mean, there’s something happening here. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, they like to talk about slot 
machines, and I’d really be remiss if I didn’t say something 
here, Mr. Speaker. And I would simply like to point out to you 
and to the members of this legislature and the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, that I have never said on any occasion, and I will 
clarify right now that there’s no intention, no intention, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of this government looking at Las Vegas style 
casinos with slot machines — no intention. I make that quite 
clear: we will not be looking at Las Vegas style casinos with 
slot machines. Now if we’re talking about electronic bingo, Mr. 
Speaker, that is another matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in closing I would like to just say a few words 
with regards to the future of Saskatchewan. And I feel that . . . 
It sounds like we got the Hallelujah Chorus going on over there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I just want to say a few words about the future of Saskatchewan 
and how very positive and very optimistic that I feel with regard 
to our economy. We know that with prices of oil going up a 
little bit, we know that the market for potash looks like it will 
be very strong for this year. And we’re very hopeful that as far 
as the weather is concerned, we’re working on that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in Science and Technology, and we are going to have 
rain this year and maybe a little more snow between now and 
spring. 
 
But I think that for the most part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
attitude in Saskatchewan, with the exception of those opposite, 
is very, very optimistic for 1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t ignore the rest of the world and pretend 
that we’re self-sufficient. We must be prepared, we must be 
prepared to meet the challenges of the world. We’ve got a great 
diverse and talented population and they have the ability, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to build this province as they have built it in 
the past. 
 
I’ve got confidence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the people and in 
this province — and in this government, I might add. We are 
going to look ahead to a very, very good year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And with that I would close by saying that I will not be  

supporting the amendment but will support the motion put 
forward by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
recognizing me. And I must say that we enjoyed that very 
lengthy presentation by the hon. member from Saskatoon 
Mayfair. I think that there are many things to which we would 
be tempted, those of us on this side, to respond, but time does 
not permit. I would however like to say to the hon. member 
from Mayfair, because I don’t want to direct my remarks to his 
speech tonight, two things . . . well mainly one thing. The hon. 
member referred to Joytec and he referred to, in the next breath, 
how he would shudder if the New Democratic Party ever came 
to office again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You bet. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And he says, you bet. And I would say to 
the hon. member from Mayfair and to the Minister of 
Agriculture, if we do get to office and we do get a look at those 
books at Joytec, the member is fully justified in shuddering, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because we intend to take a very careful 
look at what exactly took place in the Joytec situation. I think 
that it is unfortunate when any business does not succeed — 
there’s no doubt about that — and that’s the case also with 
Joytec. 
 
But when we have an expenditure of $1.2 million of taxpayers’ 
money being devoted to Joytec, notwithstanding the promises 
made by the minister and by the Premier that this was going to 
be a successful enterprise, and we now see the company leaving 
the province of Saskatchewan, I think it speaks a lot to the 
competence of this administration in really being able to garner 
industry in a solid industrial plan, strategic plan to route it to 
Saskatoon or to Regina or to the province of Saskatchewan. I 
think it demonstrates what we have heard in the last few days, 
that this government is totally incompetent, totally incapable, of 
attracting high-tech — no, not high-tech only — of attracting 
business to the province of Saskatchewan, and this kind . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And this kind, this kind of a record, I think, 
is clear testimony to the incompetence of which we speak. 
 
I guess the other thing that I’d like to refer to very briefly before 
I go to the main thrust of my remarks this evening is the 
minister’s statement toward the end about the casinos proposal, 
the slot machines proposal. 
 
And I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that his denial tonight is 
all too regular with respect to this government, in the sense that 
it makes all kinds of statements which are recorded very 
accurately and completely on the public record, and then when 
the public reacts negatively, there is a denial of the statement 
which has been made . . .  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

282 
 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
And the hon. member opposite there is saying to me, what am I 
referring to, he asks. Well I have here in front of me a February 
22, 1989 Star-Phoenix, in fact I’d call it an exclusive, SP 
exclusive by Art Robinson. Mr. Robinson is the city hall bureau 
chief of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. And he says, in this 
particular article, quoting the minister who just took his place 
— this is a direct quote: 
 

We are looking at legislation which would allow the 
government to get into such things as electronic games, 
including slot machines. 
 

That’s a direct quote. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s possible 
that Mr. Robinson, the reporter for the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
got confused; that there was no letter of correction, there was no 
statement of correction for several days after that clear intention 
was listed. In fact the only time that that correction was issued 
was several days afterwards when the Premier and his 
colleagues decided to take the polls as to what the public 
reaction would be to bringing in full-style Las Vegas casinos, 
and they now seek to back down on the words that they say. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the hon. minister opposite, you 
made that statement of your government’s intentions to casinos. 
You say that that isn’t the case now. But this is a familiar 
pattern of your government. You make these statements and 
you back down. 
 
But I make one prediction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If by some 
fluke of the next election this PC government should be 
re-elected, I guarantee you — they being the consummate 
privatizers and free enterprisers — they’ll have Las Vegas 
casinos here, I guarantee you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I say to the hon. minister opposite, it’s 
not good enough to be able to try to get away from statements 
which are stated so clearly and so bluntly and so categorically 
of your government’s intentions by the way that you have here 
this evening, which I think casts a lot of doubt on the strength 
of your argument and your speech this evening. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t intend to speak at length this 
evening. What I really want to talk about is vision and future of 
the province of Saskatchewan in the context of the Speech from 
the Throne and in the context of the image of the New 
Democratic Party in the 1990s and beyond. 
 
The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is supposed 
to outline not only a game plan, but it’s supposed to describe 
what it is that governments, what it is that we as legislators of 
this great body, the Assembly of Saskatchewan, what is it that 
we’re seeking for society, what is it that we’re seeking for our 
individuals and for our families and for our workers and our 
farmers. A vision. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, tonight I want to say a few words 
about my vision, about our vision of what it means to be a New 
Democrat in Saskatchewan in the 1990s, and in general terms, 
what it is that we would see the province  

developing and directing its attention to in the 1990s, and 
contrasting that by this Speech from the Throne, the debate of 
which is wrapping up here this evening in a few moments. 
 
You know, it has been said many times by great philosophers, 
and in fact by philosophers who were poets, there isn’t very 
much new under the sun. And that’s true. It’s true not only with 
ideas, it’s true with philosophies. 
 
And I decided, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in preparation for my few 
remarks this evening, to try to put into a philosophical 
framework what it is that this Speech from the Throne was 
trying to tell us, where it is that the government is directing us, 
and how does that contrast by the vision that we see for the 
1990s. 
 
And I decided that one way to begin would be to look to some 
of the history of the province of Saskatchewan and to see what 
other writers and what other thinkers and what other politicians 
have to say about what it is that the role of government, and 
what it is about the role of the legislature, what should be our 
function. To what goal are we aiming, whether we’re 
Conservatives or New Democrats or Liberals? What are the 
objectives of our society and of political activity? 
 
And in so preparing, I ran across a selected series of speeches 
by a person who I think, notwithstanding the fact that he’s a 
leader of the party that I am now honoured to lead, speeches by 
the late Tommy Douglas which in my judgement set the tone of 
what I’m trying to describe. And I’ll elaborate in a moment or 
two about the vision and the future of Saskatchewan for the 
1990s, because I think we can learn from the wise words of 
Tommy Douglas and others. 
 
But this quotation I think tells it all. I’m going to make some 
amendments, if I may, with the greatest of respect to the 
memory of Mr. Douglas, make some amendments to this vision 
for the 1990s. But I think at the heart of it is a vision and is a 
commitment and is a passion and is a dedication, which 
motivates all of us that get into political life; which in effect 
sustains us through all those days when sometimes we are 
subjected to speeches by members opposite which grovel, being 
very frank about it, in the seamy side, in the political attacks of 
politicians. 
 
Those things which sustain us are the kind of philosophical 
ideas which great writers and politicians and speakers before us 
have tried to define as our vision and our mission. 
 
Well I want to give you this quotation, and work from there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Tommy Douglas, in 1976, not so long 
ago, was being awarded a doctorate degree at the University of 
Alberta, the convocation address. And I recommend the 
convocation address for obvious reasons. But Tommy said this 
in the book that I have in front of me, The Quotations of 
Douglas, at page 261. And I want to take some time to read this 
slowly. Tommy said this: 
 

What is true of the individual is equally true of a nation. 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

283 
 

I’ll stop there to say, note the linkage of individual rights and 
freedoms with that of a nation. Tommy went on to say that: 
 

The measure of a nation’s greatness does not lie in its 
conquests or its gross national product, (Mr. Deputy 
Speaker) or the size of its gold reserve, or the height of its 
skyscrapers. The real measure of a nation is the quality of 
its national life, what it does for the least fortunate of its 
citizens, and the opportunities that it provides for its youth 
to live useful and meaningful lives, and equally important 
(Tommy said), what it does to share its affluence with 
those people around the world who suffer from poverty 
and disease. 
 

(2015) 
 
Just get the key points of that quotation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The real measure . . . I’m saying this with some amendment. 
The real measure of a province, say the province of 
Saskatchewan — Tommy said the nation, but I call it this 
province — the real measure of our province is the quality of 
life that we provide to our people, and especially the quality of 
life to those least fortunate and the opportunities that we 
provide for those youth who seek to live meaningful lives, to 
contribute, to foster and to develop, and to expand and to 
progress in this struggle of building society, of building values 
based on independence and dignity and human worth and 
freedom. 
 
Now you might say, well that’s a New Democrat quoting the 
remarks of a former New Democrat and a former leader; why 
wouldn’t you believe in that? To some extent, I plead guilty to 
that kind of a dismissal, if you would want to, in my attribution 
and support of those remarks. But I tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those remarks cut beyond the philosophy of a New 
Democratic Party. They cut to the very essence of what it is that 
life is all about. They talk about values. They talk about the 
higher instincts and the higher values of free men and women 
working in a free society to improve not only their lives, but to 
improve the quality of the lives of their families and their 
children and their children, and more importantly, to improve 
the quality of the community in which they live. Those are 
values which we as politicians should subscribe to. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those are values that we on this side of the House 
subscribe to and fervently subscribe to as our guiding motto for 
the 1990s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And so I said to myself, well if I subscribe 
to those values, that’s my credo, that’s my party’s credo, what 
are things looking like in Saskatchewan today about that quality 
of life? How is it that this government opposite is providing or 
isn’t providing for those of us, in the words of Tommy Douglas, 
who are less advantaged; to those of us who perhaps may be 
young and want to seek the opportunities and the new hope and 
to build the new tomorrow, the new vision. How are we doing 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
And my colleagues here have ably described the hard,  

cold, brutal statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I will not 
repeat again here in detail, but the statistics which are obvious; 
where we have a debt load of approximately $13 billion which 
is not going to give an opportunity for our young people, but is 
going to saddle those young people with a debt long beyond 
their lives into their children’s lives. That record’s been talked 
about by my colleagues. 
 
I think about the taxation records, that we are now the second 
highest taxed province in the history of Canada, only behind 
Quebec, and certainly the highest taxed in Saskatchewan. I 
think of the flood of young men and women — those statistics 
have been discussed here at length — over 6,000 in one month 
this year, more than all of those people who came to 
Saskatchewan in 1982. 
 
And I think again of Tommy’s credo about providing 
opportunities for jobs, the quality of life. I think about the 
health cut-backs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think of the fact of the 
hospital bed waiting crisis. I think of the crisis with respect to 
the staffing in hospitals. Day in and day out the Murray 
commission receives those reports of men and women who say 
that the hospitals are understaffed. 
 
I think of the dismantlement of the dental plan for children. I 
think of the dismantlement of the drug plan for Canadians, and 
Saskatchewan Canadians in particular. I think of all of the 
waiting lists at the cancer clinics. I think of the confusion, the 
chaos. 
 
I can think of the hurt and the bitterness which has been applied 
to ordinary families and ordinary people, perhaps less 
advantaged, disadvantaged young men and women; this model 
that we should be building to help to protect. I think of those, 
and I say to myself this Speech from the Throne and this 
government has failed, and failed abysmally to meet that test. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But I guess, Mr. Speaker, I think of it in 
another way more specifically, that yardstick that I’ve 
discussed. I don’t need to get into those other details and 
records. I have a bit . . . regret to have done so. To me the 
condemnation of the lack of policies, the cruel, heartless, 
unthinking free enterprise approach — which is their 
philosophy and not ours, and I’ll say a word about that before I 
sit down — I think the damnation of that policy is seen right 
here in this report, the poverty profile report of 1988, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The poverty profile report, not an NDP study, shows that the 
poverty levels in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I 
underline these for you — are the second highest or the second 
worst of any province in all of Canada. Only Newfoundland is 
worse. We have more families on poverty, we have more 
children, 16 years of age, on poverty than ever before. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are in the bread-basket of the world 
right here in Saskatchewan, and somehow we’ve not been able 
to, as intelligent men and women, we’ve not been able to 
provide the food that we grow here and the produce that we 
grow here and the land and what it’s done for the people of this 
province. We’ve not been able  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

284 
 

   to take care of a poverty rate which is the second highest in all 
of Canada. 
 
And if you applied that measure, if you applied that fact to the 
Tommy Douglas credo, to the NDP credo, I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government opposite and every minister and 
every MLA ought to hang his and her head in shame because 
we have let down the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What a juxtaposition to talk about. The 
juxtaposition of $1.2 million for Joytec — gone from this 
province. The juxtaposition to talk of $9 million for a Future 
Corporation birthday party. We’ll be gone. The juxtaposition to 
talk of $20 million or more in advertising. 
 
The examples of all of these kinds of expenditures by this 
government, which is made opposite, Mr. Speaker, on a daily 
basis, that juxtaposition stands in stark naked contrast with the 
cruel brutality of families and children who do not have 
clothing, who do not have food, who come to school hungry, 
who leave school hungry, who come home hungry, and 
somehow this government pretends to say it cares. I say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that is a condemnation which will ring around 
this government long after it’s defeated in the next provincial 
election . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The measure of the quality of life, I come 
back to this quotation, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The real measure of a nation, the quality of its life for its 
least fortunate, for its youth to live useful and meaningful 
lives, and how it takes care of others around in this planet 
of ours, which is truly now the global villages that cliché 
says . . . 
 

And I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hearken back to that 
Speech from the Throne now, some 10 days ago. Hearken back 
to these policies that I’ve described, ranging all the way from 
taxation to unemployment and the jobless rate. Hearken back to 
all of the cut-backs in education and in health care and in social 
services. Hearken back to the record that my colleagues have 
described as to how those on social services are being 
brutalized by continued cut-backs, how they’re being 
humiliated by the kinds of programs that the member from 
Mayfair advocates as welfare reform. Hearken back to all of 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and ask whether the quality of life in 
Saskatchewan today, in 1989, is what you want for your family 
and for your children. 
 
I ask you to hearken back, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Is that the 
standard that we want to follow, that standard set by the people 
opposite? Or do we want to aspire to that higher ideal and value 
of independence, worth, and individual dignity and freedom — 
freedom from want, freedom to speak, freedom to be 
democratic, freedom to be Saskatchewan and Canadian people. 
That’s the standard that we want, and that’s the failing in this 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Romanow: — How little-visioned these men and women 
opposite are. How narrow, how dominated they are by opinion 
polls, how petty, how personal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
personal . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re a loser, Roy. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Just like the hon. member from Cut Knife 
yelling from his seat, Roy, you’re a loser. That kind of petty 
debate in this legislature, when there are 40,000 hungry people. 
That member opposite ought to be thinking about that kind of 
concern rather than debasing this institution and debasing 
himself by those kinds of interjections. But no, it is a petty, 
mean-minded, short-sighted administration, short-sighted 
administration which does not guide itself by those kinds of 
credos, does not have that philosophy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes beyond that, and I want to move to 
a second theme of my remarks — I only have two or three 
themes to raise here in my brief intervention this evening — 
and that is this debate of privatization which speaks in the same 
theme, the same mode of the vision that I have outlined to you, 
this debate about privatization. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are facing a 
major fork in the highway on this privatization debate for the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan. Make no mistake about 
it. 
 
And I want to tell you how I see the Conservative Party vision, 
and I want to contrast it with ours. The Conservative Party 
vision is very simple. They get up, the Premier gets up this 
afternoon, and the ministers and the members opposite, when 
they get to speaking the issues, get up and they say simply this. 
They say, you know, we’re in a globally interdependent 
economy; we’re tied technologically. It’s all a global village 
now. 
 
And here we are in little old Saskatchewan, these are in effect 
the words — there’s nothing we can do about it. If there’s a 
merger of Molsons and Carlings, there’s nothing we can do 
about it. If there happened to be 100 workers laid off and their 
families laid off, I’m sorry, there’s nothing we can do about it. 
We simply give up. 
 
And not only that, they say, but as the world gets smaller, they 
say the world is becoming more competitive. It’s fuelled by the 
free market-place. This is the year of the rugged individual. 
People are going to compete. The United States is the world of 
competition. The United States is where it’s at. 
 
So we’re going to support free trade because there’s nothing we 
can do about it. And of course we’re going to deregulate, forget 
about the safety to airlines, the safety to the railway traffic, 
forget about the safety on health standards, forget about all of 
that. We are going to deregulate because government is an 
anathema. This is, after all, the brave new world of competition 
they would have us believe. And not only are we going to 
deregulate and privatize, we’re also going to be involved in all 
of the other kinds of activities which essentially destroy the 
effective role of government to say something about our  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

285 
 

lives, to direct what kind of a society that we want, because 
they say there’s nothing they can do about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say that all that they can do is stay on the 
surf-board. They have no control over the economic waves as 
they keep on crashing against the Saskatchewan economic body 
fabric. There’s nothing they can do about it. They are first class 
and they are world class, and they say we’re into that world 
economy, Mr. Speaker, and we must plug into that world 
economy they say. 
 
I’ll tell you what they say, Mr. Speaker, the result of that. If 
they want to plug into the world economy, that means to the 
working men and women of the province of Saskatchewan that 
if we’re going to compete with the workers in the rest of the 
parts of the world, we are going to have to go to Korea and 
we’re going to have to compete with Hyundai, and we’re going 
to be paying our workers here what they’re paying in Korea, $4 
a day, because that’s the world economy; that’s their vision. 
 
They say in farming, they say in farming, there’s nothing you 
can do about it. There’s a green revolution. Oh there’s the 
subsidies war in the United States and the European 
community; there’s nothing we can do about it. And if they say 
that is the approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that philosophy says 
if we’re plugged into the world economy that there’s no way 
that we can compete against the Chinese farmer who grows rice 
or the Thai farmer who grows rice, who gets 20 cents a day; 
that’s what our farmers are going to be heading for too, because 
it’s the world economy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cheap land. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — A policy, my colleagues say, of cheap land 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cheap labour. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Cheap labour, that’s what the minister says. 
The Premier himself gets up in Moose Jaw and says, that’s the 
world economy. How else can we compete, he says, against the 
Koreas? How else can we compete against the Thais and the 
Chinese and the Japanese and the Brazils and all of the other 
Third World people who exploit their working men and women, 
who exploit and brutalize their farming community, and the 
subtle message — no, not subtle message — the incessant 
messages that our farmers and our workers must lower their 
standards that tie into that Tory vision. I say, that’s not how this 
province was built, and it’s not my vision of how this province 
is going to be built. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So you see, it’s a very simple approach that 
they have. You’ve got a problem? Well what can we do about 
it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? That’s the way of the world. We have a 
merger; well you know, there’s nothing we can do about it. The 
European community, the American subsidies, we simply give 
up; nothing we can do about it. All we want to do is to stay on 
the surf-board, cheap labour and cheap food and cheap land, 
Mr.  

Deputy Speaker, that is the world economy. Because if they’re 
telling us that we’ve got to compete with the Koreas and the 
Thailands and the Brazils, that’s what they’re telling our people 
and our province and our farmers and our working men and 
women in this province of Saskatchewan, and I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that’s not the way this province was built. 
 
I mentioned the other day, and forgive me for a moment and 
talk about my personal experience. I mentioned in question 
period with the Premier about my own family situation. My 
father came over in the 1920s — came over from the Ukraine. 
He came over because he was in pursuit of freedom; he was in 
pursuit of opportunity; he was in pursuit of land. He was in 
pursuit of hope and all the dreams that he and hundreds of 
others from a variety of other parts of the world came to this 
part of the world to seek. 
 
And when they came here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they didn’t 
come here to beggar their neighbours. They didn’t come here, 
they weren’t attracted here, they weren’t part of the world 
economy to beggar the farmers of the day or the working men 
and women of the day. No, they came in and they blended and 
they assimilated and they worked. 
 
And my father lived and died knowing 150 words of English. 
God bless his soul to this day. And if they called him at 2 
o’clock in the morning to ice the boxcars of the CNR (Canadian 
National) Railways, he was there icing the boxcars. And if they 
told him to clean the railway tracks he was there to clean the 
railway tracks. He did everything that he could to work in this 
society. 
 
It’s not his story; it’s the story of thousands of Saskatchewan 
people so that they can make a better life for myself and for 
members opposite and for all of us here to build a multicultural 
society. And when they got here they faced all of the hurdles of 
the Dirty Thirties; and they faced the hurdles of the banks who 
were foreclosing; and they faced the hurtles of the Grain 
Exchange in Winnipeg; and they faced the hurdles of an 
insensitive, uncaring government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what was their response, those pioneers in Saskatchewan? 
Did they say, well that’s the way of the world; there’s nothing 
we can do about it? No. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they fought back. 
They picked up . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They fought back, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They fought back, and they adopted another vision and another 
philosophy which now brings me, as I say, more specifically to 
what we stand for. They fought for this kind of a statement, and 
I refer again to Tommy’s statements which were made back in 
the early days from which we can learn. 
 
And I think the members opposite ought to consider it and also 
learn as well. You know what they said, those pioneers, my 
father and thousands like him? I think it was captured, if father 
could read these, well, I’m sure this was the theme of what he 
was getting at. 
 
Tommy’s words — he said this about government, quote,  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

286 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: “Government is simply the community 
writ large.” I’ll repeat: 
 

Government is simply the community writ large. It is the 
instrument by which we do for ourselves co-operatively 
what we cannot do individually. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — “It’s the instrument of what we do 
co-operatively for what we cannot do individually.” And they 
could not individually take on the banks. They couldn’t take on 
the grain exchange, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They got together and 
they said co-operatively through the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and through Tommy Douglas, we 
are going to fashion a society and a Saskatchewan which is 
caring, which is compassionate, which has control over 
economic activities. We can do it a better way; we don’t have to 
plug into the world; we don’t have to destroy our systems and 
our institutions here. We are going to build a better and new 
tomorrow. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that message in the 
’20s is more relevant in the 1990s, and that’s what we stand for 
on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Romanow: — And so the history is well written and well 
understood, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of what happens from that 
approach. We built up in Saskatchewan a mixed economy. We 
had a private enterprise sector going. We developed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a co-operative sector right in that 1920s and 
’20s, the federated co-op movement and individual retail co-op 
movement, and we built the Saskatchewan wheat pools, and we 
set up the credit unions, and we got the National Farmers’ 
Union . . . or it’s called the Saskatchewan farmers union. 
 
And we had the Progressives start up as an independent 
political party because they were upset with what western 
Canada was doing to us. Some of the progressives went to the 
Social Credits, some went to the CCF. But it was people, men 
and women saying that they believed that they can do 
something with their lives. They didn’t take the position that 
they only could stand on the surf board and they couldn’t 
control the waves. They said, no, we can control the waves, we 
can control the economic activity, we can develop institutions 
which empower us to build our communities and give some 
security for our families and for our people. 
 
They did it, and what a record of success, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they had, from hospitalization in 1947, to Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance in 1948, to power corporation in a big 
way since Douglas took over, to telephones, to hospitalization I 
mentioned, to medicare. And from medicare to the dental plan, 
to the drug plan, and then to Crown corporations — not because 
they were ideologically committed to Crown corporations — 
because it made sense. It was a mixed economy. The three 
cylinders were private and co-operative and public, and 
working together they developed jobs, and that’s how we got to 
be a million people here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is it straight south of the line of us, 49th parallel, in  

the American economy where there is no co-operative sector 
and there is no public sector, there’s a population of only 
550,000 people? Because, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t develop it 
the way we did. They developed it the way my friends opposite 
want to develop it. They put all their eggs in one basket in the 
United States; they put it in the free enterprise basket. They shut 
down the co-operative sector; they shut down the public sector. 
And when you play by the rules of the market, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it means three things: markets, transportation, and 
political power — none of which we have here in this area. 
 
And if our forefathers, if my dad had adopted that approach, if 
Tommy Douglas had adopted that approach, we too would have 
been at 500,000 people. But we had men and women of vision 
and commitment and ideals and values, and they built up the 
province of Saskatchewan that we today love and cherish and 
promote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here we are in 
1989. And the members opposite, they say, well you know, 
privatization, it’s the wave of the future. Privatization and 
deregulation and free trade — they say that’s the wave of the 
future. Well you just think about it. Free trade ties us into the 
United States; that’s the market, so forget about the co-op sector 
and the public sector. Deregulation — that takes off all the 
strings off the private market . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like the airlines. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s right, like the airlines. And 
privatization, of course, just destroys the public sector. You just 
think of what’s going to happen five years from now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They say this is the wave of the future. You 
know what’s going to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if these 
people opposite get re-elected. They will end up having our 
economic engine being one, singular — the engine of the large 
market, open market-place — the private enterprise system. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if they do that, if they 
should ever succeed by doing that, then we’ll be at 550,000 
people like North Dakota and Montana, or less, as well, at that 
time. 
 
Is that the vision? Is that the way to build a society to look after 
those of us who are less fortunate? Is that the way to build the 
hopes and the futures and the opportunities for young men and 
women that Tommy talked about in 1976? Of course, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is not. And more than that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what they have done is not true privatization. The 
members opposite say, oh, the NDP was for privatization in 
1982. I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a debate 
that I am going to welcome, and welcome with relish when it 
comes to this House, on what exactly it was the NDP believed 
in 1982. And I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what 
the NDP in 1982 advocated, as compared to what these people 
opposite are doing in their global economy approach, is like 
night and day. 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

287 
 

Mr. Speaker, in 1982 the privatization approach of the NDP did 
not mean that there would be sell-offs of profitable companies 
to the private friends of this government opposite — not a 
suggestion of that, like in WESTBRIDGE or Sask Minerals. In 
1982 privatization did not talk about privatization of such basic 
resources as potash, for example — not a word. It is a 
falsehood; it is an untruth. This government is spending $40 
million, I predict, on a massive publicity campaign starting right 
now on public participation and it is a pack of untruths and 
falsehoods about the 1982 situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Make no mistake about it, I will be 
welcoming this debate when we debate Bill 1 in more specifics 
about that 1982 scheme. I tell you, by the way, parenthetically, I 
ask myself about the quality of government, how it is that 
selected minutes of government operations are leaked to 
selected journalists who happen to be former speech writers of 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan; some leaked and 
others not leaked, Mr. Speaker, and then not making it available 
to the rest of us — how the ethics of that applies, and how the 
ethics of the journalistic community is such that they would 
accept those kinds of documents without any kind of analysis or 
consideration whatsoever. I would like to talk about that in the 
near future as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But, Mr. Speaker, just take a look at what 
the record is. I’ll come back to the 1982 document, very much 
so. 
 
But let me just take a look at what’s happened. I mean, this has 
been documented by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, and my colleague, the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. And we are going to zero in in this long session, I 
guarantee you, with details about what privatization has meant. 
 
They talk . . . the Premier talks today about people in 
partnership. What people in partnership benefitted when they 
privatized the government office buildings and moved the 
ownership from government and from us the taxpayers and 
gave it to a few select friends of the Conservative Party? What 
benefit is there for people in that? 
 
Who benefitted, Mr. Speaker, in the Weyerhaeuser 
privatization? They don’t have to pay more than eight and a half 
per cent on their obligations, and they don’t have to pay a penny 
if their profits are below thirteen and a half per cent. Did the 
farmers benefit on that style of privatization, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What about the privatizations with respect to the Sask Minerals 
operation? We simply take the ownership right out of 
Saskatchewan and we ship it out to Quebec, and in doing so we 
lose control over the economic policy in this vital sector. Did 
the people of Saskatchewan benefit in that particular 
privatization, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And then what about the Premier’s latest foray? The Premier 
has gone to China and he’s offering the Potash  

Corporation of Saskatchewan for privatization. And he’s doing 
it . . . he says he’s going to change it by changing the ownership 
from the people of the province of Saskatchewan to the people 
of communist China because we’re part of the global economy. 
I say, shame on the Premier. It’s a betrayal of the history and 
the tradition of the province of Saskatchewan to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But it’s going to be more than that, Mr. 
Speaker, this debate on privatization. This is not only debate on 
privatization. But when we get to debate privatization, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s going to be more than that. 
 
We’ll be asking in this election — the sooner the better — we’ll 
want to know how privatization has reduced the taxes of 
individual people. We’ll want to know how privatization has 
reduced the debt of $13 billion on the people. We’ll want to 
know how privatization has removed the quotas on university 
students. 
 
(2045) 
 
We’ll want to know how privatization has helped in cutting 
back the 10,000 people waiting to get into hospital beds, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’ll want to know how privatization has 
helped the drug plan and its re-establishment — not the plastic 
card, but the real goods. We’ll want to know how privatization 
has helped the dental plan, how it’s helped the senior citizens, 
and we’ll want to know how it’s helped the roads, and we’ll 
want everybody at tax time today — I say those who may be 
watching, even the Conservative members opposite — take a 
look at your taxes and then ask yourselves, has privatization 
helped me? as I am now the second highest taxed province in 
all of Canada today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, we’re going to be asking about 
privatization. We’re going to be asking about privatization. But 
you know, Mr. Speaker, there are some condemnations coming 
out of the words of the government in this issue itself. Here I 
have the remarks of the member who is from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, I think, the Minister of Public 
Participation, as he calls himself. Look, someone should tell, 
Mr. Speaker, the government, they should forget it; give up the 
ship. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Indian Head-Wolseley, give up the ship. It’s 
not the Minister of Public Participation, it’s the minister of 
privatization; that’s what everybody knows him as, so he should 
give up the ship and acknowledge it. 
 
And here I have in front of me, in the Globe and Mail of March 
20, 1989: 
 

NDP attacks Devine’s privatization plan (is the story). It’s 
their Alamo, the Premier says, of the foes. 
 

I might say the Premier should take a look at his history; I think 
the Mexicans beat the Americans at the Alamo. 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

288 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Nevertheless, we being the underdogs, we’ll 
see whose Alamo it is. But here’s the story of this grand 
privatization plan. By the way, and as I say, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to be here for a long session in this session, quite 
obviously, unless this government calls an early election, which 
we would welcome, the sooner the better, unless it does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We’ll want to know what latest stunts the 
billion dollar Finance minister is up to. You know, a couple of 
years ago he was out by a billion dollars in his deficit. And now 
he’s out a billion dollars in the evaluation of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. What’s a billion? It’s only $2 
billion. 
 
But here’s the point. The Premier this afternoon talked about 
how it was that privatization was a partnership with people. In 
the context of the words that I say, of course, it doesn’t apply — 
a partnership with people in a co-operative movement. It isn’t. 
And you know, his own minister says in this particular Globe 
and Mail article that I refer to on March 20, 1989, and I have to 
cite the name here, Mr. Speaker, in order to identify the direct 
quotation. The quote says this: 
 

Mr. Taylor acknowledges that only a small percentage of 
Saskatchewan residents are shareholders in provincial 
corporations (on the privatization). 
 

That’s how people’s democracy — shareholder democracy — 
is taking place. But you know, there is something even more 
insidious, apart from the difference in the visions that I describe 
— their global vision, their return back to the future — this 
other quotation which I think is even more damning. In the 
paragraph above, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says this, the story: 
 

There have been indications that the Tories want a 
permanent transformation of the province’s economic map. 
Last year, deputy premier Eric Berntson vowed the 
government will make it almost impossible for the NDP to 
regain control of the privatized companies. 
 

And it is applauded by the Minister of Education opposite. Get 
the motivation — hear, hear. Get the motivation — hear, hear. 
It is not for the people of Saskatchewan they’re privatizing; it’s 
not for the young people they’re privatizing; it’s not for the 
workers; it’s not for the farmers; they’re privatizing because 
they want to stop the NDP. That’s their motivation, and that’s a 
shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Hear, hear. Hear, hear, Mr. Speaker, the 
hon. member from Weyburn says. That’s exactly what they 
want to do. They want to shut down that public sector engine, 
and they want to shut down that co-operative sector engine, and 
they want to leave us at 550,000 people, and they want to leave 
us with no hope  

to be able to look after those poverty numbers that I’ve talked 
about. They want to leave us with no chance to build our 
hospitals, our schools. That’s what they want to do, and those 
people want to do it for partisan political reasons. I say you 
won’t get away with it. You will be beaten so badly you won’t 
be back for another 50 years because of that attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Let me close, Mr. Speaker, by describing to 
you . . . Let me close, Mr. Speaker. I’ve tried to outline this 
afternoon and this evening in my involvement in the Speech 
from the Throne, in, obviously, some political terms — I 
obviously admit that — but I’ve tried to do it in philosophical 
terms as well, because I think it’s important to describe the 
differences, and to describe the vision, to describe the vision 
that we have of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m prepared, Mr. Speaker, at any time to wait until the 
Minister of Urban Affairs stops his agitated comments from his 
seated position to finish my remarks because, as I’ve said about 
the Minister of Urban Affairs, he has a particular aversion to 
truth which results in this kind of nattering from his seated 
position. So he ought to just tone it down a little bit. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, in my few closing remarks about this 
. . . What I’m trying to do is describe here in an important 
debate — I don’t expect everybody to agree with my view, but 
I’d like to think I contributed something to the visions and the 
philosophies. What I’ve tried to describe here, Mr. Speaker, is 
the visions, the competing visions, or lack of visions between 
the government opposite and we here on the . . . members of the 
New Democratic Party. 
 
And I’ve told you about their belief about the global economy 
and that we can plug in — not plug in, but there is nothing we 
can do but be a part of that. And that’s what the journalists say 
up there too. And what I might also only say, in probably the 
most shallow analysis when they analysed Gorbachev and they 
analysed China — the most shallow of economic analyses of 
the whole operation. 
 
I shouldn’t be critical of my friends in the gallery, but that’s the 
reality of the situation. You seem to say, well you know, 
everybody’s against the NDP — that’s what they say. They say 
there’s global economy; you know it’s inevitable. 
 
The logical conclusion, Mr. Speaker, is, if it’s inevitable, why 
are we here? I mean, why is the Premier here? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Would you pose that logic again? You 
lost me. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I lost the hon. member from Weyburn, 
who is very easily . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s not hard. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, no, no, no. No, no. My colleague says, 
it’s not hard to lose the hon. member from Weyburn.  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

289 
 

I have news for my colleagues. The hon. member from 
Weyburn’s been lost for the last seven years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So there’s no problem there. Why are we 
here, Mr. Speaker? I tell you, the question is a fundamental 
question of why we’re here, because these people have 
abandoned faith in the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
The pioneers that I’ve told you about — my father — they’ve 
abandoned that faith in our people to be able to take charge of 
our destiny and our future. They don’t believe that we can 
empower the people of this province. They don’t believe that 
we can establish a set of programs which give ordinary men and 
women and families and communities a control over their 
economic and their social lives. They believe that simply all 
that they can do is forget about it, because the economic 
circumstances control. Why is he there? They’re not doing their 
job; they’re simply being patsies of those international large 
corporations, who also believe that we shouldn’t be saying 
anything about our lives. 
 
And you know they have it because their philosophy speaks to a 
meanness of people. It speaks to the question of greed and 
competition, and it speaks to the issue of acquisition and 
inquisitiveness, that’s what it speaks to. It is competition. It is 
therefore the corporate efficiency standard for hospitals. It is the 
corporate efficiency standard for schools. It’s the corporate 
efficiency standards that the Minister of Education has imposed 
and brutalized upon the universities. It is the corporate ethic of 
all of those mean sides of the human nature to which they 
speak, to which the whole situation develops. 
 
It is the kind of an approach which would say that all the 
hospitals in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg area, if implemented on 
the Schwartz report, ought to result in the closure of concerns 
for health care people, like that member there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — A member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
who — I am sad to say this because I do believe — I’ve met 
him several times here in the course of the 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg election — was a decent person who 
came to this House with some ideals or ideas that I may not 
have supported. But I must say to the hon. member opposite in 
that performance of his maiden speech, in that kind of an 
approach, together with the member from Rosthern, has written 
his political demise, because he does not speak to the issue of 
the operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The hon. member may or may not believe 
me, but I’ve been around this Chamber long enough to know 
what kind of a member makes a contribution and sticks around 
for quite some time. But that’s a peripheral matter. 
 
I still wish him luck and maybe he’ll change. He has some good 
friends and workers behind him who I think are  

concerned about his approach. That’s peripheral. 
 
What I’m saying, as I close on this issue, is that we don’t hold 
this view that there is nothing that we can do about it. And we 
hold a different view about politics, Mr. Speaker, we hold this 
view about politics — we believe that the object of our system 
here in the legislature of Saskatchewan ought to be to build 
hope, Mr. Speaker, hope for young men and women. We 
believe that we ought to be providing opportunities, and we 
ought to be providing the questions of security, and we ought to 
be providing policies of fairness, and we ought to be having 
commitments to the finest health care system in North America, 
and that we ought to be having commitments to the finest and 
forward-looking education system ever. And that we’re going to 
have an economic development program which will work on 
the mixed economy and which will involve people to participate 
as individuals, not in a wholesale give-away to the large 
corporation friends of the people opposite. 
 
We believe in mankind and womankind being motivated by 
those virtues of decency and co-operation and self-worth and 
independence and hope. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we are 
saying to the people of Saskatchewan, stay with us; there’s a 
new day coming; we are going to give you that hope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We are going to give you that hope. 
 
There’s a new day coming, Mr. Speaker; there’s a new day 
coming of honesty in government; there’s a new day coming of 
integrity in the political process. We are going to examine, and 
when we become the government of this province, we are going 
to introduce legislation. I’ll tell you something that they’ll never 
be able to do again. We’re going to introduce legislation which 
will never ever allow a Conservative government to deny the 
basic democratic rights of this legislature . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This parliament has to respect it, Mr. 
Speaker, because the difference, the fundamental difference is 
this: we believe that people working together can make a 
difference. 
 
We believe that the people in Saskatchewan have made a 
difference. We believe that we can empower to give authority 
for the people to make that difference in their community 
levels. We do not believe that there is nothing can be done 
about it, as the big Progressive Conservatives and the 
big-business friends opposite. We believe that people in 
Saskatchewan, in today’s world of the 1990s, can devise a 
newer, more exciting vision where, in the words of Tommy 
Douglas, government will do collectively that which we can’t 
do individually. And in the words of Tommy Douglas: 
 

Government will provide opportunity and hope for our 
young people, and care and compassion for those in need 
of health and social services and care, and the poor. 

  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

290 
 

We believe in that. That’s the issue in this session. That’s where 
the Speech from the Throne has failed, and the sooner this 
government gets on with this election, so that we can start 
building the new tomorrow, the better for everybody in 
Saskatchewan and Canada, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be voting against 
this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
rise in this debate to the Speech from the Throne, and I 
congratulate Her Honour, Sylvia Fedoruk. 
 
I would like to deal with the subject, Mr. Speaker, and that is 
the subject of trade and investment. 
 
I am honoured to be the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of 
Trade and Investment, and that involvement has given me many 
insights to that subject. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I have 
been involved in the business of trade for a good long time 
before the people of Kinistino honoured me with their trust as 
their MLA. That experience was often a frustrating one before 
1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entire effort of the previous government was 
to build a Crown corporation. But that was not the business of 
trade and the province and the counting . . . counting for the 
diversification and growth. And the Premier deserves a 
commendation from the House for his personal intervention to 
help this province grow. 
 
(2100) 
 
The NDP criticized and condemned the government for the 
Pacific tour, Mr. Speaker, and in doing so they are condemning 
hundreds of millions of dollars worth of trade with the Pacific, 
including new contracts with Japan to buy new uranium. But 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker, don’t want to trade with Japan. They 
make just terrible insults to the Japanese and then expect us to 
trade with ourselves. They boo their consul general from the 
United States and hope to stop trade with our biggest market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are flag burners, they are insulters. They hide 
in the basement. New Democrats cannot be allowed to have 
their way. 
 
Let me tell you a bit about my recent activities relating to trade, 
Mr. Speaker. I had the privilege of travelling to West Germany 
for the department. And, Mr. Speaker, I saw tremendous trade 
shows, just tremendous, and one of the best was a show of food 
and agriculture. They bring together producers for all kinds of 
the food products, food retailers, and consumers. They bring 
together all of the participants and they make it work. People 
from all over the world attend the shows, and we are doing 
some of that here. 
 
I am very pleased, very pleased to see that a major step has been 
taken in the throne speech to get a unified approach for our own 
agriculture and food sale sectors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The creation of the department of agriculture and food will be 
the basis for not only creating more industries and creating 
diversification, but it can be the base for a more  

united promotion of production, and we grow and process in 
this province. I personally look forward to the potential of more 
trade shows and bigger trade shows and encourage the 
government to continue to work with agribition to expand the 
show and expand the areas it involves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words about my tour 
through Europe. I first . . . I had the first tour in October of 
1987, and it was one of the biggest wholesale food show called 
Anuga. It was in Cologne, West Germany and there’s about 157 
countries participating. My main promotion, was to promote 
Saskatchewan-grown products, food products and northern 
products. I spent six days at this show. It took two and a half 
days just to make one round — it’s just a tremendous 
exhibition. 
 
I then travelled with Dale Bain, from the Economic 
Development. We went to Norway, where we visited a 
manufacturing plant called Smilde, and it’s in Heereveen, 
Holland. Among their plant was one processing plant of salads. 
We spent one day with the president of the plant — it was Mr. 
Smilde — trying to promote and motivate him to build a food 
processing plant in this province. Well about three months ago I 
was very pleased that there was announcement in Delisle that 
they will construct a food processing plant, and the opening will 
be in May of this year, a food processing plant that will produce 
salads, mostly potato salads. In four or five years from now, it 
will have 500 acres of vegetable, mostly potatoes. And I’m 
proud, Mr. Speaker, I was part of this promotion to bring 
industry to this province. That’s diversification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Amongst the promotion I did over there, there was for nature 
berry, wild rice, blueberry, cranberries, and mushrooms. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they wrote me a letter that their sales last year 
tripled, and it said it was because of the promotion in Europe. 
 
Just on January 26, I went to Berlin, West Germany. I attended 
a retail food fair. The official opening was on January 26, which 
I took in, and I was very impressed with it. There were 85 
countries participating in this fair, and in the opening of the 
26th, I listened to two ministers of agriculture. And they 
apologized in their speeches, they apologized of what harm they 
did to the farmers around the world. Because of their heavy 
subsidy, they were aware of the damage they did, especially to a 
country like ours. 
 
In this fair, there was from 50 to 70,000 people a day going 
through this food fair. Again I promoted the Saskatchewan food 
products. Among these products were lentils from Sedley. I had 
samples which I passed out all over Europe and they went to 
India and Saudi Arabia. 
 
Just a week ago, I had a fax from one of their consultants from 
Ottawa. He had requested quotes on 25,000 tonnes of lentils. 
Twenty-five thousand tonnes is just about half of the 
Saskatchewan stock right now; it represents $11 million. Well I 
sure hope this sale will go through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Trade and 
Investment on initiatives his department has undertaken, getting 
information out to the business  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

291 
 

community on how to trade and where there are good 
opportunities for trade. This is an important role for the 
government to play, and the minister has assured us to play his 
role well. 
 
I also look to the Minister of Education, and I see that he, too, 
understands the importance of trade for the future for our 
province as he institutes new programs to better equip our 
children for a global market and a global competition. 
 
I look to the new language institute at the University of Regina, 
and I say that’s exactly the kind of things that we need to be 
successful. 
 
I see the Minister of Science and Technology encouraging and 
actively supporting the technological development that serve 
not only our own market but international market. And I say it 
is amazing how consistent this government is in focusing on 
efforts and ensuring our economic future is a bright one. 
 
Look at the minister, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Public 
Participation, who is creating hundreds and hundreds of jobs 
and opening brand-new international markets for Saskatchewan. 
And I say this government knows how to rate. 
 
Look at Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, the business the NDP 
threatened to shut down if they ever take power from the people 
again. Look at that business and you will find it is a trading 
business. It built a paper mill on the exports of that paper. 
 
Recently it started construction on the sheet mill to make paper 
for photocopiers, a product never produced in Saskatchewan 
before, and a product we’ll trade in the world. There are a 
number of examples that the member of Indian Head-Wolseley 
is responsible, the area of expanding and creating new trade. 
And I say, congratulations! 
 
Mr. Speaker, across the board, if you look at the front bench of 
this Progressive Conservative government, and you see people 
who are taking care of the interests of this province, and they’re 
taking care of the future, creating the wealth for the health care, 
for the social services, and for the schools. 
 
The Minister of Energy and Mines is no stranger to trade, Mr. 
Speaker. Just check the results. Her policy . . . just look at her 
results. The opposition can hoot and holler all they want but the 
results speak for themselves. We have more gas wells drilled 
than ever we could have imagined before. In fact, in one year 
alone we had almost more wells drilled than in 10 entire years 
from the NDP government. On that, gas is being exported out of 
the province, bringing wealth to our people. Congratulations, 
Madam Minister. Congratulations. 
 
Look at the minister responsible for Agdevco, Mr. Speaker. 
This guy is probably the world’s greatest trader. He’s selling 
milk cows, beef cows, and trading on deals from investment in 
Saskatchewan for turbines and on and on. He gets rural gas 
distribution going for our farm family and then he tells 
SaskPower, go out, sell the technology to the world, and they 
are pursing that, Mr. Speaker. 

The NDP shout that they aren’t happy about that. Well, of 
course they are not happy because the government is doing a 
heck of a job and they don’t like it. 
 
Then look across the floor, Mr. Speaker, and look at the 
opposition benches, and what do you see? Well, I look at the 
member from Saskatoon South. The member from Saskatoon 
South, Mr. Speaker, he wrote to my constituency telling them, 
when he was the Minister of Health, that he would not approve 
any nursing homes. He wrote them and told them he would not 
build any more nursing home beds; he couldn’t afford it. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sick and tired of hearing this. When somebody 
brings up that they had put a moratorium on nursing homes, he 
says it’s not true. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to table a 
document. I had brought this up before. I want to table this 
document, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document is a letter what was sent to William 
Komarnicki, administrator of the Cudworth Nursing Home. 
And it reads, and that came from Social Services: 
 

I feel I must draw your attention first to the fact that our 
government has placed a moratorium on (the) approval or 
construction of any additional special-care beds in this 
province. 
 

It makes me sick to listen to them and say it’s not true. And it 
goes on. I want to further quote from this statement, and it is 
signed the Minister of Health, Herman Rolfes . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . It’s true, but they have enough gall to stand 
there and say it’s not true. 
 
That is what the member from Saskatoon South wrote to my 
people of Cudworth. Six years of moratorium — six years, they 
never approved any construction of nurses homes. They would 
not have a nursing home in Cudworth, and they did not have a 
nursing home in Saskatchewan. That was the words from the 
former minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why do they turn down the seniors of this province, Mr. 
Speaker? Why did he do it? It was a matter of cost for the 
member from Saskatoon South and his government. They said 
they could not afford to help our seniors, Mr. Speaker. They 
could not afford to help our seniors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if they would have learned that we can gain 
revenues through trade with the world, they would have given 
the people of this province the opportunity and the information 
to trade with the world. We would have been able to say yes to 
the people of the Kinistino constituency, as this government 
said yes, and built new nursing homes. 
 
(2115) 
 
But he does not understand trade and does not want to trade. 
Who else have they got over there, Mr. Speaker? Well, they 
have the member from Saskatoon University and several of his 
colleagues who, when the President of France was here, he 
went and had dinner with the great international socialist. And 
after sharing a meal with the man, what did they do? They said, 
we don’t sell this man’s  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

292 
 

country any uranium. They said, Saskatchewan must not trade 
with France because we don’t need their business and we don’t 
want their business. Well, Mr. Speaker, the member of 
Athabasca had something to say about this, but he never did 
manage to straighten out that bunch over there. They do not 
want to trade and they don’t care. 
 
We care, Mr. Speaker. We care about the families who depend 
on trade for their living. We have been trading minerals, grains, 
potash, oil, gas, mushrooms, lentils, wild rice, and other 
products we grow in this province or dig out of the ground. 
 
I’m proud of the trading record for this government, and let me 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be even better in spite of the 
members opposite. Look at them, look at the member from 
Regina Rosemont. He hates Americans, Mr. Speaker, he hates 
them. Keep the Americans out of Saskatchewan, he says. We 
don’t want their business and we do not care. But, Mr. Speaker, 
this province depends on the trade from the United States. 
Tommy Douglas understood this; Tommy Douglas understood 
this. He understood, Mr. Speaker. I have an article from The 
Melville Advance, and it’s from 1946 — 1946, Mr. Speaker; 
Tommy Douglas telling the people, we need free trade with 
United States. Tommy Douglas knew in 1946, and the member 
from Rosemont doesn’t care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech indicates that government will 
produce measures to better equip the businesses and to compete 
internationally. And you know full well the members opposite 
will oppose those measures. They will oppose the throne speech 
and they will oppose trade, but we will not let them stop 
Saskatchewan from growing and prospering. Our children 
cannot afford the attitude of the member of Riversdale who 
thinks we just need to attack the Americans, attack the French, 
attack the Japanese, and attack the government of India. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the NDP attacking the 
possibility of a third-world country obtaining an interest in the 
potash mine, an interest that might help to assure the people to 
over-supply of fertilizer so they do not have to worry about 
food shortage? 
 
The NDP says it’s a bad deal. Well, Mr. Speaker, you cannot 
run around attacking countries and expect them to be excited 
about the idea of trading with you. 
 
They want to burn American flags, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from North Battleford, he wanted to burn the American flag. 
Well we don’t burn flags over here, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t 
boo the representative of other countries, and we don’t oppose 
trade and investment from third-world countries. We will 
continue trade and investment from around the world, and I am 
proud, I am proud of that fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to get into a subject, a subject that’s been a 
sore spot in this House. And I don’t want to go into details 
because the member of Rosthern did it quite well last week. But 
I want to make one thing clear. The fellow who was involved 
with the foreclosure, and he was introduced in the gallery, is a 
member of my constituency. He’s a farmer. I knew him for 
about 15 years. He’s well respected, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
tell  

you that the member of . . . Allan Gaudet, that he started to get 
foreclosed on, foreclosed on by the Leader of the Opposition’s 
law firm, which had . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true, not true. 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — There we say it’s not true. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s two members involved. They have enough gall to say 
it’s not true. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to table a document. 
And I want to table a document, Mr. Speaker, and I have more 
copies left in case you forgot what the firm did . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think that we should just 
refrain from using that type of unparliamentary language in this 
House, in whatever context, and then we won’t have any 
problems. 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Mr. Speaker, again the member from 
Saskatoon South, he said before, as I tabled the document he 
had signed, and he said it was not true. Well, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote from a document. I quote from this document, and the 
letter-head is Mitchell, Taylor, Romanow, and Ching. And it’s 
dated July . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. There’s a 
sub-debate taking place. Let’s allow the member for Kinistino 
to make his remarks. 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that document is dated 
July 8, and again I repeat the heading of the letter. It’s Mitchell, 
Taylor, Romanow, and Ching. And it’s addressed to Allan 
Gaudet, and it’s from the Bank of Nova Scotia, and it states: 
 

This will confirm that our office acts on behalf of the Bank 
of Nova Scotia with respect to the current outstanding 
indebtedness and liabilities of the (above-mentioned man). 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s one document. 
 
The second document is dated November 3, 1984. Again the 
same headline, Mitchell Taylor Romanow (and) Ching, which 
two of them are members of this House here. And it’s addressed 
to the United oilseed producers in Lloydminster, and here 
they’re telling them they had foreclosed and seized Allan 
Gaudet’s farm. Again, it says: “This will advise that our office 
has been retained by the Bank of Nova Scotia with respect to 
the above-mentioned customer.” Oh, by the way, and it’s 
signed, “Yours truly, Mitchell Taylor Romanow (and) Ching”. 
 
Mr. Speaker there’s another document and that’s dated in ’85, 
again about the foreclosure. Here is an order, and again this 
order is prepared by Mitchell Taylor Romanow (and) Ching, 
and that’s dated on August 21, 1986, just before the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Allan Gaudet, he said he did not mind the bank 
foreclosing on him, but he said what he really . . . he really got 
upset over is the Leader of the Opposition because, he said, he 
blew out of both sides of his mouth in the same time. 
 
A day before the election, the Leader of the Opposition  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

293 
 

stood in front of the television, he said he cannot let them do it, 
he cannot let them take our small farmers and our small 
businesses, and he just was in the process of foreclosing on the 
poor fellow — foreclosing on Allan Gaudet. By the way, Allan 
Gaudet only lost five quarters of land, but his son Keith Gaudet 
was 20 years old at the time when they lost his farm; he’s now 
working for somebody else. 
 
Again this order is prepared by Mitchell Taylor Romanow and 
Ching. Finally, Mr. Speaker, finally we have the final process, a 
lease, a lease, and that’s dated . . . for 1987, oh, the 20th day of 
May, 1987. It’s a lease agreement leasing the land back to Allan 
Gaudet. Finally he made a crop sharer out of him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did not want to bring this subject up, but I got 
sick and tired of telling . . . of listening to these guys telling us 
that’s not true. And I also was sick and tired, that’s why I tabled 
the bill from the former minister of Health. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, before closing I would like to speak for a 
few moments about my constituency. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we did not have a nursing home built, and I 
challenge the member of Saskatoon South to tell me one 
nursing home he built from 1976 to 1982 — just tell me one 
nursing home you built, or one bed. 
 
We have a brand-new nursing home in the last six years, a 
brand-new nursing home in Middle Lake, a brand-new nursing 
home in Birch Hills, and we have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I know it’s getting near the end of the 
debate on the throne speech. However, I think the hon. member 
does have the floor for a few more minutes and we should 
respect that right. 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We also had 
extensions. We also had extensions in my constituency. We had 
an extension in Middle Lake, in Wakaw, and in Kinistino. 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we had enriched housing — three: 
one in St. Louis, one in Middle Lake, one in Cudworth. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s performance. What we had from the NDP 
government from 1976 to ’82, we had one liquor store in 
Wakaw. No nursing home, no hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this, I want to oppose the motion, and I 
certainly . . . I oppose the amendment, and I certainly am in 
favour of the motion of the Speech from the Throne. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
welcome the opportunity — although it will be brief, I 
understand — to enter into the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this debate on the Speech from the Throne has 
been exemplified by the member who just spoke, Mr. Speaker, 
who stood in his place and uttered nary a positive thought. This 
whole speech, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a carry-on Speech from 
the Throne from a carry-on government, resulting in carry-on 
hurting for the people  

of Saskatchewan. 
 
Did we see, did we see a statement of vision from the 
government opposite — a vision of hope and caring to provide 
hope for the people of Saskatchewan? No. What we saw was 
member after member, just like the member who just spoke, 
stand and condemn the NDP government of the 1970s. These 
folks are trapped in the past, and they’re grasping, Mr. Speaker, 
to try and deal with the present, and they are totally out of touch 
when it comes to the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — That’s been the tone of the whole debate from 
every member from the government side, Mr. Speaker: 
condemnation of the record of the New Democratic Party; some 
weak, limp-wristed defence of their own actions in government, 
and rarely a thought about the future. 
 
But what do they have to say about the future, and in the time 
. . . in the minute or two that is left, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me 
that when the Premier of Saskatchewan came to my home city 
of Moose Jaw, he said exactly what the vision of this 
government is all about — the hurting vision, the hurtful, 
harmful vision of the Government of Saskatchewan — what did 
he say? And I quote, he said, and I quote from the Saturday, 
March 4 Times-Herald: 
 

Asian entrepreneurs hoping to cash in on the Canada-U.S. 
free trade pact could be lured to Saskatchewan with 
promises of cheap land and labour, Premier Grant Devine 
said Friday. 
 

Mr. Speaker that’s . . . It’s cheap land, cheap labour . . . That’s 
the mission of the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2130) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. According to rule 
13(4): 
 

On the sixth (day) of the said days, at thirty minutes before 
the ordinary time of daily adjournment, unless the said 
debate be previously concluded, Mr. Speaker shall 
interrupt the proceedings and forthwith put every question 
necessary to dispose of the main motion. 
 

The motion that we have been debating, then, is the main 
motion proposed by the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
and seconded by the member for Yorkton, which reads as 
follows: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour, the Honourable Sylvia O. Fedoruk. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly  

  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

294 
 

thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 
Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of 
the present session. 
 

The division bells rang from 9:31 p.m. until 9:34 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Clerk and myself will be 
unable to hear the members’ response. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 35 
 
Devine   Meiklejohn 
Muller    Pickering 
Duncan   Martin 
McLeod   Toth 
Andrew   Sauder 
Berntson   Johnson 
Lane    McLaren 
Taylor    Hopfner 
Smith    Swenson 
Swan    Martens 
Muirhead  Baker 
Maxwell   Wolfe 
Schmidt   Gleim 
Hodgins   Neudorf 
Gerich    Gardner 
Hepworth  Saxinger 
Hardy    Britton 
Klein  

Nays — 20 
 
Romanow  Solomon 
Rolfes    Atkinson 
Shillington  Anguish 
Tchorzewski  Goulet 
Koskie    Hagel 
Thompson  Lyons 
Brockelbank  Lautermilch 
Mitchell   Trew 
Simard   Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky  Koenker 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my 
friend and colleague, the member for Redberry: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Redberry:  
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 84, hereby  

appoints the Committee of Finance to consider the supply 
to be granted to Her Majesty and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:39 p.m. 
 
 


