


















































June 21, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 21, 1989 
 
 

2085 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
member for Redberry, I'd like to introduce a class of 14 
students, grades 7 and 8, from Saulteaux School at Cochin. 
They're accompanied today by Len Gorgei, Rodney Gopher, 
Mary Wegner, and Johnny Night. 
 
I'll be meeting with you for pictures, and my friend here and 
seat mate, the member for Biggar, is going to come along with 
me, and we'll be joining you to have a little bit of visit and some 
refreshments. And I want all the members of the Assembly to 
join me in welcoming you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it's my extreme pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to the members of the Chamber today, a 
group of 39 grade 7 students from Caswell School in Saskatoon 
Westmount area. They're situated across from me in the east 
gallery. I know that all members will want to wish them the 
most interesting day here today. They're accompanied by 
teachers and others: Mr. Reichert, Mrs. Nichol, Mr. Tootoosis, 
Mr. Kuschner, and Ms. Stanzel. 
 
I know all members will want to wish them the best and hope 
they have an interesting and informative day in the legislature 
and a safe trip back to Saskatoon. I'll look forward to seeing 
them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
a great deal of pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and 
through you to other members of the legislature, a group of 44 
grade 6 students visiting us today from St. George School in 
Saskatoon. They are accompanied by their teachers, Cathy 
Reschney and Joan Wallace. 
 
I understand they're going to be visiting the science centre after. 
And I'm sure that they're in for a very interesting afternoon with 
the proceedings here and also at the science centre. And I would 
like to wish the students a very safe trip home and a very happy 
summer vacation. I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming the students and their teachers here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financing of Fertilizer Plant at Belle Plaine 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, I 
think, today should be to the minister in charge of Trade and 
Investment because he's been answering for the government on 
this matter. And it deals with yesterday's revelation that the 
government opposite had a financial  

commitment to the Cargill Belle Plaine fertilizer project which 
is much larger than what it has admitted to thus far to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Rather than the $175 million short-term equity investment, 
which some might say is bad enough, Cargill has confirmed that 
the exposure by your government opposite now totals $290 
million — $60 million equity, $230 million loan guarantee 
exclusively by the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is this: can the 
minister tell this House and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan why it was that he and the Premier misled the 
people of this province about the true nature of the financial 
set-up involving Cargill's deal at Belle Plaine? Why was it that 
we weren't told the truth at the outset? What are you hiding? 
What are you covering up? 
 
And while the minister is getting up to answer that question he 
might as well tell us how in the world he justifies a $290 
million sweetheart deal with one of the wealthiest corporations 
in the world while ignoring small-business people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps you would indulge 
and I'll try to respond to the hon. member's question. Cargill 
and the Government of Saskatchewan entered into a joint 
venture company called Saferco, owned 50 per cent by the 
government, 50 per cent by Cargill. The project that we 
undertook to build, or are undertaking to build, has a capital 
cost of about $350 million. 
 
Now that project is going to be paid for in the following way: 
30 per cent by way of equity and 70 per cent by way of debt. 
Now the 30 per cent equity will be contributed half by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, half by Cargill. The debt which 
will make up 70 per cent of the project will be borrowed by 
Saferco, the joint venture company, not from the government, 
but from a conventional bank, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now with regards to the financial package on the loan, there has 
been no arrangement arrived at to date for more arrangement. 
There are four options being considered. One option, Mr. 
Speaker, is a traditional bank loan; option number two would be 
a bank loan with a government guarantee; option number three 
would be sale-leaseback arrangement; option number four 
would be a convertible debenture. 
 
I think the important thing to remember is should we . . . And 
I'm certainly advising the House that one option that we were 
seriously looking at is the government guarantee arrangement. 
Mr. Speaker, the rule that was set down and agreed to by the 
Saferco board, composed again of Cargill and the Government 
of Saskatchewan, as in the event that there was to be a loan 
guarantee by government; given the fact that a part of the 
production from this fertilizer plant would be sold into the 
United States, that it must be free from countervail action 
.  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2086 
 
 

In other words that means, Mr. Speaker, any financial 
arrangement must not have with it a government subsidy. In 
order to avoid that subsidy, Mr. Speaker, should we proceed 
with a government guaranteed loan — and that decision has not 
been taken — then there will be required to be a guarantee fee 
paid by Saferco to the Government of Saskatchewan. It would 
have to be a fee of such amount, Mr. Speaker, as to suggest and 
prove to the courts, both in Canada and United States, that there 
is no government subsidy and no potential countervail action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister. And may I say that the minister's answer is absolutely 
incredible, and his explanation becomes more tortured with 
every minute that he gives it. Absolutely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on May 16, 1989, according to 
the Canadian Press broadcast news wire service, on May 16, the 
Premier, your colleague, your boss, said, and I quote as follows 
in response to a question at the press conference question: 
 

So it's $175 million each. (Devine, according to the 
transcript says) Yes, well it's half of $350 million. 
 

That's the answer. That was the exposure. And now today the 
minister says that there are four options as he's identified it. My 
question to the minister is this: is there a deal or is there not a 
deal? Because a deal implies that the financial terms, at least the 
principals of the deal, are in place. 
 
And if the financial terms and the financial principals of the 
deal are in place, you have an obligation, sir, especially in the 
light of your confusion and your cover-up, to table all of those 
details and principals in this legislature now by way of 
documentation and to be forthcoming. What in the world are 
you covering up? Why in the world do you not fess up what the 
deal is? Is it that bad for the taxpayers that you're trying to 
cover up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks 
about a press statement of May 17, 1989. And I'm reading here 
from the Leader-Post, and what the Leader-Post says, quoting 
the Premier, is: we are into a 50-50. And that is exactly what 
we're into, Mr. Speaker: 50 per cent for the province of 
Saskatchewan and 50 per cent of Cargill, Mr. Speaker. And 
that's what it is — that's what the arrangement is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we're each putting in 30 per cent — that's 15 per cent of 
the entire project will come, one from Cargill and one from the 
Government of Saskatchewan — and that is by way of equity. 
The balance of it will be borrowed from the bank, Mr. Speaker, 
by Saferco, which is owned 50-50. It is a company, not a 
partnership, Mr. Speaker, and it's going to be the company that 
borrows the money, Mr. Speaker. 

What the Premier said is it's a 50-50 joint venture deal. That's 
exactly what it is. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister. How in the world is it 50-50 on the arrangement, even 
as you've explained it, with all of its uncertainties? Cargill puts 
up $60 million, according to the newspaper reports today; you 
people put up $60 million. That's 50-50. And then there's $230 
million guaranteed by you, not by Cargill. How in the world is 
that 50-50? That means that the exposure is $290 million; your 
risk, the taxpayers' risk, amounts to $290 million. Explain that 
one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the arrangement, as I've 
indicated to the House — that's what the hon. member asks for 
— I indicated to the House, is 30 per cent of the $350 million in 
the project would come by way of equity. That means about 
$52.5 million from both the government and from Cargill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now what the hon. member suggests on a loan guarantee, let 
me go back and give you an example. On the Co-op upgrader, 
the governments of Saskatchewan and the governments of 
Canada entered into that arrangement where a loan guarantee 
was provided in excess of $600 million. There was no guarantee 
fee because we could not come to an agreement on one. Now 
that would end up as being a countervail able type thing, should 
they wish to sell the product into the United States. 
 
We must avoid any sense, Mr. Speaker, of a government 
subsidy. And this project is being put together so that it does not 
have a government subsidy to it, Mr. Speaker. That is the intent 
because we wish to sell that product into the United States. And 
it would be senseless to put a deal together that is countervail 
able, could prevent the product from being sold into the United 
States and therefore render the project uneconomical. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
Obviously . . . Look, to the Minister of Health, there's 
absolutely no doubt, given that answer, why this government 
has run up a deficit of $4 billion, because of your total 
incompetence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Look, no matter how much you obfuscate 
and no matter how much you try to cover up the reality, the 
facts are that you are exposed $290 million, either by way of 
equity or by way of loan guarantee — your loan guarantee, my 
loan guarantee, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan — $290 million. 
And the largest corporation, one of the largest corporations in 
the world is only exposed to $60 million, and you say somehow 
that's a 50-50 deal. 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2087 
 
 

How in the world is it that we've got $290 million for the 
Cargills of the world but we don't have enough money for a 
drug plan or for a dental plan or for highways or for the 
small-business people in Saskatchewan? How do you explain 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member surely 
knows the difference. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member's argument 
is, if you are to follow what he is suggesting, is that X number 
of dollars for this project are coming out of the Consolidated 
Fund. That is not in fact the case. That is not what I said, and 
that is not the deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the deal, Mr. Speaker, is exactly . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order, 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, that the 
hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition, by his question 
would suggest that all the money other than Cargill's equity is 
coming from the Consolidated Fund of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All loan guarantees . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well that's what he's indicating. That's 
what he's indicated, Mr. Speaker. That's exactly what he's 
indicated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is not in fact the case, Mr. Speaker. What they are doing 
. . . It's no different, Mr. Speaker, than if you had a joint venture 
with SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) 
where they enter into a joint venture — so much equity, the rest 
is borrowed from the bank in a conventional way, Mr. Speaker. 
That's exactly the same thing that we are doing here. 
 
It's not the first time, Mr. Speaker, not the first time that there 
has been loan guarantees or other arrangements with 
government to kick-start projects that are important for the 
people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have one more question, and 
I don't know whether to direct this to the Premier or the 
Minister of Trade and . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one more 
question to the Minister of Trade and Investment, and he 
refuses to answer this. In fact I don't think there is an answer, 
but I'll ask him in any event. How does he explain, as a matter 
of public policy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, listen to me 
for a moment and not to the Minister of Finance who tries to 
give you the answer, otherwise you'll be in a billion dollar 
jackpot rather than a $280 million jackpot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Romanow: — So my question to you or to the Premier is 
this. How in the world do you explain, as a matter of public 
policy, hitching up your government with a debt of $4 billion 
on the operating budget, with a corporation in the United States 
that has sales last year of $38 billion US? 
 
If we could use that money that you're guaranteeing or exposing 
in one form or another, you could give $3 million, roughly, to 
approximately a hundred rural communities for small-business 
development, without any obligations, and provide more jobs. 
 
What in the world is the rationalization for doing that and 
turning down all the small communities who had the hopes and 
the prospects of going ahead in Rosetown and Melfort and 
Tisdale and Yorkton, Melville, but because of your 
government's incompetence, now has that deal changed. How 
do you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member, the 
Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition, the NDP government when they were in power, 
gave low interest loans to the Cornwall Centre. No problem 
with that — nine and three-quarters when there was 20 per cent 
interest rates. They give . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. We're having 
difficulty hearing the Minister of Justice. I would ask the hon. 
members to allow the minister to continue without interference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, it was okay for them to go 
into the Cornwall Centre mortgage at something 10 per cent 
below the rate of interest, to buy Nabu corporation that proved 
to be a flop, to put money into Prairie Malt at low interest, Mr. 
Speaker, to go into Ipsco with low interest, and that was in fact 
done. 
 
But if we are to do a deal, Mr. Speaker, with the Weyerhaeuser, 
or with the Co-op upgrader, or with the operation in North 
Battleford or in Swift Current, somehow there's something 
wrong with it, Mr. Speaker. Every time a deal has been put 
forward where there is new activity, where there is new jobs, 
where there is new economic diversification, the hon. members 
stand against it, Mr. Speaker. They stand against it unless it is 
100 per cent owned by the government, and then they're against 
that, as the case in Rafferty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite are against it simply for the simple 
reason, Mr. Speaker, is that the members on this side of the 
House, the Government of Saskatchewan, is doing it. And that's 
why they're against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Trade and Investment. Mr. Minister, you and the Deputy 
Premier and the Premier are becoming widely known as the 
ministers responsible for sweetheart deals. In your rush to cook 
up this sweetheart deal for Cargill, you have done a disservice 
to, and in fact you've betrayed  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2088 
 
 

the communities of Rosetown, Tisdale, Melfort, Yorkton and 
Melville. 
 
You told this House that the reason you picked Cargill over 
Canadian “88” energy project is that the smaller operation was 
looking for a subsidization of interest rates — the same 
subsidization you offered Weyerhaeuser. You clearly implied 
there was something odious about a company asking for a 
subsidized loan. 
 
My question, Minister, is this. Can you explain how it is more 
financially prudent to guarantee in full a $230 million loan, plus 
pay $60 million in cash up front, than it is to subsidize the 
interest rate for a $10 million loan. And what evidence, other 
than your assurances which have so far proven worthless in this 
deal, can you give that the debt owed by the Cargill plants will 
be paid off at the going rates, at the going bank rates, and not at 
a rate subsidized by your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises the 
question of Weyerhaeuser. And I remember Weyerhaeuser very 
well, Mr. Speaker, prior to the last election. And what the hon. 
member said is, number one, Weyerhaeuser would never pay a 
red penny to the government of Saskatchewan, one; number 
two, Weyerhaeuser would never build a paper plant, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser did in fact build a paper 
plant. It's in production in Prince Albert. It's employing 
hundreds of people. It is producing paper, Mr. Speaker. And 
number two, they are paying back the Government of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is exactly what has happened, and that's why I say to the 
members opposite, you're always against the project because it 
comes from this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. That is your 
rationale in every one of these deals. Don't do it, don't support it 
because it's being done and promoted by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me the hon. members should look if 
they are genuinely interested in diversifying this economy, in 
creating jobs for the people of Saskatchewan, in creating more 
economic activity, that they would support some of these . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, the opposition is only against your 
mismanagement and your incompetence and your costly 
sweetheart deals to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — If this project goes over budget and ends up 
costing more than $350 million, we want to know who's going 
to pick up the extra costs. Will we cost-share it, will Cargill 
pay, or will it simply be tacked on to the debt that the people of 
Saskatchewan are, according to you, ready to stand good for? 
Who will pick up the cost overruns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, why is it — and I say this 
to the hon. members — why is it that they were against Co-op 
upgrader being here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well they 
were. Why was it that they were against the Husky project . . . 
(inaudible) . . . where we made a very large equity investment. 
Mr. Speaker, number three, why were they against the 
Weyerhaeuser project, where it was a venture where we sold it 
off? 
 
Why are they against Rafferty, which is 100 per cent owned by 
the government? Mr. Speaker, they against it if it's 100 per cent 
free enterprise; they're against it if it's a mixed joint venture 
with government and free enterprise; and they're against it if it's 
altogether 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
If the project loses money, Minister, during its operations — 
not during the budget start-up and the cost overruns, but if the 
corporation loses money during its operations, will the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan be making up the difference, and if 
so, what is our proportion and what further liabilities will the 
taxpayers be responsible for if this doesn't fly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 
perfectly aware of, what if we lose money. Mr. Speaker, they 
have a fair degree of experience on going into ventures that will 
lose money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is it that they always take such a negative view on 
everything that is done. They say, oh but this is going to be a 
failure; oh but this is going to lose money; oh but this will never 
be built, or doom and gloom. How do you build a province? 
How do you diversify an economy with an attitude of doom and 
gloom? It's going to fail regardless of what, Mr. Speaker. That 
attitude never built anything, Mr. Speaker, and that attitude will 
never build anything in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question to the minister. Our concern, 
Minister, is that with you and your government running it, it 
may just well fail. That's the problem. It will fail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — This is a very strange and unusual situation 
. . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
strange and unusual way to do business — strike a deal, then 
make an announcement, and then work out the financial details 
later. Why were the financial arrangements not done before you 
announced the deal? You're flying on the seat of your pants on 
this one, Minister. Is there a final deal as yet, and what will it 
cost the taxpayers in the end? That's what we want to know. 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2089 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this project in the end will 
cost the taxpayers not 1 red cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This project, Mr. Speaker, will 
contribute to this province. This project, Mr. Speaker, is going 
to provide fertilizer to the farmers of Saskatchewan and 
northern United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this project is going to use 
natural gas that we have here in the province of Saskatchewan 
to make fertilizer. It's going to create jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It's going to create tax revenue. It's 
going to diversify the economy, Mr. Speaker. And that's how 
you build this province, Mr. Speaker, not with a negative gloom 
and doom as the members opposite are so . . . always trying to 
put forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Trade and Investment. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I'd just like to ask the 
hon. members to allow the questions and the answers to go 
forth, and perhaps tone down your interference so that we can 
proceed in a more orderly manner. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. I have a new question for the Minister of 
Trade and Investment, and I see that he has gotten his notes; 
he's brought his music sheet along from the Minister of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Kelvington wants to know why it is we won't play ball with the 
Progressive Conservatives opposite. We will play ball, except 
we've knocked so many home runs off them this session, there's 
no contest left to play. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Speaker, I didn't think they'd give 
us another pitch on this Saferco deal which would allow us to 
knock another political home run, but they have. 
 
My question to the minister opposite is this. I simply . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order. I think . . . 
Let's just settle down. Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I . . .  

The Speaker: — Order. I'm going to ask the Minister of 
Finance to allow the question to go forth. And the member for 
Quill Lakes, I'm going to ask him also to allow the question to 
go forward. Now the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We haven't been entertained by the Minister 
of Finance's rather witty interjections in this legislature lately, 
witty interjections which amount to a 10 decibel yell across the 
floor, but we're enjoying it today. 
 
My question to the Minister of Trade and Investment is this. 
You have a major financial commitment which apparently is 
unnegotiated yet in its final details, according to all of the 
answers you give today, which I find absolutely incredible, and 
announced by a Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, 
which makes it doubly incredible. A Premier who makes the 
announcement and tells the details, and one month later has the 
rug pulled from underneath him by you and the Cargill people 
— you're not able to tell the deals. That is absolutely 
unbelievable. 
 
But my question is, whatever the financial arrangement is, why 
in the world do you turn your back on a project which would 
have three possible different locations in Rosetown, 
Melfort-Tisdale, or in Yorkton-Melville? Why is it that you turn 
your back on that one with limited provincial government 
money — it's rural diversification, it's economic diversification. 
Why do you turn your back on the people in the small towns, 
and the small-business people there, and pump the money, $290 
million worth, for Cargill? What is your explanation for that 
stupid policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we look at a variety of 
projects that come forward to review, to look at, as to whether 
we should proceed forward or not, Mr. Speaker. The analysis of 
these two projects was by professional people in CMB (Crown 
Management Board), was that the Cargill project was far 
superior to the energy “88” project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the reality of the analysis, Mr. Speaker. To 
the members opposite I only say once again, Mr. Speaker, they 
should at least give us credit for even one project that we do, 
Mr. Speaker, and we've done many, Mr. Speaker. We should 
ask for at least credit for one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member from Regina 
Elphinstone says, which one, Mr. Speaker. I will go over a large 
list of ones that he could review, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2090 
 
 

Referral of Bill to Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, 
I would like to move the following motion, seconded by my 
colleague, the Minister of Urban Affairs, the member for 
Regina South. I'd like to move: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 33, An Act to 
amend The Regional Parks Act, 1979, be discharged, and 
the said Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 
of the day I would like to rise to advise all members of this 
Assembly, and I would ask leave to pay tribute to a truly 
distinguished Saskatchewan resident, Mr. Mederic McDougall, 
who passed away recently. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Mederic McDougall, a 
truly distinguished resident of Saskatchewan, a long-time 
resident of St. Louis, passed away recently. Throughout his life 
Mr. McDougall dedicated his energies to the service of his 
church, his community, and his people, the Metis and 
non-status Indians of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1986, Mr. Speaker, his distinguished career of service to the 
people of his community, to Saskatchewan, and our nation, was 
formally acknowledged when he was awarded the Order of 
Canada by the Governor General. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that all members of this Assembly will 
join with me today in extending our deepest sympathy to his 
family. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I would like to ask the minister a specific question 
about the funding that is being made available to the three 
theological colleges that are associated with the University of 
Saskatchewan campus. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can provide us with the details of 
the budget for each of these colleges for the current fiscal year 
in contrast to the previous fiscal year.  

Could you do that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'm advised that the colleges that you 
refer to received the same amount this year as they did last year. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I'd be grateful if you could send 
me the details of the funding on each college. 
 
And the question I want to ask you at this point is: why is it that 
at a time when the University of Saskatchewan is receiving a 
budget increase in the range of about 2 per cent, just under 2 per 
cent in your estimates, and also of course is, in addition to that, 
able to take advantage of the special fund that you have 
established, which I think in general will mean about a six and a 
half per cent increase for the University of Saskatchewan, why 
is it that at the time when that increase was taking place, the 
three theological colleges on the campus are receiving a zero 
increase in funds for, I take it, now the third year in a row? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think that either you were confused 
or I was confused in my response relative to who got what, and 
so maybe I'll try and clear that up for you. 
 
The affiliated colleges, that is to say those that are off campus, 
received no increase. The federated colleges received a 2 per 
cent increase. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, it's the affiliated colleges 
that I'm talking about. And my question to you is this: on what 
basis did you decide that while the University of Saskatchewan 
got, I might add, a desperately needed infusion of funds from 
your government, you chose on the other hand to provide the 
affiliated colleges with not a penny extra in budget, after their 
budgets have now been very tight over the two previous fiscal 
years. On what basis, Mr. Minister, did you decide that these 
colleges deserve no increase while the University of 
Saskatchewan did get an increase? Can you explain that to me 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Certainly, I can see why the hon. 
member would raise the point that . . . and the question as to, 
why not as well provide some additional funding for those . . . 
the important role that these affiliated colleges play, and we are 
not insensitive to that. But I guess the larger sensitivity for us, 
and one that had been impressed particularly upon us, was the 
situation at the university as a whole with its broader 
obligations, if you like, and society's higher expectations, and 
that was an overriding factor in our minds, number one. 
 
And secondly, as well, as you will know, the affiliated colleges 
do have opportunities to raise revenues or other sources of 
revenues from their parent church bodies, and that has always 
been the case, and who can be there to provide that stabilizing 
influence as well. So it's not a matter of trying to pick on them. 
It's a matter of us trying to address the broader obligations that 
we feel the university has and that we have to them. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just don't think that's a 
satisfactory explanation. Surely there ought to be some kind of 
equity with respect to the way in which you  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2091 
 
 

handle funding for post-secondary education. I think this is just 
another little example, Mr. Minister, of the unfairness with 
which you've approached the situation. 
 
You know full well, Mr. Minister, that the affiliated colleges, 
the theological colleges have been hard pressed with respect to 
their funding, just like the rest of the university campus has, Mr. 
Minister, and I think that all you've chosen to do is in effect 
discriminate against them, Mr. Minister. And I'm asking you 
here today to change that policy and to put into place in the 
budget at least a 2 per cent increase for those affiliated colleges. 
 
Now will you do that, sir, this afternoon? Will you revise your 
budget to ensure that those affiliated colleges get the same kind 
of treatment that the rest of the University of Saskatchewan 
campus received? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think the hon. member is doing 
a bit of grandstanding. He knows full well that we don't revise 
budgets here in the middle of June. 
 
I've given him my reasons. I've suggested that we weren't trying 
to be unfair and unnecessarily pick on anyone or penalize 
anyone. We felt we had broader obligations at the universities 
as a whole because of their broader obligations. And number 
two is that these affiliated colleges do have opportunity for 
outside revenue. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, frankly I don't think that 
the opportunities that the affiliated colleges have for outside 
revenue is any different than the opportunities that the 
University of Saskatchewan, as a whole, has for outside revenue 
through contributions from alumni, through various corporate 
contributions that the University of Saskatchewan has gone to a 
great deal of trouble to raise. 
 
And I fail to see the distinction that you make, sir, and therefore 
I ask you again: on what other criteria did you base your 
decision to place another freeze for yet a third year on the 
affiliated colleges? Provide me with an explanation of that this 
afternoon, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If I could just review what our 
approach has been here. We recognize particularly that our 
universities face some major challenges. We wanted to respond 
to them just as we have in the past. We identified that . . . This 
government identified that as a particular priority. 
 
And while many areas in government may have had to do the 
same and more with no additional funds — and included in that 
group, affiliated colleges — we tried to respond rather 
generously, given the current economic situation, to the 
universities. And that's why we put in place the special $10 
million enhancement fund that speaks to the priority that we 
feel post-secondary education has. 
 
In your mind, you I guess feel that somehow somebody has 
been penalized because of it. And I guess all I can do is that 
maybe you and I will have to . . . albeit I'm sensitive to your 
arguments, I think all we're trying to say here is the  

larger priority was our larger obligation to the university. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, one other question to you, and 
that is with respect to the funding crisis that the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina still face despite 
your budget, sir. 
 
When the full impact of your budget is taken into account on 
the University of Saskatchewan campus, in effect the University 
of Saskatchewan campus is getting a budget increase of a little 
over 6 per cent, sir. Now that budget increase comes after two 
previous extremely difficult years at the U of S campus. 
 
And basically, Mr. Minister, all that that six and a half per cent 
increase constitutes is a stand-pat situation at the university. If 
the budget increase had not been in the range of six and a half 
per cent, Mr. Minister, there would have had to be, as you well 
know, more deep cuts in programming at the University of 
Saskatchewan campus. All that your budget has done this year, 
sir, is prevented the crisis in funding from getting any worse 
than it already was in the previous fiscal year. 
 
So in other words, Mr. Minister, the issues that my colleague 
the member for Saskatoon South has raised earlier with respect 
to accessibility, have not been alleviated at all. And the 
problems that you will be well aware of with respect to the 
decline in the quality of education at the University of 
Saskatchewan campus have not been alleviated by this budget 
either, Mr. Minister. This is simply a stand-pat budget in 
comparison with the previous fiscal year. 
 
And you well know, Mr. Minister, that in 1988 and again in 
1989 there is a very serious crisis at the University of 
Saskatchewan with respect to funding, with respect to the 
ability to deliver quality education on the campus. We suffer, 
Mr. Minister, from overcrowded class-rooms. We suffer, Mr. 
Minister, from a situation in which there are, particularly in the 
arts and science field, there is a serious lack of resources, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And my question to you is, when are we going to see a budget 
for the University of Saskatchewan campus that will allow the 
University of Saskatchewan to improve the quality of education 
on the campus, instead of seeing a steady erosion in the quality 
of education on the campus as we have seen since your 
government was elected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the only ones who are 
using words like financial crisis at universities after the budget 
was delivered, is the opposition members who are trying to do a 
little grandstanding and politicking. And I understand that; 
that's part of the reality of this business. 
 
But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, and the universities are 
appreciative of it, that during not exactly buoyant economic 
times, this government, this Minister of Finance, this Premier, 
recognizes the importance of continuing to have a strong 
university sector in this province. That is why there was a $10 
million enhancement fund set up, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Your colleague, the member from Saskatoon South, 
   



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2092 
 
 

himself said, what we were looking for was about a 7 per cent 
increase for the universities — 7 per cent, exactly how he was 
quoted in the newspaper, Mr. Chairman. We delivered a 7 per 
cent budget. That's what your own colleague and the critic for 
post-secondary education said — that's what the universities 
needed. And that's what we delivered, and we won't stop 
delivering. 
 
And this is the government as well, Mr. Chairman, that 
delivered a new agricultural sciences college on that campus, 
after years and years of neglect by the NDP when they were in 
government. 
 
This is the same opposition that . . . or this is the same 
government, Mr. Chairman, that's delivered some of the best 
student aid programs to make sure that young people are 
enrolled in those colleges on those two universities, Mr. 
Chairman. We have not forsaken these students in the past; we 
will not forsake them in the future. 
 
And you, sir, are the only one who is using words like financial 
crisis to describe this budget relative to universities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I have 
two or three questions for the minister . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — On superannuation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, it's not on superannuation. I'm 
interested in young people who are being betrayed by the 
policies of your government. They're not ready for 
superannuation yet. 
 
Mr. Minister, the only thing that I can think of that's worse than 
denying students an opportunity for education is pretending that 
they're getting one, making them get tied up with extensive 
financial commitments by student loans and whatever other 
financing they might do, and then finding out that the courses 
they have taken are not worth anything in the market-place and 
are not recognized by the employers. And such is the case, Mr. 
Minister, that it's existing in Saskatchewan today because of 
your drive to even privatize some of the education system. 
 
Mr. Minister, one such example. There are courses that are 
being delivered by CompuCollege in Saskatchewan. I have had 
numerous contacts by students who have taken courses at 
CompuCollege and then have gone out and tried to apply for 
jobs and have been told by employers that those courses 
provided by CompuCollege are not recognized. A number of 
employers have said that they didn't even know what 
CompuCollege was. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware of these problems that many 
students are facing in Saskatchewan? Are you aware of them, 
and what are you or your department doing to deal with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to CompuCollege, and you 
can correct me if I'm wrong, our best understanding that 
officials have is that the concerns that we've had raised — and 
they probably go back a year and more ago — relative to 
CompuCollege was relative to one particular course, the travel 
consultants. And if that's the  

ones that you're raising and asking what has been done about 
that, I'm also advised, and I think I made this point last year, 
that there was a bit of a problem across the country with that. 
 
The industry maybe had to share some of the blame there in 
terms of not clearly spelling out what it was that they wanted. 
But rather than getting into finger-pointing, suffice it to say that 
everybody's been engaged to define what this job should look 
like. There's been some fruitful discussions. The appropriate 
changes have been made, and hopefully those young people 
who graduate from there will find work in the travel industry. I 
think the program has been customized as much as can be done 
to suit the needs of those employers. 
 
If that's the one you're referring to, that's the issue that we've 
had raised with us there. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that's not the one I'm 
referring to. And I'll get back to the one I'm referring to, and 
there are a number like that. And I'm really quite shocked that 
you would not be aware of them and that your officials would 
not have been aware of them because those complaints have 
been going to the department from these students. 
 
Mr. Minister, you now recognize, going back to your travel 
consultants' course, you now recognize that there has been a 
problem. Mr. Minister, during the time when there was a 
problem, many students took the course, borrowed money to 
take the course, paid atrocious tuition fees in order to be able to 
take the course, ended up with having nothing that was 
recognized by anyone from the point of view of a certificate. 
 
What steps have you taken, Mr. Minister, to assist those 
students who were misled by being told that the course was 
going to be recognized and that it was worth something? — 
misled because they felt that the Government of Saskatchewan, 
which obviously licensed this private educational institution, 
would have licensed them only if they were sure that the 
courses they were offering were legitimate courses. What steps 
have you taken to assist those students who got caught because 
of your neglect, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, I don't 
think the hon. member would expect that we can go around 
providing guarantees of employment for young people no 
matter what course they graduate from, whether it's public or 
private. 
 
Secondly, I think for him to use the word “misleading” may be 
overstating the case by some fair measure. What we attempt to 
do is just as I outlined in my earlier answer. Where we see 
concerns raised, where we see an issue, we investigate, we look 
to assist, in fact, oftentimes play a lead role in rectifying the 
problem. And we've done that in the past and we'll continue to 
do that in the future. 
 
As he may well appreciate, predicting labour market future 
demand is at best a grey art. I wish we could be more precise 
sometimes and provide that information in a most perfect form 
possible to high school students who look to vocations and 
careers. 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2093 
 
 

But you know, when you look at the fact, Mr. Chairman, that 
. . . and some have said, some have speculated that 90 per cent 
of all the jobs in the future are going to exist in professions that 
today, or in companies today that don't even exist. You can see 
how difficult that can be. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that's a nice attempt to 
dodge the question, but the issue here is not the labour market. 
The issue here is not the availability of jobs. The issue here falls 
squarely on your shoulders. The issue is the quality and the 
standard of the courses offered; the quality of the standard 
which you, as Minister of Education, have to approve before a 
private vocational school can operate in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, your department — you therefore are 
responsible — provides to these students student loans, which 
they then have to repay after taking some of these courses 
which have proven to be inadequate, Mr. Minister. Clearly the 
evidence . . . This has got nothing to do with the availability of 
jobs. It's got everything to do with your neglect in how you 
have licensed these vocational institutions without first assuring 
yourself that the courses they offered are adequate courses and 
will be recognized by anybody in the market-place because, Mr. 
Minister, appropriate steps weren't taken to make sure that the 
courses were legitimate courses. The responsibility has to be 
yours. 
 
I ask you again, what are you prepared to do to those students, 
through no fault of their own, who got caught and took those 
courses and now find that those courses are not useful for 
anything because there isn't an employer in North America who 
will recognize them? What are you going to do for those 
students who now have those loans — some student loans 
through your department, some loans that have been taken out 
through the bank — and are forced into a situation where they 
have to pay to them back, but are not able to find a job in that 
field because their course is not being recognized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said in last night's 
examination of the estimates, any time we have issues or 
concerns raised with us or ourselves, based on our inspections, 
have some sense that courses are off the mark, our officials 
move to do what they can to correct and work with the college 
to provide the best curricula with the best faculty possible. And 
if such isn't forthcoming, regulations do have some teeth; there's 
provision for refunds and so forth. 
 
As it relates to the travel industry, as I said earlier, it has been a 
bit of a national problem. And I think it would be somewhat 
unfair to characterize the colleges as totally at fault here and say 
that they merely had bad courses, when in fact there is some 
suggestion as well that the industry itself maybe hadn't defined 
exactly what they wanted. That wasn't a problem just in 
Saskatchewan, but as the hon. member himself said, an issue 
across North America. And I think that by sitting down with the 
industry and the colleges and our self, we've been able to come 
to some resolution on that. 

The second point I would make is, recognizing that perhaps the 
regulatory framework needed to be updated, a year ago we set 
in place a committee to look at the whole question of the 
regulation of private vocational schools. They have a broad 
mandate, they're well into their work, and I expect a report back 
from them early this fall. So we haven't been sitting on our 
hands, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And the final point I would make is that the colleges themselves 
have no wish, no desire to turn out graduates who do not get 
jobs because that's what brings their future clients either back 
into the door or not back to the door. And the good, 
long-standing, highly-regarded colleges in this province — and 
as the hon. member from Saskatoon South said last night, there 
are many of them — they don't want their reputations damaged 
by others who do not subscribe to the same standards. 
 
I think that's an issue that we all want to see addressed; they 
want to see it addressed. And we've taken appropriate steps to 
address it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Exactly the point, Mr. Minister. The 
good and reputable colleges do not want their reputations 
damaged by these kinds of situations — the good and reputable 
colleges. The fact of the matter is that under your administration 
the licences that you have issued have not always been issued to 
good and reputable colleges, and so as a result, Mr. Minister, 
there are a lot of young people who are getting caught simply 
because there are people around in the private education 
business who are there simply to make themselves a profit and 
not to provide a quality education. 
 
It's not good enough, Mr. Minister, to say, oh well, you know, 
some of those students got caught and they will continue to get 
caught, and when we find out there is a problem we'll make the 
colleges change them, and then say, but sorry, all you young 
people who got caught, that's your problem. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, don't you check the courses offered in 
advance to determine whether they are legitimate courses and to 
determine whether they meet a certain minimum standard? 
Don't you check them in advance? Or do you wait until there's a 
problem and then you deal with it? What's the procedure, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The additional points I could perhaps 
provide the hon. member with is that the department, before any 
course is approved, the college must get at least three employers 
to say that they will hire these students, so that there is some 
sense of a job market out there. 
 
As I mentioned last night as well, we have an “instructor 
certification process” that is in place. And in fact when 
concerns are raised, my observation would be that the officials 
in the department investigate them and investigate them 
aggressively on behalf of the students or whomever raises them. 
 
And to reiterate again, if there's some better regulatory 
framework that needs to be put in place, then perhaps that will 
be forthcoming when I receive the recommendations  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2094 
 
 

from the committee I've put in place over this past year, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if you go out and try to 
seek out three employers who will say that they will hire the 
students, what in Heaven's name went wrong with your tourist 
consultant program, travel consultant program? What happened 
to those employers, Mr. Minister? Are you just simply saying 
this in order to try to bail yourself out here, or is that in fact the 
process that's used? What was the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the issue you raise, as I said, was 
one that concerned us. You rightfully ask, what have we done 
about it. What we did about it is we recognized that the industry 
hadn't probably defined as well as they should have what it was 
they expected; hence, the course material wasn't maybe 
providing the students with what the employers wanted. Maybe 
a bit of fault on both sides. We got everybody in a room 
together, defined what it is, and I think that one is behind us. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — But unfortunately, Mr. Minister, the 
students who got caught and are now having to shoulder some 
considerable debt, it's not behind them. It's not behind them. 
They are faced with the problem, and you still haven't addressed 
the question about what you are prepared to do to correct the 
mistake which you made. And you may want to share it with 
the industry — I don't accept that. In the ultimate end, you are 
responsible; you are the one who signs the certificate which 
gives the licence. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I said I would give you another example, and 
I have had a number of students who have contacted me, who 
complained about a nine-month course which has a tuition fee 
of $6,000. Now you want to have an example of what is a 
rip-off in the education system, this is an example. A private 
college providing a nine-month course, charging a tuition fee of 
$6,000 for a course that deals with business administration, 
accounting, and computers — a double diploma course. 
Students who have taken this course and have graduated are 
being told by employers that that course is not being 
recognized. Now I shouldn't have to stand in the House and tell 
you about this, Mr. Minister. If you're doing your job, you will 
know about the problem. 
 
This one particular student — I'll give you one example only — 
has a student loan of $13,000, is unable to use this certificate 
because employers won't hire the student. The student says that 
in the accounting portion of the class, in that nine-month period 
— if the minister would listen — in the accounting portion of 
the class, Mr. Minister, during the nine-month period there were 
six different accounting teachers. Now anybody who knows 
anything about education will know that that kind of 
inconsistency is not exactly bringing about any kind of a quality 
education. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware of this problem, or have you waited 
for somebody to tell you in this House so you can deal with it in 
the same way as it took you three years to deal with the travel 
consultant problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm a little  

unclear exactly what is the problem. Is it that the $6,000, the 
tuition, is too high? I don't understand what the concern was 
there. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It's really quite atrocious that the minister 
would be so flippant about a serious case as this. Here we have 
young people, those who have not been turned away from a 
technical school or a university, because hundreds of them 
have, going into a course which they believe to be a legitimate 
course because the Government of Saskatchewan has licensed 
it; pay a tuition fee of $6,000 for the course. That itself is 
atrocious, $6,000 tuition fee. But that's not the question. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister, is that after having paid that kind of 
a tuition fee, after having been saddled with a student loan of 
$13,000, the students go out and seek a job in the field for 
which they are supposedly trained, and employers are saying, 
sorry we don't recognize that course. 
 
Once again, Mr. Minister, are you aware of the fact that this 
course in business administration, accounting, and computers, 
many employers are not recognizing it, and students are once 
again being saddled with this expense, something which you're 
not prepared to help them with, even though you licensed the 
courses in the first place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I would ask, perhaps, if the 
member has a specific case here relative to this course at 
whatever college, perhaps he could provide it to me and I could 
forward it to my officials and I would have them investigate it, 
because we don't have a particular concern there that we can 
glean from your commentary that would provide me to be more 
forthcoming in my answer, quite frankly. 
 
I guess I would just want to put this whole private vocational 
school situation in perspective, Mr. Chairman, because one 
could think that there's several thousand students that have been 
victimized out there by the private vocational college sector. 
 
And the two points I would want to make. Yes, there are from 
time to time concerns which we pursue. But number two, many, 
many colleges have a long-standing history and have turned out 
high quality graduates who do get high quality jobs. 
 
Yes, the tuition fees are higher because, unlike a university, 
there is not an 85 or 95 per cent subsidy from the taxpayers of 
the province. And to put it in perspective, of the 5,000 young 
people who were enrolled in these colleges last year, we had 
approximately . . . something less than 100 complaints. Now if 
you are one of those students who has been hurt, at least in your 
mind hurt, then statistics are cold comfort. But certainly I'd like 
to keep this all in perspective for the hon. member, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I had not intended to pursue this 
area any longer because there are many other areas that I want 
to pursue, but I think it'll take a lot longer than I had anticipated. 
 
I am somewhat amazed, Mr. Minister, that you take this  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2095 
 
 

thing so lightly. At least it seemed like you . . . but, so what? So 
a hundred students got rooked, so a hundred students got took 
— so what? Out of 5,000. What are the members opposite 
concerned about? 
 
I was surprised that the member for Regina North East . . . I 
hadn't even talked about the problem. He said he wanted to get 
in and address the problem. I didn't know what the problem 
was. He addresses the same problem that last night the member 
from Saskatoon Westmount brought to my attention. The same 
problem that others on this side have brought to my attention, 
and I know they brought to your department's attention. 
 
And I am really amazed at your attitude this afternoon. You 
seemed to be more sincere last night than you are today. And 
maybe you got up on the wrong side of the bed this morning 
 
(1515) 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Minister, you are the final one who must 
accept responsibility — don't lay it on the industry. Don't lay it 
on people out there. You are the minister. You are the one that 
licensed that. And if you have people in your department who 
don't understand a curricula when they look at one, whether it's 
a good one or a bad one, then, Mr. Minister, you'd better hire 
yourself some people who understand. 
 
But I don't believe that. I don't believe that that's the case. I 
think you are about as flippant with the problems that you get 
from private schools as your answers are to us today. 
 
I had a number of them last night, and I didn't want to mention 
the various colleges or the various private schools, but, Mr. 
Minister, by setting up a committee you have not resolved the 
problem, as I indicated to you last night, because some of the 
people that you have appointed to the committee are from the 
private schools who are causing the problem. And they're not 
going to recommend, they're certainly not going to recommend 
that you tighten up your regulations in regards to private 
vocational schools. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think if you haven't taken any steps in the last 
little while as the problems have come to your office . . . and I 
know because I have phoned your department on several 
occasions on problems that have come to my MLA office. Now 
I know if I phoned you personally, yes, I will admit I do get 
results, I do get results, and I'll give you that credit. But, Mr. 
Minister, there are lots of others who don't get the same results. 
 
And if you are approving student loans today, if you are 
approving student loans today for those colleges . . . pardon me, 
those private schools that are the problem, then you are not 
taking care of the problem. You are simply doing exactly what 
the member from Regina North East had indicated. You are 
helping to take these students to the cleaners. And many of 
them find themselves in huge debts — 5 or $6,000 tuition fees 
are not the exception for these private schools, they are the 
standard in many instances. 

I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, as I brought to your attention 
last night, that some of these private schools have now extended 
their courses, have drawn them out, but the course remains the 
same; the hours don't change, but they have extended them over 
a longer period of time so they can qualify for . . . so that 
students who take these courses can qualify for the student loan. 
But the quality and the standard of the courses is atrocious. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Minister, it's time that you addressed this 
problem seriously. And before you go out and accuse us of 
blaming all the private schools, I want to make it very clear, as I 
did last night, that there are a number of good ones and they 
should not take the blame because the minister refuses to accept 
his responsibility when he licensed those irreputable private 
schools that have come on stream. 
 
And I'm going to leave it at that. But I did ask you some 
questions last night, Mr. Minister, as far as student loans were 
concerned as they pertain to private schools. I wonder if you 
have that information. I had asked you, Mr. Minister, several 
questions. Just to refresh your memory I had asked: how many 
loans had been approved to private schools; number two, of the 
applications that you received, what percentage were approved; 
number four, can you tell me what the total costs, the total loans 
were; and, number five, what was the default of those loans? 
Have you got that information and can you send it across to us 
today? 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not have it in writing? I asked the question 
last night. I'd appreciate if you'd send it across. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well last night I told you that we — at 
least our understanding was that we didn't traditionally or 
historically have it by college or by institution across the 
province. We will continue to endeavour to pull that together 
for you. Your request is a fairly large one and it will be done 
manually. 
 
Specifically as it relates to Bridge City there is, and I think I 
mentioned this to you last night, an audit under way there. I'm 
advised that it will take some days to complete, and so I 
couldn't give you some of that information even if I wished, 
relative to the defaults and that kind of thing, because that's all 
part of the audit, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — That's all the information you have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well it doesn't make any difference, Mr. 
Minister. You can give it to us next week. Because if that's the 
attitude you have, then we're going to just simply continue until 
we get some of those. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to continue then. I've also asked you to 
give me the process. I want to know, and this surely you can 
give me . . .  
 
But before I go to that, Mr. Minister, there's one other question I 
wanted to ask. Do you know how many of those students . . . 
first of all, how many students, when they received loans, also 
received bursaries? — the ones to the private schools. I want to 
know. I also want to know  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2096 
 
 

the amount, the total amount of the bursaries that those students 
received . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Ah, you do. 
 
A Member: — Forgivable loans. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — That's forgivable . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, okay. Forgivable loans. That's fine. Forgivable loans. 
 
I heard the Minister of . . . see, you change the definition so 
often. I heard the Minister of Economic Development the other 
day now say that if you have a subsidized loan, that is now 
considered a grant. And I have some more questions I want to 
ask the Minister of Finance when we get to his estimates, on 
that, because that will be very interesting. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you got that information for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I'm going to have to 
take notice on that question as well, because that one requires a 
fair bit of investigation, as you can appreciate. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, just to make certain that you 
understand what I am saying. I want the number of students 
who asked for loans who also received the forgivable portion of 
that loan. Secondly, I want the percentage of students who 
asked for loans who also received the forgivable portion of it, 
and the defaults. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, just to be very precise about 
what it is we're looking for . . . Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Minister, we want to know how much of the 
total non-forgivable loan money in the province is going to 
students in private vocational schools. That's what we want to 
know, Mr. Minister. You have a total budget for non-forgivable 
loans. We want to know how much of that budget is going to 
private vocational school students and how many private 
vocational school students are getting that money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I understand the question. We'll 
have it in black and white for us when we get the Hansard, and 
I'll endeavour to provide you as much detail as we can, knowing 
full well that, as I understand, our computer doesn't spit it out 
that way. But we'll see what we can do for you, and we'll see 
what we can do for you as expeditiously as possible. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, there's one further question that 
I'd like to direct to you, and it's in regards to welfare recipients. 
I'm not sure whether you have or you keep records of how 
many people who are on welfare who also receive student loans 
in applying for courses at private schools. Do you have that 
record? Would you be able to tell me how many there are who 
have applied for student loans, received student loans, and who 
have taken courses at private vocational schools? 
 
If you don't have it, I want to . . . Well, Mr. Minister, while they 
are looking that up, the reason I'm asking that question is 
because there have been some complaints. Again, the member 
for Regina North East indicated that many of the students take 
these courses, then of course there are no jobs available. 

And what is happening now to the welfare recipients is this. 
They get a student loan; they take the course; there is no job 
available. They then go and reapply for welfare, and the welfare 
department says, sorry, but you are not eligible for welfare right 
now because the student loan was more than you would have 
received on welfare. But the student doesn't have the student 
loan any more; that went to the private vocational school. So 
they're sitting there now, no job, they're in debt, and they can't 
get welfare. But who benefitted from it? The private vocational 
schools. 
 
My next question to Mr. Minister — and I asked you, I think, 
this last night; if I didn't, I had intended to and I will ask it now 
— will you tell me what is the process of processing the student 
loans for private vocational schools? Student A comes to you, 
asks for a loan, was to attend private school B. You go through 
the steps of the student applying for the loan, getting the loan, 
and attending a private school. Where does the student loan go? 
Directly to the student? To the private school? Or how is it 
handled? 
 
Mr. Minister, one further question while they're looking for the 
answer; maybe you tell me this one. Do you set a cap on tuition 
fees of private schools, or do you simply recognize any tuition 
that they set? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, we don't set a cap, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, so that means they can set 6, 7 to 
$8,000 tuition fees, and if a student then applies for a student 
loan, would that all be covered by the student loan, or how do 
you do it? I mean, I don't have a handle on this. If they set their 
tuition fees at $5,000, a student doesn't have any money, do you 
pay . . . and the student then requires $5,000, do you give the 
student $5,000 in loans and that's the end of it? Or what 
happens? Maybe if you go through the process I'll understand it 
better, because I don't quite understand how this works. Neither 
do some of the students, I can tell you. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'll go back to the process question 
relative to student loans — does the cheque, the student's loan 
cheque go to the student or to the college? I'm advised that the 
cheque is made out personally to the student, that is to say the 
funds when they're being disbursed from the loan, to the 
student. But in some . . . for the student's convenience they will 
sometimes send it right to the college, but it's made out to the 
student. But because sometimes they're moving from wherever 
to wherever, may not have their permanent address yet, they'll 
use that almost as the post office, if you like, but it's made out 
to the student. 
 
Now relative to fees for the courses, we don't set a cap, but 
certainly we are cognizant of the fees that are being charged. 
And in fact one could argue that the student loan program, 
because it has a maximum weekly cap on it, in a way, as well 
indirectly caps what fees might be charged in so far as what 
funds might be there to cover them. 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2097 
 
 

The second point I would make relative to fees is the 
market-place regulates that to some degree. For example, two 
beauty colleges, one charging 4,000 a year and one charging 
8,000, guess who's going to get all the business, given that 
they're of equivalent quality? And that's sorted out pretty 
quickly by the market-place, and that's the kind of thing that all 
the good operators want to continue to protect. They don't want 
to have bad reputations. They want to have satisfied clients and 
satisfied customers who, yes, pay money — yes, substantial 
sums of money — but who do go out and do go on to succeed. 
 
Does the system have its problems occasionally? Yes. And 
that's, I suppose, regrettable and none of us wish that they 
would occur. But as well, as you pointed out again, we don't 
want to drag those good colleges through the muck when there 
are lots of them. At the same time, when there are those who do 
not fulfil the students' expectations or our expectations, we will 
act on those concerns, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, again let's be realistic. 
We're not talking about the good colleges, the good private 
schools — we're not talking about those. And you know full 
well, by dragging them in you're trying to muddy the waters. 
 
Let's stay with the issue of those colleges that do not have a 
reputable name for themselves or made a reputable name for 
themselves in this province. Those are the ones that are ripping 
off the students and those are the ones that we are concerned 
about. I'm not concerned about Robertson. I'm not concerned 
about Saskatoon Business College. I'm not concerned about 
Marvel Beauty School. I'm not concerned about those. I told 
you that last night. You always bring in those again to muddy 
up the waters. We are concerned about those private schools 
that you have licensed that do not have very good courses. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which one? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I mentioned them last night, and the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster wouldn't recognize it if we gave 
him the name. Mr. Minister, I want to again reiterate, it is a 
problem out there. I think it's time that you address it. The 
problem was brought to your attention three years ago. You've 
finally now set up a committee. 
 
I am concerned about the composition of that committee, but 
you've set it up, and I hope that in the end we will get some 
good recommendations. I am leery about it because of the 
composition of some of the people on that committee, but I'm 
simply saying to you that I would have felt better if one or two 
members of the schools who have been in existence — the 
private schools have been in existence for a long time — if one 
or two of those members had been on that committee. 
 
And I want to simply say to you today that . . . or ask you today, 
when that report is brought to your attention or submitted to 
you, will you then make it public, and will you make it 
available to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well perhaps the hon. member last 
night when I went through, who was sitting on that  

committee, wasn't in the House when I addressed that, because 
our concerns, I think, were like yours. I mean, we wouldn't want 
to have a committee where we just had the fox in the chicken 
house. I mean, I don't think that would accomplish what 
anybody wants. 
 
And for that reason on the committee, yes, we do have private 
vocational school operators, number one. As well, we have a 
graduate from the school. As well, we have two employer 
representatives, in this case, one from the corporate accounts 
executive, Marlin Travel. I think you understand, given today's 
conversation, why that person may well have been involved. 
We have somebody from . . . the other employer representative 
was Lisa Hickie, from Lee Anne's sports wear. The chairperson 
was from our own department. I think always government's 
viewed as that independent referee, if you like. 
 
And then from the employer's side, just as you have suggested 
— why didn't we have somebody there who's long-standing and 
has a reputation earned over a decade and more? Well that's 
exactly, I would suggest, the kind of people we have in Gordon 
McKay, who I'm advised is into a second generation now in that 
operation at McKay Tech Inc. in Saskatoon. Saul Jacobson at 
Prairie broadcasting, I think that one's been around for a good 
long time — obviously would have gone by the wayside if they 
hadn't been doing their job. 
 
So I think your concerns were our concerns. I'll accept criticism 
if you want to put criticism my way relative to, that we'd like to 
have had the committee up, running, the report in and put in 
place; or any new recommendation they might have if that 
would give us a better system. I'll accept that criticism. 
 
I think the fact that we put the committee in place was 
something that we both had agreed to in previous estimates. 
And in so far as the report, I think your suggestion was to make 
it public or available or whatever, and I'll certainly take that into 
consideration when I do receive the report. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I want to leave that particular 
topic now because in fact we could spend most of our estimates 
on that topic. I believe it is that important. And we want to 
impress that upon you and your officials that come next year, if 
we still have those complaints, I can tell you it won't be easy on 
your — of course you probably won't be there — it won't be 
easy on the law firm . . . the rumours have it that you will have 
a lateral movement, lateral movement somewhere. 
 
Mr. Minister, but please pass that message on to the next 
minister because he or she will not get an easy ride through 
their estimates if we still have those problems in existence come 
next year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Have you been chatting with the Premier 
that I don't know about? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes I have. In fact, I've been giving him a few 
suggestions, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
if you went to Urban Affairs we'd at least have a minister there. 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2098 
 
 

Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to another topic, and we talked 
about it last night, and that is funding of post-secondary 
education, and particularly, Mr. Minister, as it compares to 
other provinces and as it relates to the last federal budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, before we get into your comparison to other 
provinces . . . and by the way, Mr. Minister, the latest statistics 
have you ninth, only Manitoba being behind you, in the amount 
of money that you spend on advanced education as a percentage 
of your budget. As a percentage of your budget, you rank ninth. 
Mr. Minister, these are the information that I have received. As 
a percentage of your budget, you rank ninth, only behind 
Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I want to ask you . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Maybe to facilitate the discussion, 
maybe the hon. member could table the document that he's been 
quoting those statistics from. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, these are my own figures that I 
have calculated from various documents that I have received, 
which are in my files in my office under lock and key, but . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, Mr. Minister, you can refute 
these. You know what the position you are in, and I will read 
these to you a little bit later. 
 
But what I want to ask you now, what effect did the cuts of the 
last federal budget in the EPF (established programs financing) 
have on post-secondary education? Secondly, if that trend, if 
those cuts continue, if those cuts continue for the next five 
years, what will be the impact on advanced education for your 
department? All right. You must have done those calculations, 
obviously. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The comments I would make relative 
to the budget and established programs financing would be 
these. That I, like I suppose any minister or any provincial 
government across the country, will always like to see more 
money forthcoming from the federal government to our 
province and to this budget. 
 
But to keep all of this in perspective, as I understand it, what the 
last budget said is that the increases relative to established 
program financing won't be as large as they have been in the 
past. That doesn't mean to say there's going to be cut-backs, that 
we're going backwards. It's just that the increases won't be as 
large as they have been in past. For example, if there was a 6 
per cent increase before, it may well now be a 5 per cent 
increase, year over. 
 
Having said all of that, what is the implication for us? Yes, we'd 
always like to receive more money, not less, but that doesn't 
mean to say that somehow that will cause us serious problems 
here. We always just have to adjust to that to continue to make 
education the priority that we've always considered it to be. And 
just because there'll be a slower increase in federal government 
spending in established program financing, that doesn't mean to 
say that you'll see slower increases in educational expenditure 
growth in this province, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, it is true that there probably 
couldn't have been too much of a decrease, because if there's 
any further decrease we're going to be in a minus figure. That's 
true — we're going to be in a minus figure because some of the 
post-secondary education got less than 2 per cent in their 
budget. On their base funding, they got less than 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, my understanding is that if the trends continue in 
the EPF — and can you verify this — if the trends continue in 
the EPF, that for the province of Saskatchewan it will mean a 
reduction of what we had anticipated, had the increases 
continued, of $122 million in the next five years. Is that correct? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It's a little tough for me to predict five 
years down the road, but I'll deal with today and this year and 
last year. 
 
The equalization . . . or the established programs financing in 
our budget estimates for ’89-90, which we're examining, is 
$435 million — that's what we expect to get. If we saw that 
decreased by 1 per cent in its growth, that would mean $4.3 
million. Substantive enough. But of course from our 
government's standpoint, we have to look at what's happening 
in all of our revenue sources, like equalization payments, other 
transfers from the federal government. 
 
And I guess what we're saying is yes, we're mindful of that. But 
on the other hand, a $450 million drought payment, when you 
put that in perspective against a $4.3 million issue and look at 
the entire basket, I would suggest to you that maybe yes, 
looking at established programs financing you can raise some 
questions. When you look at the entire basket — deficiency 
payments, drought payments, grain stabilization payments, 
equalization payments — that's a number that we can certainly 
live with, given that context. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, that's the problem, I guess, that 
we have, is that you have to defend your brothers in Ottawa 
rather than defending the people of Saskatchewan. That's the 
problem that we have, and consequently it's the people of 
Saskatchewan that are suffering. It's the people of 
Saskatchewan are suffering. That's why our universities don't 
have sufficient money to allow students to enter, who are 
qualified. That's why we had to turn away 800 students in the 
last two years who otherwise would have qualified for a 
university education. 
 
I hear the member from Swift Current say hear, hear. That's 
true, she says hear, hear, because she believes, as she answered 
in question period some time ago, that those students who were 
denied entrance to university wouldn't have got a job anyway. 
That was her answer. All of those students who were turned 
away, they wouldn't find a job anyway. That's her attitude. 
 
And I see the same attitude coming from you, Mr. Minister. 
Now let's defend our brothers in Ottawa and let's not defend the 
people of Saskatchewan. We got the  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2099 
 
 

same attitude from the Premier of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is true that even the Premier of this province 
defends the federal government and doesn't worry about the 
people of Saskatchewan. And as the editorial indicated, the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, if it wasn't for the Premier of Alberta, 
would be standing alone. He would be standing alone in the 
defence of Ottawa in the last budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me just read to you what the editorial said in 
the StarPhoenix, “Devine's endorsement of budget worrisome.” 
It ends up by simply saying this: 
 

Devine says Saskatchewan people will tighten their belts 
and say, boy, I hope Wilson knows what he's doing. 
 

The fact is, they're more likely saying exactly that about their 
docile Premier. 
 
Mr. Minister, what we need here in this province is a 
government and government ministers who will defend 
Saskatchewan, who will see to it that we get our fair share of 
the EPF so that we can provide quality education for our 
students — quality education — so that we don't have to turn 
away 800 students who are qualified to enter our universities. 
 
They aren't here, Mr. Minister, as I said last night. They are 
getting their education somewhere else — in Alberta, in B.C., 
in Ontario — because you haven't provided sufficient spaces at 
our universities and our technical schools so that they can 
receive their education here. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is borne out, that is borne out by the statistics 
that I indicated to you before. You stand ninth in all of Canada 
as far as providing education or money for education as a 
percentage of your budget — ninth. Only Manitoba has a lesser 
percentage of their spending on education. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you turn to the moneys that you have provided 
for our universities in the last number of years . . . let's have a 
look. Let's have a look at what you've done. In 1985-86 there 
was $139.1 million; 1986-87, in the operating grants, you 
provided 143.5 million; 1987-88, 143.5 million at zero per cent 
increase — zero per cent increase; in 1988-89, 146.4 per cent; 
and in 1989-90, 149.4 on the base funding, plus you indicate to 
us today that they are receiving additional sums from the 
enhancement fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have provided in the last four years a little 
over 8 per cent increase in the operating funds for our 
universities. But the cost of living, I believe, has gone up by 15 
per cent. So in real terms, over the last three or four years, our 
universities have suffered a loss of 7 per cent — a loss of 7 per 
cent. 
 
And is it any wonder, Mr. Minister, that our universities have to 
turn away qualified students? Is it any wonder that they can't 
provide the quality education that our students deserve with that 
kind of increases? That includes the enhancement fund that you 
have indicated. If we take that off, Mr. Minister, and I think we 
need to for the future  

because it's not added into the base funding, then our 
universities are in a crisis situation. 
 
And as the president of the University of Saskatchewan 
indicated the other day, that there are going to be a number of 
students, qualified students, who won't graduate from this 
university because they couldn't find spaces for them. They now 
are attending other universities. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a very specific question. Why 
did you not, as requested by the university, provide them with a 
7.3 per cent increase on the base funding in their operating 
grants rather than a 2 per cent increase? 
 
I believe you established the $10 million enhancement fund for 
two reasons — one, that you wanted to have the hammer over 
the universities as to what is going to be done with that $10 
million; and number two, you wanted to make it a one-shot 
deal. You didn't want to include it in their base funding because 
that meant that you'd have to do it again next year. That is the 
concern of the universities when you talk to them. If you talk to 
the officials, they say that that's got to be included in their base 
funding. 
 
Two things must be done, Mr. Minister, two things must be 
done to assist the universities. Number one, you must provide 
them with the additional moneys in the base funding; and 
number two, you must provide them at least the increase in the 
cost of living. At least those two things have to be done. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I'm asking you now, why did you not 
include the $10 million in the base funding for the universities, 
the U of S and the U of R, and for the technical institutes? Why 
was that not put into the base funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member asks 
why has the enhancement fund been set aside on a separate line 
in the budget. In fact, this was as a result of discussions with the 
university and the post-secondary community. They had, along 
with ourselves, I might add, identified some specific challenges 
that they wanted to tackle and that we wanted to tackle. I think 
even words by the administration, like bridge financing, were 
used. So it was always viewed as a separate fund, which is 
obviously what it ended up being called. And so that's the 
reason for that. 
 
Now to get back to your earlier . . . to an assessment of your . . . 
the member for Saskatoon South's StatsCanada statistics, or 
whatever you would call them, his own version of StatsCanada 
statistics on who's going to university and how much money our 
university's getting. And the hon. member's research 
department, his own research department, he says, he reminds 
us, has us in ninth place. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for him to suggest that, borders on gross error, 
quite frankly. I'm tempted to use some unparliamentary 
language, but I know that's not allowed here. I think he's doing 
a disservice in fact to this province to suggest that, and I'll tell 
you why, Mr. Chairman. I'll tell you why, because the numbers 
are these. The numbers  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2100 
 
 

are these, Mr. Chairman. What we have seen from ’82-83 
through to ’88-89 is a 31.6 per cent increase in university 
grants, operating and capital — 31.6 per cent. 
 
And how does that compare to other provinces, Mr. Chairman, 
because we want to compare apples and apples to oranges and 
oranges. Has B.C. had a 31 per cent increase, Mr. Chairman? 
The answer is no; it's been a 13 per cent increase over that same 
period. Alberta, Mr. Chairman? No, fourteen and a half per 
cent. Manitoba, Mr. Chairman? No, 29 per cent. We've had 31.6 
per cent increase. 
 
Now I'm not trying to suggest because of a 31.6 per cent 
increase in operating and capital, that somehow it's easy for our 
universities here in Saskatchewan or, for that matter, anywhere 
across Canada. The answer to that would be no. But certainly if 
you look at our track record, I think it's fairly meritorious, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
And I guess I ask you, if by using the hon. member's socialist 
accounting techniques he has us at ninth, where were we in 
1982-83? If we've had a 31.6 per cent increase and everybody 
else has been 13, 14 — 29 is the highest — in western Canada, 
where were we under those dark days of the NDP? 
 
Additionally, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to capital funding at 
the University of Saskatchewan, this year the increase will be 
127 per cent. You see, how would the hon. member reconcile 
his ninth place finish by his own socialist accounting, when the 
University of Saskatchewan is going to get 12.4 million from 
the ag development fund; 15.5 from the university renewal and 
development fund, a fund that did not exist under the NDP. 
 
How would he reconcile that with a $7.6 million expenditure 
from the ordinary capital fund, over a half a million from urban 
parks, and 10.1 million from education, for a total of 46.2 
million, Mr. Chairman? That's why I say his figures do a gross 
disservice to the administrators and to the people of this 
province when it comes to where dollars are being spent. 
 
And what about the students themselves, Mr. Chairman, the 
students that those members opposite did not come to the 
defence of? In ’81-82, in those so-called halcyon days of the 
NDP, the NDP student assistance program helped 5,400 people, 
5,400 young people, to the tune of $12.8 million. In ’88-89, 
what are the numbers? — 18,500 young people received 
assistance to the tune of $95 million. 
 
There was no 6 per cent loans then. There were no forgivable 
loans back in the NDP days. And then the question becomes 
one of . . . the question then becomes one of: were there more 
young people going on to universities in the NDP days or are 
there more going on to university today? And the answer is, 
there's something close to 7,000 more young people in our 
universities today than in the NDP days of ’80-81. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now I say, would we want to go back to the NDP days? I  

say again, the answer is no by every measure. By every 
measure, we have tried to help young people, and the 
universities meet the challenges that are indeed there. And I 
would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that that $10 million 
enhancement fund jointly agreed to will indeed address some of 
those challenges. 
 
And I might remind the hon. member that on March 31, shortly 
after the budget was delivered in this House, he told the 
Leader-Post, the NDP wanted — and I'm quoting now — “The 
NDP wanted at least a 7 per cent increase for the two facilities, 
Rolfes said.” End of quote, March 31, ’89, Leader-Post. 
 
That was shortly after the budget was delivered, Mr. Chairman. 
And what does the enhancement fund, along with the 2 per cent 
increase, represent for our two universities, Mr. Chairman? — 
6.8 per cent. 
 
The NDP said, come up with 7 per cent; the university said, 
come up with 7 per cent; and by golly, Mr. Chairman, we 
delivered 7 per cent. Would we like to deliver more? I'd always 
like to deliver more. But by golly, I think we responded in a fair 
and reasonable fashion to our universities, just as they 
identified, just as the university identified, and just as we 
identified, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, if you and I were talking 
privately, I'd have some very choice words for you, but in this 
House, I can't. 
 
Mr. Minister, how you can squirm out of things . . . yes, I can 
understand that, you're a politician, and probably one of the 
worst in that particular character. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are talking about operating grants. When we 
asked for 7 per cent and when a university asked for 7 per cent, 
they asked for a 7 per cent increase on the base funding of their 
operating grants. For you to stand here and say you gave them a 
6.8 per cent increase on their base funding is simply misleading 
not only this House, but misleading what the universities have 
said. And it's simply unacceptable for you to come here and say 
. . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Can't hear you. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And you should get your hearing-aid, which 
you did away with. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's unfair, it's simply unfair for you to 
misrepresent the universities. That was not their first priority to 
have the enhancement fund. They wanted the 7 per cent on the 
base funding; that's where they wanted it. Oh yes they did . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I spoke to the president and I 
spoke to other people at the university, but they couldn't get 
that. They either take this or get only a 2 per cent increase. And 
their comment simply to me was that the minister wanted to 
determine how the money was going to be spent, how the 
money was going to be spent. And that is simply unfair for you 
to categorize the universities now in saying that they agreed that 
that was their priority, because it simply wasn't. 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2101 
 
 

Mr. Minister, when we talk about increases in operating grants, 
I think you will have to agree, operating grants, that for the last 
number of years the increases have been the following for 
operating grants. And please don't mix this up with capital, 
we're talking about operating grants. 
 
Your operating grant increases to the university have been the 
following: from 1985 to ’86 there was a 4.9 per cent increase; 
1986-87, 3.2; 1987-88, zero; 1988-89, 2 per cent; and 1989-90 
on the base funding was 2 per cent, and you can add on another 
4.6 if you want to add on the enhancement. That's a one-shot 
deal. That is not calculated into their base funding for next year. 
 
And I know what you want to do for next year, which is an 
election year. You want to take the 149 million of base funding, 
give them a 7 or 8 per cent increase and say, well hey, look how 
generous I am. 
 
But if you add in the 5.6 million, there will probably be a 2 per 
cent increase for next year. But that is not going to help the 
crisis at the university. You can play with all those figures you 
want, but it still remains that over those years, those were the 
increases — from your own statistics — those were the 
increases in the operating grants. You can add in the capital all 
you want, but that is not going to help the universities in being 
able to accommodate the students. They simply can't do it with 
that kind of money. 
 
And I'm simply saying to you, Mr. Minister, you're 
misrepresenting the universities and what they had asked for. 
They did not ask for this enhancement fund. They wanted it on 
the base funding and the operating grants. You denied them that 
because you had other things that you wanted to do with them, 
for example, distance education. You wanted to determine that 
a lot of these things were going to be done off campus. 
 
I don't say that I agree or disagree with that. All I'm saying is, 
don't misrepresent the universities, what their priorities were. 
Their priority was that they needed a 7 per cent increase on the 
base funding and the operating. And if you don't believe that, 
also look at issues and options on the section on accessibility; it 
will tell you the same thing, and we'll get into that next day. Mr. 
Minister, I want to turn it over to my other colleague. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I too want to discuss 
further with you educational spending for the K to 12 system. 
And in particular, Mr. Minister, I would like an explanation on 
the part of your government as to why government grants for 
school divisions have dropped from 55 per cent in 1981 to last 
year less than 49 per cent of the total school board revenue. As 
you're probably aware, school boards across Saskatchewan are 
concerned that as a result of the underfunding in education, the 
K to 12 school system . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To facilitate the discussion relative to 
K to 12 funding the member was quoting some  

statistics, and I wonder if she could provide me with a copy of 
those. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I suppose it's appropriate; we could ask the 
member. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I think the member does have the statistics. 
All he has to do is check with the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees' Association or check with any school board in 
Saskatchewan, and he can have access to the statistics. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what I am prepared to do is share with you 
a newspaper report, and I've had the opportunity to review all of 
the rural newspapers in Saskatchewan and look at what 
happened to school taxes in those rural communities as a result 
of this latest budget of yours. And one comment that I found 
very interesting in one newspaper, and it was The Whitewood 
Herald, was this. I'll repeat it for you: 
 

The Provincial share for funding of education in the 
Broadview School Division has steadily been declining. In 
1978 the provincial share was 57.8 per cent — in 1989 the 
share has dropped to 39.75 per cent. As the Provincial cost 
sharing drops, the additional monies must be raised 
through property tax increases. The Provincial 
Government did not share the increase in operating costs 
for 1989, therefore the property taxes had to be increased 
by 6.896 per cent to cover all of the added costs. 
 

Mr. Minister, I'm wondering whether or not you agree with the 
statement as presented in The Whitewood Herald, that in fact 
provincial funding of our educational school system here in the 
province of Saskatchewan has steadily been declining, and as a 
result, Mr. Minister, that shift from the province to the local 
school division has meant that property taxes, school taxes, 
have had to increase on the local ratepayer, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I recall it, 
when I sat in other portfolios, Energy and Mines, and my 
colleague from Swift Current was in Education, in my days 
when I sat in Agriculture and other ministers had the Education 
portfolio, and I think even when the NDP were in office and the 
Conservatives were in opposition, these same questions have 
come up every year. 
 
The opposition always tries to suggest that somehow the 
government of the day is off-loading or not meeting its 
obligations and its traditional 50-50 share of financing school 
operations across the province. 
 
Every year as long as I've been in this House, that comes up. 
And so we'll read into the record again the numbers, because I 
think the member opposite probably used the same kind of 
selective socialist accounting techniques as their colleague from 
Saskatoon South does. In 1982 the provincial share as 
percentage of actual and/or final budget expenditures was 52.6 
per cent. Now the hon. member suggests we're down to 45 per 
cent; 1989, what do I have? — 51 per cent. 
 
Now she might say, well yes, but you're including the  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2102 
 
 

education development fund. What I'm doing is I'm comparing 
apples to apples and oranges to oranges, and even without the 
education development fund it's 50.2. Okay? 
 
Now does that suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that we're 
somehow off loading in some horrendous fashion onto the 
backs of the school boards? I would suggest not. If I look at the 
numbers over the years, and I've got them right back to 1971 
when that infamous NDP government came to be, was 45.8 per 
cent. That's their track record, Mr. Speaker. That's their legacy. 
They didn't put an education development fund in place; this 
Tory administration did. 
 
So over the years it's varied by plus or minus a couple of per 
cent, and that's because politicians of whatever administrative 
stripe, political stripe, have always wanted to provide as much 
as economic circumstances permitted to this very high priority 
we call education. 
 
And we can go through this, actually, you know, political 
debate again, and you can try and score your points, and that's 
your job and I accept that. But that's the reality — we go 
through this every year, and if you wish, fine. But let's look 
beyond the numbers, let's look beyond that petty debate and get 
into some substantive issues as it relates to K to 12 education. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Right. Well, Mr. Minister, it's interesting. 
The information that's contained in local newspapers across 
Saskatchewan and the kind of feedback that caucus members 
are receiving from school board trustees indicate that your alibi 
or your rationale for this continuing process of school cuts is 
not sinking in in the general public. They disagree with you. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you paraded out this budget of yours in the 
spring of 1989 saying that it was going to do wonderful things 
for local school divisions, but it still hasn't helped to address the 
problem that local school divisions are facing. 
 
And I just want to read into the record what has happened as a 
result of this latest budget of yours, and I'll give you some 
examples. This comes from the Department of Education — the 
1989 foundation operating grant comparison. Let's look at 
Arcola. Arcola, you say that there was a 4 per cent increase, but 
let's look at what happened to Arcola. Arcola, which is a school 
division, received a 2.01 per cent increase. What did they have 
to do with their mill rate? They had to increase their mill rate by 
7.02 per cent. 
 
Assiniboia received a 3.03 per cent increase, and they had to 
increase their mill rate by 6.25 per cent. Another example 
would be the town of Biggar. Biggar had a 0.05 per cent cut, 
and they had to increase their mill rate by 5.83 per cent. 
 
And once again, Mr. Minister, I want to read into the record 
what was reported in The (Biggar) Independent on April 24, 
1989, what the school trustees had to do as a result of your 
decision not to give the Biggar school division an adequate 
funding increase. Now what they say is that: 

Increasing pressures to meet the educational needs of all 
students within the Biggar School Division is reflected by 
the board establishing the 1989 mill rate for school 
purposes at 63.5 (per cent). 
 

It goes on and talks about how the board was faced with a 
deficit of some $200,000, or an equivalent of a required 
increase of 7 mills. In order to deal with that, and recognizing 
some of the economic conditions, it dictated, according to this 
newspaper article, it dictated that the board increase its budget 
very wisely. And so what this board had to do, and I quote: 
 

The reduction was accomplished after many hours of 
consideration of all areas of the budget. Expenses were cut 
by reducing the number of teaching staff in the division by 
an equivalent of three, reducing 1989 plant repair and 
maintenance budget, reducing the teacherage repair 
budget, omitting a provision for future expenditures for 
buses and the reduction of capital equipment purchases. 
This allowed the board to set the mill rate at 63.5 (per 
cent). 
 

Then it goes on, it says: 
 

Education is a personnel related industry with the greatest 
cost expended on salaries of employees. Another cost of a 
fixed nature is plant operations being heat, light, water, 
janitorial and cleaning supplies. A reduction in 
expenditures would mean a reduction in either personnel 
or school programs. In the last six years, 10.0 teaching 
positions have been cut while school programs remained 
up-to-date, current and met provincial standards, in all 
schools. 
 

(1615) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the point that I'm trying to get at is that as a 
result of some trends that we're seeing in rural Saskatchewan 
and in this province with regard to rurality population, declining 
enrolments, greater expectations on schools, that they have to 
provide services that have not traditionally been within the 
realm of the school division. And as a result of your 
government's underfunding of education, school boards have 
had to make some decisions. 
 
Now those decisions, Mr. Minister, have not been easy on those 
school boards. School boards have had to consider school 
closures in rural communities, they've had to look at increased 
student/teacher ratios. It's meant that there have been crowded 
class-rooms in some instances. It's meant that teachers, Mr. 
Minister, have had to take on more responsibilities. It's meant 
that there have been all kinds of problems — teacher cuts, cuts 
in funding for special needs students, Mr. Minister. And what 
I'm simply pointing out to you is that there are some serious 
problems that have developed in this province as a result of 
your government's decision to improperly fund education in this 
province. 
 
Now I just want to address something that you said earlier. 
You're saying now that the provincial government  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2103 
 
 

is picking up about 52 per cent of the total school board 
expenditures, and you include EDF (education development 
fund) in that proposition. Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not including 
EDF in that proposition; I'm including operating and capital 
grants as reported in your own government estimates, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I just want to read into the record what has happened in 
this province. In 1980, Mr. Minister, the grants as a percentage 
of the total board expenditure amounted to 56.7 per cent on 
average; in 1981 the grants as a percentage amounted to 54.7 
per cent; in 1982, 54.6 per cent; 1983, 56 per cent; in 1984, 54.7 
per cent; in 1985, 55.2 per cent; in 1986, 50.5 per cent; in 1987, 
49.9 per cent. And, Mr. Minister, I don't have the figures 
available for 1988 and I don't have the figures available for 
1989. And I'm not quite sure how you can have the figures for 
1989, in view of the fact that there are some provisions made at 
the end of the year to increase basic grants in some cases. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to advise you what has happened 
in other areas of this province in terms of the mill rate. In The 
Battlefords, they had to increase their mill rate by 7.51 per cent; 
in Eastend, they had to increase their mill rate by 14.55 per 
cent; in Gull Lake, 12.28 per cent; in Herbert, 15 per cent; in 
Kindersley, 13.56 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we're dealing with rural school boards, and 
as you know, and you represent a rural constituency, things 
haven't been all that great on the farm and they haven't been all 
that great in rural Saskatchewan. And when . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And you're asking me to wrap it up. Well I'm 
not going to wrap it up, Mr. Minister. I'm going to try and 
explain to you some of the problems that are being faced by 
rural school boards in our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you recognize full well that things have not 
been good on the farm; they have not been good in our towns 
and villages. And I would like you to explain for all of the 
people living in rural Saskatchewan, your rationale for cutting 
back on foundation operating grants to numerous school boards 
across Saskatchewan. And as a result of that, we've seen some 
horrendous increases in our mill rates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member asks 
some questions about why some school boards got a decrease or 
less funds this year than last year. And it's a legitimate enough 
question on the surface because one could legitimately ask, if 
the kindergarten to grade 12 budget went up by 4 per cent this 
year compared to last year, why didn't every school board 
across the province experience a 4 per cent increase in the 
cheque that comes from the government? That's a legitimate 
enough question to the outsider. The pie went up by 4 per cent, 
so the share of that pie that all school boards should get should 
have gone up by 4 per cent. 
 
But the reality is, Mr. Chairman, the school trustees who 
represent all of the boards across the province, some years ago, 
along with the Department of Education, agreed to a formula to 
divide the pie up. When you think about it, it made sense, 
because what they were trying to  

do was put some fairness into the system, some equity into the 
system. And I think we all would subscribe to that view. 
 
Certainly if you look at it fundamentally, an area like northern 
Saskatchewan with few people and few businesses and no great 
manufacturing sector, no industries to speak of to draw from on 
a tax base, has less of an opportunity to raise money locally 
than downtown Regina. There's no question about that. 
 
And because trustees recognized that, they said, let's put a 
formula in place that will divvy up the money fairly. If your 
school board is an area where there's a number of students come 
in unexpectedly — Lloydminster's been a classic example, the 
extreme activity in the oil industry over the last decade — it 
must be flexible enough to reflect that. If you've got upgraders 
being built in your backyard that pay hundreds of thousands of 
dollars a year in tax to the school board, that takes the burden 
off of the ordinary home owner, then that should be reflected, 
because some areas do not have that to draw on. Or 
Weyerhaeusers in Prince Albert who probably pay hundreds of 
thousands of dollars. 
 
So in their wisdom they said, let's put together a formula to 
divide this up, an equalization formula to divide it up. You see, 
and the reason they did that, Mr. Speaker, is because they 
wanted to be fair. And you see, for every example the hon. 
member trots before us where this board received less and this 
board received less, for every one of those, Mr. Speaker, if the 
formula is working, there must be a board that received more 
money, because the funds totally went up 4 per cent from the 
provincial government. The cheque was 4 per cent larger. 
 
And you see, she trots out for us here this afternoon, for 
political gain — and I recognize that — the Arcola school 
division. In 1981, they were receiving 54.89 per cent of the 
revenue from the provincial government; today its 49.11 — 
down, yes. And she trotted out Biggar, that used to get 61 per 
cent of its fund from the provincial government, and it went 
down to 53.94 this year. 
 
But you see, she does it in that sort of mischievous, selective, 
socialist accounting. She didn't mention Battle River, that went 
from 35 up to 48. She didn't mention Battlefords, that went 
from 51 to 57. She didn't mention Melfort, that went from 47 to 
59. She didn't mention Melville; she didn't mention Moose Jaw; 
and the list goes on and on and on. 
 
You see, this argument, quite frankly, is just a mischievous one. 
And I understand where the trustees are coming from. They 
have to posture to their public. They have to raise the mill rates, 
and they say, well the reason we have to raise the mill rates is 
the grant from the government didn't go up as much this year as 
we expected. 
 
If we're going to be serious politicians in this forum, Mr. 
Chairman, why don't we get down to the nub of the issue? And 
the nub of the issue is, is the hon. member saying that the 
formula's unfair? Is that what she is saying? I say to her, come 
clean with the public. Take your duties seriously as an 
Education critic, and let's have an intelligent debate  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2104 
 
 

about the formula. 
 
Does the formula reflect the same kinds of equity concerns that 
it did 20 years ago, given what's happening in rural 
Saskatchewan, given that we see an increased urbanization 
across the province? Does it? And given the business tax furore, 
and given all of the skirmishes that are taking place between, in 
some instances, RM councils and school boards. Why can't we 
go beyond this silly little debate about our share went down, 
theirs went up or didn't go up enough, and all that kind of stuff, 
when really what we should be arguing is, is the formula 
wrong? 
 
You see she didn't attack the department or the government on 
the 4 per cent. A 4 per cent increase, as the teachers' federation 
president said after the budget, a 4 per cent increase . . . and 
Susan Bates, the president of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation) said that is fair and reasonable considering the 
economic climate of the province. 
 
Why can't we have that kind of intelligent assessment and 
debate in this House? Is the formula a good formula? It served 
us well for 15 years. Will it serve us well in its present form for 
the next 15 years? It seems to me that's the question we should 
be addressing. We put 4 per cent more money in the pot; it's 
distributed by this fairness formula. And this selective little 
games playing really serves no useful purpose for the boards or 
the trustees. If you want to have an intelligent debate on the 
formula, I am prepared to entertain that. 
 
And I say to the hon. member, is that what you're attacking — 
the formula? Come clean with the public and tell us. Do you 
want the formula changed? Go on the record, put it on the 
record. Do you want the formula changed? Is the formula 
unfair? I want to hear that from the hon. member. Is the formula 
unfair, or are you just being mischievous with the statistics? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in two years you will 
have the opportunity to ask the questions, but until that time, 
Mr. Minister, I'm the Education critic. I get to pose the 
questions. You're the Minister of Education, and your job is to 
answer the questions. And, Mr. Minister, you haven't been 
doing a very good job. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to go on about some of the 
problems with the operating grants, and I want to look at 
1986-87. In 1986-87 there was a 5 per cent increase in the 
operating grant over the 1985-86 year. In 1987-88 your 
government cut the operating grants by 1 per cent. In 1988-89 
there was a 2.16 per cent increase in the operating grant, and in 
this budget, Mr. Minister, there was a 3.84 per cent increase. 
 
Now if you look at what's happened with the consumer price 
index in 1985 . . . or 1986-87, CPI went up by 3.11 per cent. In 
1987-88, CPI up by 4.9 per cent. In 1988-89, 5.7 per cent 
increase in the CPI. And in 1990-91, the projection year to date 
thus far, Mr. Minister, is a 4 per cent increase. 
 
So what has happened, Mr. Minister, in reality is that the 
operating grants have actually declined by 8.4 per cent as a 
result of inflation and so, as a result of your  

government's underfunding of school boards in Saskatchewan, 
and as a result of the increases in the consumer price index, Mr. 
Minister, school boards across this province have had to make 
some changes and have had to make some cuts as a result of 
your underfunding. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I'm not here to debate the merits of the 
formula. What I'm here to do, Mr. Minister, is to speak on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, particularly people in 
rural Saskatchewan who are facing some problems, and one of 
those problems, Mr. Minister, is rural depopulation and declines 
in enrolment. 
 
Now it doesn't matter whether you have 20 grade 12 students or 
190 grade 12 students, Mr. Minister, you have to present a 
curriculum to those students in order that they can receive a 
grade 12 and go on to post-secondary education, if they so 
desire. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, while I am not here to debate the 
formula, what I am here to do is to talk about how this, as a 
result of the enrolment declines, there have been some serious 
problems created for rural Saskatchewan. They still have to 
provide grade 12 social studies and English and chemistry and 
physics and biology and all of the other courses. 
 
So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what are you planning to do 
about what seems to be a trend in this province that school 
populations are declining in rural Saskatchewan; and there's no 
question that they are increasing in urban Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member has raised a 
number of questions. She has tried to make the point that 
somehow our funding increases to education have not kept pace 
with inflation. From 1981 to 1982, Mr. Chairman, through to 
’89-90, funding increased by 62 per cent, while the inflation 
rate or the consumer price index rose by 47 per cent. The net 
effect has been an increase of over 10 per cent in real funding to 
school boards during that period. 
 
If one looks at that on a per pupil basis, Mr. Chairman, real 
funding has increased by more than 12 per cent, and that is 
because enrolments have gone down over that same period by 
about 4,000. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Chairman, that that doesn't include the 
special warrants that this legislature passed — the one being 
$19 million to bail out the teachers' pension plan as a result of 
the stock market crash, which would mean something close to 5 
per cent in terms of the funding increase in that year alone. 
 
So I think the argument that she makes, that somehow increases 
in expenditures in education haven't kept pace with inflation, is 
a spurious one, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I now want to talk about 
special education in Saskatchewan. As a result of some of the 
problems that have occurred with your funding cuts in the last 
several years — and you and I are not going to agree that there 
have been tremendous  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2105 
 
 

funding increases because, in my view, there have not been — 
special education has developed as an issue in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I spoke earlier to you about what had 
happened in the Sturgis area. And in the Sturgis area, Mr. 
Minister, the situation is such that the school board has had to 
make a number of cuts to programs, to transportation. And as a 
result, a parent in Sturgis has been advised that her son, who is 
in grade 9 this year, who has been receiving the assistance of a 
teacher aide, will no longer have the teacher aide come next 
fall. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the teacher aide is necessary because this 
boy, this young boy, is a hearing-impaired student. He's a deaf 
student. And as you know, Mr. Minister, people in 
Saskatchewan, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, would like to 
see their special needs students remain in their own 
communities. But as a result of your funding cuts, Mr. Minister, 
this young man is not going to have a teacher aide next year. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can bring us up to date 
on how your funding cuts and your changes to the formula for 
special education have affected special needs children and 
youth in our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, relative to special 
education, the increase in the special education budget overall 
was 2.3 millions of dollars, and I wouldn't want to suggest for a 
moment that we couldn't use 25 or $30 million there, because 
we probably could. But as well, over and above this, because I 
too would like to . . . and our government would like to respond 
in this area, even to a greater degree than we have. There was 
an enhancement grant as well put in place for severely 
handicapped, including the profoundly deaf, to the tune of 650 
thousands of dollars. Now those obviously are increases, not 
cut-backs. 
 
Could we use more in this area? It's an area that I would suggest 
to you could probably use increases in the magnitude of tens 
and twenties and thirties of millions of dollars, and that's . . . A 
strategy to put that kind of money in place, along with boards, 
is not something that's going to be able to happen overnight, but 
we're trying to respond to the issues with boards out there in a 
positive manner, and I think that speaks to the increases I talked 
about in those two areas. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to talk about the 
Sturgis situation as an example of what's happened to some 
school districts, and then I want to talk about the enhancement 
grant that you talked about. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when I look at what's happened at Sturgis, 
they received a funding cut of 4.31 per cent, and I want to read 
into the record again a newspaper article that was in The 
Norquay North Star sometime in May. And this is what the 
headline reads: “Three-mill tax increase, expenditure cut 
approved.” 
 

The Sturgis School Division board has prescribed some 
strong medicine for the division, its ratepayers and 
teaching staff with the setting of its 1989 budget and mill 
rate. 

The tough measures decided on by the board were 
announced in a press release issued this week, which cites 
“very difficult economic times” currently being 
experienced by the Sturgis School Division. 
 
“This, unfortunately, is all too common to Saskatchewan 
rural school divisions and municipalities as we are all 
grappling with a shrinking population and economic 
base,” . . .  
 
Identified as factors which “affect the 1989 budget for the 
Sturgis School Division” were: an enrolment drop of 59 
students . . . (so that) a net Foundation Grant loss of 
$64,858; increased salary costs for teachers (4 per cent) 
and other employees (2.75 per cent); increased fuel costs 
for busing through both provincial and federal increases, 
with a notation that the division does not receive the fuel 
tax rebate; increased costs for natural gas and electricity; 
increased costs for school and library materials, and an 
accumulated deficit of $60,000 for 1988. 
 
“To combat these increases in operational costs and 
decreased grants (from the provincial government), the 
Sturgis school division board of education has presented a 
budget that contains the following key points: 
 
“A 6.5 (per cent) reduction in the number of teachers we 
employ; 
 
“The closure of Stenen School at the end of the current 
school year . . .; 
 
“A $60,000 reduction for school operating budgets; 
 
“Expenditure reductions in many other areas, such as 
janitorial supplies, contracted services and board services 
expenses; 
 
“A mill rate increase of three mills. This will raise the mill 
rate from 57 to 60 mills. This increase has been forced 
upon on us by the provincial government raising the 
computational mill rate from 50 to 53 mills. The 
computational mill rate is the factor that the government 
uses to determine how much money must be contributed 
locally before the grant commences. By raising the 
computational mill rate by three, the government is saying 
that three more mills must be contributed locally.” 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, the woman who contacted me whose son 
has been affected by your decision to raise the computational 
mill rate by three, and your decision to cut back on school 
funding to several rural school boards across Saskatchewan, is 
quite concerned that her son, a grade 9 student who is hearing 
impaired, will not have a teacher aide this fall. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what I'm trying to point out to you is that 
when you sit in your office in Regina playing Mr.  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2106 
 
 

Cabinet Minister, and making decisions about school boards 
and school board funding, Mr. Minister, it impacts upon 
students and parents in this province. And so while you like to 
play fast and loose with the truth, as I call it, regarding the 
grand increases that have occurred under your government, the 
evidence that we've been able to garner from looking through 
newspapers simply does not bear out any relationship to the 
truth. 
 
And I want to know, Mr. Minister, what sort of arrangements 
are you going to make to ensure that this woman's son has a 
teacher aide this fall in his local community, and that he is not 
put in a position where he has to move out of his rural 
community and away from his family? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member raises the question, 
specific question, what am I going to do to see that this student 
gets a teacher aide. I don't think the hon. member would want 
somebody under this dome in the legislature in Regina to start 
running our school boards. They would take umbrage at that. I 
think they would see that as interference. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, any time there's a distraught 
parent with legitimate concerns, I think it's fair to say that, if 
raised with us, we attempt to raise it with the school board, 
hopefully to the satisfaction of that individual. I'm not 
suggesting that school boards don't face challenges like the 
Sturgis school board. 
 
But you know, in fairness, Mr. Chairman, why doesn't the hon. 
member tell the whole story on the Sturgis school board? Why 
do we get into this mischievous representation of the facts? 
Why doesn't she tell the Assembly, all the members here, so 
they can make an informed judgement? Why doesn't she tell 
them that the Sturgis school board lost 60 pupils? Why doesn't 
she tell them that their enrolment has gone down by nearly 6 
per cent? Why doesn't she tell them that? And why doesn't she 
tell them that their assessment went up marginally, which 
means that they get a little more money from the same mill 
rate? Why doesn't she tell the Assembly that so they can make 
an informed judgement? 
 
And she knows that the computational mill rate is part of that 
divvying up the pie in a fair way that's always been agreed to by 
the system. And I'm not trying to suggest for a minute that it's 
easy for the Sturgis school board or any other school board 
across the province. They're all trying to deal with the 
challenges, and I think they do a good job, for the most part. I 
think they do a good job. 
 
And if there's a specific case that the hon. member would like 
me to take a specific look at, I would just ask her to send the 
details to me and I'll see what we can do. As I said earlier, 
we've tried to increase to some degree the funding available to 
boards or special education to recognize that there are some 
special people out there who need some special attention. I'm 
not happy if it doesn't go the way boards or parents or trustees 
or students would always like to see it, but that's a reality, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you review Hansard, 
you will note that I did indicate when reading  

this article that there had been an enrolment drop of 59 students. 
So I did give you that information for all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to hear. 
 
Now I just want to talk about your enhancement grants. Now, 
Mr. Minister, as I understand it, school boards whose divisions 
make the decision to spend in excess of $12,000 in the 
academic year September to June, 1989, may be eligible for this 
enhancement grant. 
 
One of the problems with this enhancement grant, as it's now 
defined, is that you have to spend the money in order to apply 
for the money, and there's no guarantees, as I understand the 
situation, that you will be reimbursed for the money that you've 
already spent. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Minister, that special ed consultants have a 
very difficult time planning what to do with special needs 
students. And I'm wondering if that particular point that I've just 
raised with you has been brought to your attention and whether 
you're prepared to do something about the enhancement grant in 
order to allow teachers and special ed consultants to do some 
planning when it comes to special needs children in our 
province. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 
asks, relative to the rationale of the enhancement grant 
expenditure — and what I'm advised, and it's relatively complex 
and I'm probably going to oversimplify it — but this is to go to 
220 children who have been identified as severely or 
profoundly handicapped, to top-load, if you like, programs that 
have been put in place by boards for these 220 individuals with 
some very special needs. And I know that's an 
oversimplification, but there's 220 that have been identified . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 220 is to share the $650,000? That's 
right. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Mr. Minister, what has been brought 
to my attention is that it's very difficult to plan for services 
being put in place for children because you have to spend the 
money to get the money back. And there's no guarantees that 
you're going to get the money back. 
 
How have you communicated this program to local school 
board divisions? Because it appears to me that there is some 
concern that it's difficult to plan for kids when you're not really 
sure whether or not they're going to be eligible for this 
enhancement funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I appreciate the point the member is 
raising in that an administrator, a program administrator, a 
financial planner for a board would like to have, for lots of 
reasons, one of which you've mentioned, the money in hand 
first. The reality is, as you know, in terms of government and 
comptrollers and audits and all the rest of it, that's not the way it 
works here or virtually in any other area of government. We pay 
for the services sort of on delivery, that kind of approach, that it 
has to be delivered and then they're reimbursed. 
 
And I know it causes . . . I can see your argument; I can see the 
merit of the argument. But this has traditionally been the way 
that we've delivered it. 
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2107 
 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now maybe I misunderstood the information 
that was given to me, but I understand that this is a new 
program for special needs children whose school boards spend 
in excess of $12,000 on them. Is that not the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So this is a new program. So when you say 
that this has traditionally been the way we do things, we can't 
really say that this has traditionally been the way we do things 
because this is a new program. 
 
And so I just want to reiterate the concerns that have been 
expressed to me that you can't plan because you have to spend 
the money in order to apply to get the money. And so for school 
boards that have . . . who are facing cost crunches, Mr. 
Minister, there's a great deal of risk being taken if they spend 
the money and there's no guarantees that they're going to get the 
money back. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you said that this is for 220 students in 
Saskatchewan who are severely developmentally delayed or 
have severe handicaps, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me how 
many students in Saskatchewan have school boards who spend 
in excess of $12,000 on their educational services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I'll have to take notice of that question 
and undertake to see if we can't dig that out for you. 
 
And on the whole question of your observations, this is a new 
program, so how can I say that traditionally this is the way 
we've done it? What I was talking about is traditionally, in 
terms of government paying the bills, if you like . . . And in 
special ed, whether it's this new program or our special ed 
budget, normally it's always been conditional funding paid on 
receipt of a program being put in place, that kind of approach. 
That's what I meant when I was talking about traditional. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, I understand that you've 
changed the way you fund special ed in Saskatchewan. It used 
to be that the process, when I was involved in special ed, that 
you'd determine which students you think had learning 
disabilities or required some additional funding on the part of 
the provincial government. You would go to a designation 
meeting with Harry Dahl in Saskatoon, who's an employee of 
your department, and you would make the case or present the 
case that students should be designated for high cost funding. 
 
Now I understand that that process has changed in the last 
couple of years, and I would be interested in knowing what the 
changes have been and how we now fund special education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — This is a bit complicated, and I'll take 
a run through it. And if I'm off the mark, my officials will 
provide me with some additional information so that we can 
make sure the members of the House get as accurate 
information as we can. 

The traditional eight categories — the deaf, blind, mentally 
retarded, hospitalized students, multiply handicapped, 
orthopedically handicapped — I think what's been traditionally 
called high cost in the educational system, the procedure for 
those is unchanged. And they're identified, the right program is 
identified, and the funds are made available on a per capita 
basis, per student basis. And that's as in the past and it is today. 
 
The category that there's been some changes on is what they 
call a learning disabled category. And why that is . . . And I 
agreed with the changes because I think in some instances in 
this learning disabled category, we don't have the the 
technology . . . no, technology isn't the right word. Our 
capability of diagnosing the students with learning disabilities 
isn't as precise as it might be in some of these other categories, 
and I think you can see why that would be so. 
 
And so what was done there, because diagnosis is a little 
tougher, is that the levels were frozen at what they were two 
years ago, but the fund has had increases not unlike what the 
Education budget generally has — 4 per cent, 3 per cent, 5 per 
cent, whatever the number might be. But for a board to earn, if 
you like, a chunk of that increase, they have to essentially 
demonstrate that they've put something more in place to help 
learning disabled students in their area. 
 
So I know I'm over-simplifying a bit, but that gives you some 
sense of what we're trying to do in that area. And the changes 
largely revolve around problems with diagnosing in the learning 
disabled category. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, is it possible for you to provide 
me with a written explanation of what's happened to funding for 
learning disabled students in Saskatchewan, because I have had 
a tremendous amount of concern expressed to me from parents 
and teachers of learning disabled students who in their view are 
not getting the kind of resources and services, program services, 
that they used to get, as result of changes to funding for 
special-needs kids who have learning disabilities. 
 
Now I just have one other question here. Is it true that special 
ed programs have been frozen, the funding has been frozen for 
the last couple of years, and that this is one of the reasons why 
we're having some of the problem in funding for learning 
disabled students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I will have my officials provide a 
comprehensive briefing note for you in this area. Because it is 
pretty complicated, and certainly to the lay person such as 
myself, sometimes I don't do as good a job of explaining as I 
would like to. 
 
The area, as I mentioned, that's been frozen, was in the learning 
disabled category. It was frozen because of the difficulties with 
good diagnosis in some instances. 
 
There have been increases, but they're the incremental increases 
like 4 per cent or 3 per cent or 5 per cent that have gone into 
that chunk of the budget pie. So it's not as though there haven't 
been some increases, but it's not  
  



 
June 21, 1989 

 

2108 
 
 

funded on a per capita basis any more like those other eight 
categories are in the high cost basis. So we'll have that laid out 
for you so you can have a clear picture of it in a comprehensive 
briefing note. 
 
And before I take my place on this question, I'd just like to 
reiterate again what I said at the outset. This whole area of 
special education, quite frankly, in my mind . . . And maybe I 
bring — you've worked in it, as you said — maybe I bring more 
of a layman's perspective, or a layperson's perspective to it. My 
observation, after being in this area for two or three years, is it's 
an area that we have come some fair distance on over the last 10 
or 15 years. I think there's even much more we can do. 
 
I think even some of the technological . . . some new 
technology, and I know that sounds awful clinical when you're 
dealing with the human side of learning, but I think there are 
even some technological advances that I've had my Legislative 
Secretary, the member from Canora, along with my officials in 
the department, investigate over this past winter. And we're 
looking at putting them on show here, if you like, for some 
boards and doing some pilots with them over this next few 
months, to respond to students' needs to some greater degree in 
this area. 
 
And a final comment would be, and I know that you'll probably 
hold this to me, but I would like to maybe think that in five 
years from now, when you and I are standing here, that we've 
made even another quantum leap on how we deal with these 
children. And I think part of that is having the public, the larger 
public, understand what we're really talking about. I mean, it's 
very complicated even for you and I, and myself with the 
additional resource of officials who work with this every day, at 
some times to untangle what we're really talking about, and we 
use terms that the average person doesn't deal with. 
 
The more we can engage the broader public in this, I think the 
better off we are, and that too would be part of how I would see 
us proceeding in the future. And I hope maybe five or 10 years 
from now when we're standing here, we've made another 
quantum leap, and I know that that might require 20 or $30 
million — a substantial sum. I mean, we have to put our heads 
to that as to how we would engage those kinds of dollars, given 
all the pressures that we face in this area. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, the thing that I wanted to say about this funding freeze 
that has occurred in special ed for learning disabled students is 
this — that there are lots of school boards in Saskatchewan that 
have had special education consultants and very good special ed 
consultants that have in the past designated LD (learning 
disabled) students, so as a result, they aren't facing the kinds of 
problems that school divisions who haven't done all the 
designating in the past are presently facing. 
 
So we have a situation, Mr. Minister, I understand that this is 
now . . . special ed is now block funded. And if you did a good 
job of designating the students in the past, you're not 
experiencing the same difficulties that other school divisions 
are facing as a result of not designating students. 

And so in terms of the briefing note, I'd like to know if you can 
do this. I would like some information as to the kinds of 
problems that school divisions are facing as a result of your 
government's decision to change the way we fund people with 
learning disabilities, and as a result of your government's 
decision to freeze the funding, because I'm hearing from lots of 
parents that their kids simply aren't getting the services that they 
used to get under the old system. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:05 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


