


















































June 5, 1989 Hansard


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 5, 1989 
 
 

1621 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with considerable pleasure that I introduce today 10 guests 
sitting in your gallery. They are part of a course called “English 
as a Second Language.” These are, almost without exception, 
people who come to this country from various parts of the 
world — sometimes western Europe, but more likely eastern 
Europe or Asia — and they’re learning English. It’s always 
interesting to visit with them and to discuss with them the 
traditions of this institution. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Elsa Turek. After the 
question period is over, Mr. Speaker, I’ll look forward to 
meeting with them and discussing what they’ve seen. I know all 
members will want to join with me in welcoming these people 
to the legislature and to this great country of ours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Regina Centre in welcoming our 
special guests to the Assembly. 
 
And I would like as well, Mr. Speaker, to have all members 
welcome to the Assembly some 20 grade 4 students from the 
Lumsden Elementary School in Lumsden. And they are seated, 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, sir. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Carol Youck-Cousins; chaperons Anne Cockman and 
John Holman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all hon. members to join with me in 
welcoming the students, their chaperons and teachers to the 
Legislative Assembly. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and through 
you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, some friends 
and guests of our Sergeant-at-Arms, Mr. Goodhand. 
 
And seated in your gallery we have Mr. and Mrs. Premi from 
England, who are visiting Saskatchewan for one week; and 
accompanying them is Mr. Agit Kapoor from Melfort, 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join 
with me in recognizing these guests from England and from 
Melfort. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with the others in wishing those in the Speaker’s gallery 
who are involved in the English as a Second Language 
program, welcome. Hope you enjoy the proceedings here this 
afternoon. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is a great deal of pleasure for me to 
introduce, in the west gallery, 28 students from Wilfrid Walker 
public school in the constituency of Regina Wascana. They are 
accompanied by Jill Hockin, Elaine Smith, and Bev Jeggo. I’ll 
have an opportunity to meet with them at 2:30 for pictures and, 
I hope, an opportunity to have a chance to talk to them over 
drinks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you and the others please welcome the 
students from Wilfrid Walker School in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In your 
gallery, it’s my pleasure to introduce Mr. Steve Bobiash, who is 
the president of the Saskatchewan Young New Democrats, an 
organization with some 1,600 young people ages 13 to 25. 
Steve has his own business; he runs the family farm. And the 
Young New Democrats have written a position paper that Steve 
will be releasing the recommendations of tomorrow on the 
economy and employment, and I’m sure the government will be 
very interested in those important ideas. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Steve 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations with Guy Montpetit 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question today is to the Deputy Premier and it concerns the 
GigaText scandal. Last week, Mr. Minister, the minister from 
SEDCO indicated that you would be bringing some answers to 
some questions that we asked. We haven’t seen those yet, so I 
will ask you today: will you confirm that sometime in the early 
fall of ’88, in September or October, you met with Mr. 
Montpetit for a three-day meeting in his office in a Montreal 
suburb, with a Mr. Leier and with three of Mr. Montpetit’s 
associates? And would you confirm, as well, that the purpose of 
the meeting was to negotiate a further Government of 
Saskatchewan investment of $125 million with Montpetit — on 
what Montpetit refers to in court documents as the GigaMos 
project, a semi-conductor manufacturing venture — and that 
you were on the verge of signing the deal until the lawsuit blew 
it up in your face. Will you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, none of his allegations 
are correct. I have met with Mr. Montpetit in Montreal on two 
occasions. I think on each occasion the longest occasion would 
be no more than one afternoon, certainly not three days. 
 
As it relates to the deal that he’s talking about, Mr. Speaker, 
there was a proposal brought forward by Mr. Guy Montpetit 
and some of his associates. And it dealt, Mr. Speaker, with the 
possibility of building a foundry for the manufacture of 
computer chips. The proposal brought forward, Mr. Speaker, 
was a rather interesting proposal, to say the least. And if, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t think, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re interested in the answer. But if, Mr. 
Speaker, the  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1622 
 

proposal proved out to be a possibility, it would provide lots of 
opportunity in the high-tech field in Saskatchewan, something 
that I would think at least the members of Saskatoon would be 
interested in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But before this proposal could receive any support from this 
government, three things had to happen, Mr. Speaker. First, the 
technology had to have scientific verification. That still isn’t 
done, Mr. Speaker. We’re working on it, but it still isn’t done. 
Secondly, markets had to have verification. The commercial 
viability had to be verified. That still isn’t done, Mr. Speaker. 
And only after those first two steps are taken do you take the 
third. And the third step, Mr. Speaker, would be to put together 
a financial package. 
 
We have done this, Mr. Speaker, in many other instances. And 
on this particular one, there was interest by investors from 
United States, from Canada, from offshore, from public, from 
private, Mr. Speaker. And part of my job, Mr. Speaker, is to 
bring economic development and investment to Saskatchewan, 
and I’ve looked at lots and lots of them. Every one of them, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m prepared to take full credit for when they work, 
and full responsibility for when they don’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, your responsibility is to protect the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan from unscrupulous operators like 
Montpetit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — This guy, at the time you were 
negotiating, this guy at the same time you were negotiating, has 
already done away with $4 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
money, and that’s where you’ve got a problem. 
 
Now I want to ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, can you tell us 
who picked up your expenses for the government trip . . . or for 
the Montreal trip? Was it Montpetit, was it GigaText, or the 
government? And if it was the government, will you submit the 
travel and the expense vouchers in this House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as a member of Executive 
Council and minister responsible in Saskatchewan for western 
diversification thrust, I naturally, as reasonable and fair-minded 
people would already know, I would naturally be travelling at 
cost to the government, Mr. Speaker. That’s my job. Will I table 
the vouchers today? Of course not, Mr. Speaker. I don’t carry 
them around on an ongoing basis, and I think that’s 
unreasonable to even suggest that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Montpetit has testified that on at least one 
occasion you and Mr. Leier flew in his personal jet for a 
meeting regarding your dealing with  

him. Can you tell this House if that was a trip to Boston, or was 
it another trip? And can you tell us who accompanied you on 
that trip, the duration of the meeting, and the subject of the 
meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t remember the 
date, but I do remember being in Montreal meeting with Mr. 
Montpetit on one occasion. The following . . . no, that very 
evening, in fact, he was leaving Montreal for Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, for a board of directors meeting of GigaText. 
 
I did have an Air Canada ticket, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t recall 
what it cost to fly from Montreal to Regina, but I thought it 
would be appropriate in the circumstances, since the plane was 
coming from Montreal to Regina in any event — in any event 
— to fill up one of the empty seats, Mr. Speaker, and save the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan the fare from Montreal to Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Another question to the Deputy. How 
convenient, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a helicopter was 
apparently chartered last year to fly over Saskatoon to view 
possible sites for Mr. Montpetit’s plant. The helicopter, 
according to Mr. Montpetit, contained him, his pilot and Mr. 
Leier. Can you tell us if it was the government of Saskatchewan 
which chartered that helicopter, and what was the cost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell 
him that today. I’ll undertake to find out, Mr. Speaker. And you 
know, from time to time when we are developing the economy 
in Saskatchewan, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to do some site 
selection. 
 
I remember once, not many years ago, Mr. Speaker, when the 
member for Athabasca and I took a helicopter over to the 
Clearwater park, Mr. Speaker, and took a pretty good look at 
that, and he persuaded me, Mr. Speaker, that it would be a good 
site for a wilderness park. We do that from time to time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I can’t believe how you so blatantly defy 
democracy and people in the province of Saskatchewan. The 
minister of SEDCO, last week in this House, took notice of a lot 
of these same questions. She said you’d be back here last week, 
instead of hiding, to answer the questions. You still can’t 
answer them. You shouldn’t be taking notice on them. 
 
What I’d like to ask you now is that Mr. Montpetit, he’s 
testified in Montreal that your government commissioned a 
feasibility study on the GigaText project and the study was 
carried out by Dr. Fabian of Toronto who was at the meeting 
with you in Montreal; that again under testimony, Mr. 
Montpetit said, lasted for three days. Will you tell us today in 
this House how much that study cost, and will you table the 
study in this House so we can see how extensively you looked 
into whether or not GigaText  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1623 
 

could actually translate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — First, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell all 
hon. members where I was hiding last week. Mr. Speaker, I left 
town on . . . I don’t remember the date, but I went, Mr. Speaker, 
up to Uranium City and Camsell Portage and Fond-du-Lac, Mr. 
Speaker, Black Lake, Camsell Portage — I already mentioned 
that one — Wollaston Post, and Hatchet Lake, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that I was talking to up there were 
very, very pleased with the fact that they now have unlimited, 
uninterrupted electricity, Mr. Speaker, at five and a half cents as 
compared to 29 cents . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. We are getting 
into debate. And as sometimes happens when the individual 
asks the question, introduces a new topic as well. So I don’t 
think members should cast aspersions back and forth; it was 
part of the question. No doubt the minister took too long to 
answer it, and I’d like to get him to his answer now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The people from the Athabasca region 
appreciated it very much, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to respect 
for the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. And he raised that 
question; I didn’t. He raised that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t me that hijacked this place for 17 days. 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, documents tabled at the court 
case in Montreal clearly show that on October 31 of 1988 
GigaText had not one red cent left in the bank. In less that six 
months it had run through the taxpayers’ $4 million and failed 
to produce one single statute of this legislature. Yet at about the 
same time you were in a Montreal suburb meeting with Guy 
Montpetit, and according to his sworn testimony you were on 
the verge of committing another 125 million of taxpayers’ 
money to the operation. 
 
Were you so caught up in jet-setting around and helicopter tours 
and trips to Boston that you couldn’t even see the forest for the 
trees? And were you so interested in playing a high roller with 
the taxpayers’ money that you had no concept of what was 
really happening with our taxpayers’ dollars in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a 
moment about a question raised by the members opposite, and I 
think it can best be characterized as the NDP style of justice. 
And we shouldn’t be surprised. I’ve been subjected to it before 
in here, Mr. Speaker, and we shouldn’t be surprised that they 
would do it again. It’s the nature of them, Mr. Speaker. But 
they’re prepared to hang this guy and this project without any 
test of fairness, without any test of fairness. 
 

Let’s take a look at the timing of what’s going on here, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a civil trial going on in Montreal. They’re not 
prepared to wait for the outcome of that trial. We have, Mr. 
Speaker, right here in this House, indicated to members 
opposite that the deadline for the technology to be proven and 
up and running — and remember, Mr. Speaker, it’s been over 
some rocky roads because of the civil trial in Montreal — and 
the deadline is June 17. And they’re not prepared to wait to see 
if the technology works. And if it doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker, 
they will rub their hands with glee and we will have lost an 
excellent opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, they are not prepared to wait for the 
tabling or the conclusion of the report from the RCMP, the 
investigation called for by this government, Mr. Speaker, the 
very minute that that civil action began in Montreal. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is the NDP style of justice — hang them, then give 
them a fair trial. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. It’s your 
incompetence that’s under question here today — not court 
cases, not RCMP investigations, but your waste of taxpayers’ 
dollars in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now this new question is to you. We look at 
sworn testimony in Montreal that contradicts what you say in 
this legislature. Who do you think we should believe there, Mr. 
Deputy Premier? In his sworn testimony, Montpetit on 
December 20, 1988 said, and I quote: 
 

When I speak of government, I say Mr. Eric Berntson is 
the deputy prime minister. He is not the latest arrival in 
government. He is the head for all practical purposes. It is 
he who directs the government, the Premier being the one 
who directs the caucus. As I understand it, it is Mr. 
Berntson who is the key person in the grand projects of 
this Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

An interesting assertion that I would wonder if you’ve shared 
with your seat mate, the Premier of this province. 
 
Could you tell us what you did to give Mr. Montpetit the clear 
impression that you were able to visit Montreal and cut a deal 
for $125 million without checking back with your government 
or without the need for any further authorization? What gave 
you that authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m flattered by Mr. 
Montpetit’s assessment of the kind of clout that I have around 
here. I’m also confused, Mr. Speaker, because at the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re calling him a crook and a credible witness, 
and I don’t know how that works, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
how that works. 
 
Now I haven’t read the transcripts of the civil action going on in 
Montreal, Mr. Speaker, in either language. Mr. Speaker, it has 
been made known to me that there are certain other allegations 
that have been made too, brought in by the other side to the 
case. There are two  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1624 
 

sides to every case. 
 
One, Mr. Speaker, there is the suggestion filed in evidence, I’m 
told, in Montreal that this is not a civil action as to whether Mr. 
Montpetit improperly spent this guy’s money from Japan; it is 
. . . in fact it could well be an action designed, Mr. Speaker, for 
a technology grab — a technology grab — one, Mr. Speaker, 
that those people, those people would take great delight in, they 
would take great delight in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have fought against every economic activity 
we have ever brought to this province — ever. They fought 
Weyerhaeuser, they fought the Meadow Lake project, they 
fought the Co-op upgrader, they fought Phillips Cable, they 
fought Babcock & Wilcox, Mr. Speaker, and they rubbed their 
hands with glee that they got the Rafferty project shut down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I question the very motives of every one of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. It’s answers like 
that, Mr. Deputy Premier, that make the people in the province 
of Saskatchewan question your motives, sir, not the motives of 
the official opposition in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — When translations of the statutes were first 
announced in the province of Saskatchewan, going to GigaText 
to translate them, there was no talk of research and 
development; there was no talk about new technology; it was $4 
million to translate the statutes. That is no question, Mr. Deputy 
Premier. 
 
We would like to ask you when you will stop wasting 
taxpayers’ dollars in the province of Saskatchewan? Come 
clean; call an election over the many important issues. You 
won’t proceed with business, you hijack the people in the 
province, you’re anti-democratic. Will you call an election, Mr. 
Deputy Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m a little reluctant to 
even answer the question because I’m afraid that I might get 
into talking a little about hijacking. He raised hijacking, and 
those members know something of hijacking this place, Mr. 
Speaker, for 17 days a short time ago. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, that member has now put himself in 
the same category as Mr. Montpetit. He’s asking me to call an 
election. Well only him and Mr. Montpetit would suggest that I 
have that kind of power. The member, my seat mate, Mr. 
Speaker, gets to do that. And I think in the previous 
administration, I don’t think the deputy premier of that day 
called too many elections  

either, although I do recall when the premier was out of town 
one time you called a by-election, as I recall, yes. Now . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And he flew to Hawaii, right. That’s 
where the premier was, I believe, when you called that 
by-election. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, he talks about: when are we going to 
stop the waste and mismanagement of economic development 
in the province. Mr. Speaker, that member, that member, Mr. 
Speaker, was so critical of us because of Gainers in his home 
town, so critical of us because of Bondar’s in his home town, so 
critical of us because of High R Doors in his home town. Mr. 
Speaker, he wouldn’t recognize positive economic activity in 
this province if he tripped over it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Barber Commission on SaskEnergy, Public Participation 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy 
Premier, but it’s on a new subject matter because as I 
understand it, his colleague, the minister in charge of SEDCO, 
has undertaken on your behalf to provide answers, specific 
answers to a number of questions which were raised last week 
on the question of GigaText, and you’ve not done so today. I 
would like to say, Mr. Speaker, when I preface my question, 
that we’ll be expecting those answers from the Deputy Premier 
or the Premier tomorrow, because it’s now a week since notice 
has been taken of those questions. 
 
However, my question to the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, is 
on a new line and it has to do with the SaskEnergy hearings, 
privatization, and the Barber commission. 
 
The Deputy Premier is no doubt aware that Dr. Barber has 
indicated in statements made to the press that notwithstanding 
$1,100 a day and several other thousands of dollars for legal 
fees and advertising and associated expenses for the Barber 
commission hearings, he doesn’t view it his mandate to make 
any decision with respect to whether or not the privatization of 
SaskEnergy goes ahead or not goes ahead. 
 
In the light of this statement by Dr. Barber, one might even say 
absolving of any responsibility by himself of this whole 
exercise, what in the world does the Deputy Premier see as the 
purpose of this inquiry, other than to act as a whitewash for the 
government’s ill-timed and ill-planned-out move in the first 
place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Two things, Mr. Speaker. Number one, 
I’ll be happy to come into question period tomorrow or the next 
day or the next day, or whenever they want, and get up, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the extent that I can, answer every question that 
has been put by members opposite, providing, Mr. Speaker, 
they don’t sit there and holler and scream because we’re taking 
up question period. 
 
We took notice of it, Mr. Speaker, and I would . . . 
 
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1625 
 

An Hon. Member: — A week ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well I wasn’t here; I got here this 
morning. I got here this morning. And as I say, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
be happy to answer the questions, but it may take up their 
precious little question period to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the second question, on the second question, Mr. Speaker, 
these people, Mr. Speaker, last week accused the RCMP 
investigation of being a whitewash. Now they are accusing very 
credible people like Dr. Lloyd Barber of being used as a vehicle 
for a whitewash. I think that is totally incredible, totally unfair, 
and not becoming of that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier. I don’t believe anybody on this side accuses 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police of having a whitewash. I 
have confidence in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You didn’t last week. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And we did last week too. What we want to 
do is to make sure that your accountability as minister on this 
GigaText affair is fully out in the open. 
 
I come back to the question that I direct to you, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, which you so conveniently side-stepped. The question 
I give to you is this: what in the world are the terms of reference 
of the Barber Commission? The Barber Commission says itself, 
as a result of the newspaper reports a few days ago, that it won’t 
have the task of determining whether or not — or 
recommending to you whether or not privatization of 
SaskEnergy should go ahead. 
 
What in the world do the terms of reference mean? What in the 
world are we paying all this money for this commission to do? 
What other logical conclusion can be made except that it’s a 
whitewash? You give me a good answer to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, members 
opposite come to this with a bit of a bias. I’m told that the 
member . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And you don’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I have a bias, I have a bias, and I’d like 
to see this public offering done. Because of expressions of 
concern by you and others, we implemented the Barber 
Commission to provide for public input. And they are looking 
at just that. They are looking at just that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members of the commission are Dr. Lloyd Barber, right . . . 
and look, this is the bias I am talking about. One of your 
members, the member for Regina Rosemont, in this House the 
other night said,” . . . a great believer in public enterprise.” He’s 
talking about Dr. Lloyd Barber, “  

. . . a great believer in public enterprise; a great believer in the 
people of Saskatchewan; that person that has a hard time 
keeping his own university together.” 
 
Now that’s what I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker. You guys, you 
know nothing of fairness or reason, just personal attack — hang 
them . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Situation in People’s Republic of China 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a 
statement. I’ve forwarded a copy to the House Leader of the 
Opposition. The statement is as follows. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan deplores the violent 
suppression of peaceful demonstrators calling for increased 
democracy within the People’s Republic of China. The 
Government of Saskatchewan extends its deepest sympathy to 
the families of those killed and injured and asks that the 
Chinese military refrain from further violence against the 
citizens and urges the government to demonstrate tolerance and 
openness. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has been in contact with the 
federal government. We support the response of the federal 
government, on behalf of all Canadians, to this tragic situation, 
and we will continue to be in close contact with the 
Government of Canada to ensure an effective and co-ordinated 
response to the situation. 
 
We are presently trying with the Government of Canada to find 
ways to maintain lines of communication between people here 
in Canada and their families in China. We have been assured at 
this point by the Government of Canada that Canadians in the 
People’s Republic of China are safe. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not at all clear 
what the purpose of the minister’s statement was in saying the 
things that he has said to this House. Certainly everyone is 
concerned about events in China as they developed over the 
weekend and watched with great concern the news reports as to 
what had happened in the city of Beijing, and we will all, I 
know, continue to watch those with great care. 
 
It’s of particular significance to us in the province of 
Saskatchewan because of the trading links that we have with the 
People’s Republic of China, not only with respect to our grain 
but with respect to our potash and a good deal of our 
technology, and we’re all watching with great concern on 
account of the important relationship that China and 
Saskatchewan enjoy as we witnessed in this legislature and in 
this province with the visit of Mr. Wan Li in the very recent 
past. 
 
So we on this side of the House share the minister’s concern, as 
we share their sympathy for the people who  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1626 
 

were killed and injured in the events, and we certainly hope 
that, in some way or other, the situation in China will resolve 
itself in a way that is satisfactory to the people of China and, 
indeed, to the human rights and human betterment in all 
respects. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think hon. members should just tone 
down so that the House can hear the order of business that’s 
going on. It’s not becoming to this House that when we’re 
going through these motions we have a lot of hollering and you 
can’t even hear what’s going on. Now we’re on government 
motions, and I would appreciate if we could hear what the Clerk 
is saying. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
take part in the debate on rules and procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly, and namely rule 33(1), the method that is 
used to call in the members, and that is the bell-ringing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we are today, getting close to 50 days in the 
legislature, the 49th day debating, the 50th day, Mr. Speaker, 
debating rules changes, namely the bell-ringing. And I think 
that the citizens of Saskatchewan would far sooner see us in 
here debating the problems that we face out in the province of 
unemployment and stuff like that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And I’m sure that the member from Rosthern, he’ll have his 
chance to get up and speak when the time comes. I sincerely 
hope that all the members will get up. 
 
What we see today now is a government that is totally out of 
touch with reality, Mr. Speaker. They really don’t know or 
understand what has been happening in the province, especially 
in the last three to four weeks, Mr. Speaker. They just haven’t 
learned their lesson. The government thinks that the problem is 
that the opposition has delayed their plans, their plans to 
privatize SaskPower. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
citizens of Saskatchewan most certainly are totally opposed to 
the privatization of SaskPower, and that is one of the main 
reasons that we’re in here debating this bell-ringing rule change 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The public thinks the problem is that the 
government proposed this plan in the first place. To understand 
what has really been happening in this province the last four 
weeks, you have to understand a fundamental concept of the 
parliamentary democracy,  

and that is a mandate. 
 
Governments are elected, and thereby have a mandate to 
undertake the policy and programs they promised the voters that 
they would implement. That is a trust relationship between the 
public and the elected government. Trust is the basis of any 
elected government mandate. To the very best of a 
government’s ability, it must work to implement the programs 
and policies which it promised the voters that it would. When 
that trust relationship is violated, the mandate of any 
government comes in question. 
 
Changing of the rules — and this is not something new to 
Conservative governments, Mr. Speaker. This has also 
happened back in 1912 when we had a federal Conservative 
prime minister of Michael (Arthur) Meighen. 
 
And this happened in 1912 when closure was first brought into 
the parliaments of Canada and the legislatures, and what they 
brought closure in for was a money Bill. They wanted to pass a 
money Bill so that they could buy ships for the Royal Navy in 
England. And that’s when closure was first used, and this is 
what . . . the tactic that’s being used here today as we see in our 
legislature. 
 
Of course, I’m not talking about unforeseen circumstances. A 
Supreme Court ruling, a major economic or agriculture crisis — 
these unforeseen circumstances require every government to 
govern to the best of their ability and to sometimes change their 
promises to the public because of these changed circumstances. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is not the case here. 
 
If a government takes the time to explain those changed 
circumstances and to justify them to the public, the public can 
accept those changes and be very understanding, and the 
government’s mandate to act is still intact. And this was not a 
promise by the government, that they were going to sell off 
SaskPower, and that’s really why we’re in here debating the 
bell-ringing is because of an ideology that this government has. 
And they are going down one trail, and that alone is to sell off 
the assets of Saskatchewan and namely the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. 
 
However, what no elected government can do and expect to get 
support from the public is to consciously and deliberately betray 
the people of a fundamental issue. That’s what happened in the 
case of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. The government misled the 
people of this province and it said one thing and did exactly the 
opposite. That’s a fundamental betrayal. The people saw it as 
such, and more than half of the population told Angus Reid that 
it was an important enough issue to require an election in this 
province. 
 
In short, the Conservative government didn’t have a mandate 
from the public to proceed. Our efforts were to bring the 
government to its senses to prevent this betrayal from moving 
forward when the large majority of the public totally opposed it, 
and that’s why the bell-ringing took place in this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker. And the public’s voice was heard, Mr. Speaker. It 
was heard loud  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1627 
 

and clear. And the government reacted. It created a review 
panel and pulled the legislation. 
 
And if we didn’t have access to bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker . . . 
and that’s why this Bill has been pulled. That’s why it’s not 
being rammed through the legislature at this time, because we 
used that rule of calling in the members and ringing the bells. 
 
The government wants to pass this Bill so that it can sell off 
Saskatchewan assets — SaskPower and Sask potash. And as 
you can see, Mr. Speaker, the government has withdrawn that 
legislation. And if we did not have access to the bell-ringing 
and to call in the members to fight this type of legislation, then 
probably by now you would see the assets of our province, 
namely the natural gas side of SaskPower, would have been in a 
legal position to privatize and sell it off. 
 
Hopefully this tactic that we have used and the rules of 
bell-ringing — calling in the members — will bring the 
government to its senses and they will not go ahead with the 
sale of Saskatchewan’s assets, especially a major asset such as 
SaskPower. 
 
(1445) 
 
But now the government with the tone of this debate seems to 
be showing that it is totally oblivious to what has transpired. It 
doesn’t seem to understand that the issue here is not the 
bell-ringing but their betrayal of a major promise to the people 
of this province. We feel that perhaps this issue should be sent 
to an all-party committee of the legislature for study. Mr. 
Speaker, we feel that if you’re going to make such major 
changes as what we’re making to bringing in the members and 
the bell-ringing, that it should be put before an all-party 
committee to discuss and implement rule changes. 
 
But what is taking place right now, Mr. Speaker, is we have a 
government that is going totally against parliamentary tradition. 
Instead of making the changes with an all-party committee, they 
are doing this by themselves. And that goes against 
parliamentary tradition, Mr. Speaker, and we totally oppose 
that. An all-party committee to make any rule changes — and 
there could be many changes made — that’s where the process 
belongs. 
 
The motive of the government opposite in proposing rule 
changes before us is undoubtedly the most important issue in 
this debate. This motive is worthy of close examination because 
it says a great deal about the arrogance of the government 
opposite. This rule change is a means of ensuring the success of 
future SaskPower and other unpopular privatization legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just say to you that we are going to oppose 
this with all our power. We most certainly don’t want to have a 
rule taken away that gives us access, the only access we have 
right now as an opposition, to stop what is taking place in 
Saskatchewan, namely the privatization of our assets and loss of 
control. 
 
It is quite obvious in light of the remarkable recent events, that 
the government need this rule change to privatize  

SaskPower against the clearly expressed wishes of the people of 
Saskatchewan. It is a sad day for our province when vindictive 
rule changes have become necessary for the Conservatives to 
ram through their extreme right-wing ideology legislative 
agenda. 
 
And there’s many that has taken place, Mr. Speaker. SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation); the potash; 
our forestry; highways is gone; the dental program is gone. And 
you just have to take a look at the results that have happened in 
this province because of the privatization that has taken place. 
And this is why we’re using this method to try and bring the 
government to its senses, to try and stop them from selling off 
these major assets such as the Green Lake . . . Silver Lake farm 
in Green Lake. 
 
And I say to the minister of privatization, and I sincerely hope 
he’ll take this seriously, that if he is going to privatize it, that he 
will give the same opportunity to the citizens of Green Lake as 
he gave to Weyerhaeuser and Peter Pocklington. Because those 
folks up in Green Lake deserve that right, and this is what we’re 
in here fighting for. We’re in here fighting for a fundamental 
rule change . . . to stop a fundamental rule change that gives us 
the powers to stop this type of privatization and the outflow of 
our assets to Alberta and other parts of Canada and the United 
States. 
 
And you can see, Mr. Speaker, what has taken place since 
privatization. We just have to take a look at the debt that we 
have in this province. In 1982 we had $139 million in the bank 
when the Conservatives took over; today we have an operating 
budget of $4 billion. And that is what privatization is doing to 
this province. It is literally destroying the province and sending 
it into complete bankruptcy. And we need these tools. We have 
to use the bell-ringing process so that we can bring this 
government to its senses and try and stop the massive sell-off of 
our assets that’s taken place. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Something which they promised they 
wouldn’t do. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And that’s right. This is what they 
promised, when they went around campaigning in 1986, that 
they would not do this, and particularly indicated they would 
not sell off a major utility, especially a major utility such as 
SaskPower. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if they go through with this 
and they sell off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and 
they end up selling off SMDC, we are losing assets that is going 
to continually drive this province further and further in debt. 
We need these powers and we need these rules to try and stop 
this, Mr. Speaker. This is one of the main reasons why we’re 
debating the bell-ringing rule today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it must not be forgotten that 67 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents surveyed by Angus Reid oppose the 
Saskatchewan government’s plans to privatize SaskEnergy — 
65 per cent of them oppose the sell-off of SaskEnergy. The 
citizens of the province clearly reject the Conservative 
government’s visions of the future, blatant privatization, which 
is to dismantle everything which  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1628 
 

Saskatchewan people have built and give away the benefits to 
foreign investors and a few wealthy friends. 
 
And as I indicated before to you, Mr. Speaker, that this is what 
has taken place. It’s not only taken place with the Silver Lake 
farm in Green Lake; they want to sell off the potash; they’ve 
privatized the dental program in this province, taken away a 
good program and destroyed over 400 young women in the 
process of doing it. 
 
And they’re selling off our assets to wealthy friends. One only 
has to take a look at what’s happening to the potash. If they sell 
off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which made $106 
million profit this year, and I believe it made over $400 million 
in the years between 1982 and 1986, this is an asset that we 
need. We need it to build hospitals and schools and nursing 
homes and the like. Now what they want to do is sell off 
SaskEnergy, which is a profitable side of SaskPower, and we 
just have to put a stop to that. 
 
The people have rejected the privatization of the power 
corporation and the breakup of a major utility. They have 
resoundingly rejected a return to the 1940’s, when private 
utility companies gouged the people of the province and refused 
to provide adequate services. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, had Tommy Douglas not created 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and we still had the 
private individuals who were using diesel power in our smaller 
communities to provide power at high cost, we would never, 
ever have seen rural Saskatchewan lit up. We never, ever would 
have seen Northern Saskatchewan lit up under the private 
entrepreneurs. 
 
SaskPower is a good corporation. It’s provided the services to 
the rural areas and to the smaller communities. It’s provided 
power to northern Saskatchewan. You can go into any 
community in northern Saskatchewan and they all have power. 
That’s through SaskPower. And now they want to dismantle it 
and sell it. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have to put a stop to 
this, and that’s what we are trying to do right now. 
 
We will continue to fight to bring the government to its senses. 
We’ll continue to fight this type of a rule change that gives us 
the only tool that we have right now to stop the type of 
privatization and the destruction of this province. 
 
The government, however, clearly intends to ignore the public 
wishes not to proceed with the sale of SaskEnergy. The minister 
of privatization has publicly stated that the Bills will be 
reintroduced when the review panel has completed its work. 
And what he’s doing right there is prejudging what that review 
panel is bringing in. I suggest what may be brought in and what 
the people of this province are going to say to that commission 
is, we don’t want to sell off the assets of SaskEnergy and to 
SaskPower. 
 
And I sincerely hope that when that report comes in, that that 
commission will be listening to the citizens of this province and 
will bring in a report that will completely stop the ideology of 
this government to sell off our assets, and in this particular case, 
SaskEnergy. 
 

This rule change is very instrumental to the government in 
ramming its unpopular privatization plans down the throats of 
the public. They want clear sailing, their time is short, and they 
want no delays. And I say that in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government’s time is short. And what they want to do, they 
want to finish off what they have started, and that was to 
destroy everything that was built up by successive CCF and 
NDP governments in this province — to sell off those assets. 
And that is the agenda of this Conservative government. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the citizens of this province will 
not tolerate it. Once the writ is issued and an election is called 
28 days later, this Conservative government will be gone, and 
there will be a New Democratic government in this province, 
and there will be breath of fresh air over this province. And I 
know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I know that the member of Saltcoats, 
he sits in his seat and he chatters, but I want to say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Saltcoats will not be seeking 
re-election in this province again. I say that to you in all 
sincerity. He will not seek re-election again; he knows that, and 
that’s why he’s not getting up and speaking in this debate. He 
knows that it’s wrong. He knows full well that the folks out in 
Saltcoats are opposed to the sale of SaskEnergy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And he also knows that the folks out in 
Saltcoats support the tactic that we have been using in ringing 
the bells in here to try and bring this government to its senses. 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that’s why, that when the 
nomination for the Conservative candidate comes up in 
Saltcoats, the present member will not be seeking the 
nomination because he will not be running again. He falls into 
the category of the 23 or 24 that will never seek re-election in 
this province again. And he falls into that category. 
 
But I ask him to get up and give his side of the story if he 
sincerely believes that we should be selling off SaskEnergy, if 
he thinks that we should not have the ability to bring in our 
members by the rule of ringing the bells. If he’s opposed to that, 
then I urge him to stand up and speak. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the proposed rule change will go 
a long way towards perhaps putting in the hands of the 
government the power to steamroller over the wishes and the 
will of not only the opposition but the people of Saskatchewan, 
with respect to the privatization of SaskPower, and make no 
mistake, Mr. Speaker, other publicly owned assets. 
 
That’s the agenda of the Tory government. That’s their agenda. 
They don’t want this rule in here. They want to limit the 
bell-ringing to one hour, so that the opposition can’t get up and 
fight the sell-off of these assets, and to do what the majority of 
the citizens of this province want. And I think it’s incumbent 
upon those members over there to listen to their constituents, 
because there’s many,  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1629 
 

many members over there that have . . . should have a long 
political career ahead of them. Many of them have just been 
elected for the first time. And I think that what they should be 
doing is listening to their constituents, getting up and speaking 
on this debate, and most certainly in your caucus, trying to stop 
the sell-off of the assets that we have in this province and the 
destruction of not only your political lives but the destruction of 
our province. I say, stand up and speak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — The members opposite will try to justify 
this heavy-handed, unilateral change of the rules of the House 
by claiming that the opposition would use the tactics of the bells 
on any issue in the future, and could in fact paralyse the 
government. As an aside, the PC government has paralysed the 
operations of the government for over seven years, Mr. 
Speaker. We see the destruction that has taken place in this 
province and we have to put a stop to it. 
 
We use the bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, only when our province 
has been put in jeopardy. And I say to you in all sincerity, and I 
say it to the members opposite — and I see the member from 
Saltcoats is continually chirping from his seat; it will be 
interesting to see what he has to say when he stands up in this 
debate — I say to you that the province is being put in jeopardy 
if we’re going to sell off all these assets and, in particular, a 
major utility such as SaskEnergy. 
 
And the only way that we have to fight back, and I say that in 
all sincerity to the member from Saltcoats, is the bell-ringing 
rule. And we’re using that and I think it’s been successful, and I 
sincerely hope that some of the other members will take up the 
challenge and get in this battle to maintain those assets for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I say to you, this government doesn’t yet understand why this 
whole situation came about. It did not happen because the 
opposition was prepared to take that sort of unwarranted action. 
It happened because something in the order of 70 per cent of the 
people of Saskatchewan were opposed to the government’s 
intention to privatize SaskPower — and I indicated to you 
before, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of the citizens in this 
province are totally opposed to the sell-off of our assets — and 
because the people have understood that this issue will 
determine what future direction this province will take for 
generations to come. This government does not yet understand 
the magnitude of the grass roots public opposing their 
privatization madness. 
 
And I think that that speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker, when you 
see all the hundreds of thousands of individuals around this 
province who are signing petitions, who are answering calls 
when they are polled, and they indicate clearly that they are 
opposed to the selling off of the assets, and they fully support 
the rule that we are debating here right now, and that is the 
bell-ringing rule. 
 
The public of Saskatchewan would never have tolerated the 
actions of the opposition if it were not for the fact that  

they believed that this government was totally wrong-headed in 
its approach. It was on a course that was so inappropriate for the 
needs of Saskatchewan at this time and place in our history that 
they would tolerate almost any actions being taken with the 
rules to try and stop a majority government forcing its will in a 
totally unacceptable manner on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province . . . the people of the province were 
given the opportunity to express their will through petitions, 
their letter-writing, public meetings, and other democratic 
means. The use of the bells was acceptable to most of this 
province because they want the government stopped, because it 
is proceeding on an ill-considered course without having first 
found out what the public believes and what the public wants to 
see happen in this province. 
 
And that is the reason, Mr. Speaker, why we’re in here debating 
this rule change, the ringing of the bells. And one only has to 
take a look at the meetings that have been held around this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and the support that we have been 
getting for the stand that we have taken on this rule change. 
 
I want to share with you, Mr. Speaker, Jeanne Sauvé’s 
expressed opinion regarding the use of bell-ringing by the 
Conservatives in the House of Commons in 1982, and I quote: 
 

 I may point out that the obstructive tactics are allowed by the 
rules; however, their use must be regulated so as to safeguard 
the government’s right to have the House consider its order of 
business and the equally important right of the opposition to 
criticize, oppose, and even obstruct a government measure. 
 

And this was March 18, 1982, Mr. Speaker. The government 
may not like the message which the people of this province 
have sent to it on the privatization of SaskPower, but it ignores 
that message and proceeds with unilateral changes at its own 
peril. The residents of Saskatchewan do not appreciate being 
misled. And this Premier and this Deputy Premier, they said, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a major utility would never be 
privatized, and now they turn around and do the opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the action taken by the government in proposing 
this unilateral rule change is totally unprecedented in this 
legislature, and the government knows this. The Minister of 
Justice has admitted publicly that this is the first time that he is 
aware of the rules committee being passed by, and he makes no 
apologies — I repeat, and he makes no apologies. He does not 
believe in an all-party committee. And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that in doing that, he does not believe in democracy. 
 
When the opposition returned to the House, the Premier stated 
publicly that the government would talk to the New Democrats 
about a possible change in the bell-ringing rules. And that’s 
what should have been done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There should 
have been an all-party committee of Conservative government 
members and opposition members to discuss this rule,  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1630 
 

and the Premier indicated that that was going to take place. 
 
Obviously the Premier’s initial reaction was the correct one in 
terms of the parliamentary traditions of this House. However, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, shortly afterwards, on the same day, the 
government served notice it was introducing the rule change 
without consulting the opposition — a blatant breach of 
democracy, I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Until now, the Saskatchewan legislature has had a long tradition 
of consultation and co-operation in rule changes, of all-party 
consent on rules. This has been the strength of our system, that 
the majority does not ram through procedures without minority 
input and the approval of all concerned in the House. 
 
Throughout the history of this Assembly, substantial 
consultation on rule changes has taken place through the 
mechanism of an all-party committee which are given a 
mandate by the Assembly. Rule changes have for the most part 
been accomplished through consensus and without division, and 
examples are in 1975 and 1981 and 1986, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and there are many examples. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these all-party 
committees have undertaken comprehensive reviews of the 
rules and have brought forward legitimate proposals for reform. 
This government proposes a single rule change which has come 
about because of extreme difficulties with its own privatization 
program. This could only be seen as the action of a cynical and 
undemocratic government with one goal in mind, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: to destroy Saskatchewan by selling off our assets and 
selling off a major asset right now, I say, in SaskPower. 
 
Clearly the tradition in this House has been not to unilaterally 
tinker with the very important rules and procedures of the 
Assembly. As an institution, this House has withstood major 
and extremely polarized debates, debates with very high stakes, 
and governments of the past have not unilaterally altered the 
rules to suit their immediate purposes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to place on the record that in 
the past, consensus has always been sought on rule changes. 
Never, ever have we taken this method before. In the future I 
would hope that the consensus would always be sought. 
 
But this government is setting a precedent, a precedent that we 
are not unmindful of, that says that if the rules are not in 
accordance with the wishes and desires of the government, you 
go ahead and change them for your own purpose. And that, I 
don’t believe is healthy or democratic, and will come back to 
haunt this Conservative government. I say to you in all 
sincerity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is rammed through, it will 
come back to haunt your government. 
 
Unfortunately, this motion is yet another in a wide range of 
anti-democratic actions by this government. I would like to 
review some of those, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they paint a 
scary trend leading towards a tyranny. 
 

To begin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was fundamentally 
undemocratic of the government to introduce the SaskPower 
privatization Bills, to propose such a major change without a 
mandate from the people of the province. And that’s why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’re in here discussing this rule change 
today. We used the method that we had at our disposal, and that 
is the ringing of the bells, and if that rule change is taken away, 
then we lose that. 
 
Such a major change, without a mandate from the people of this 
province and with no prior consultation on the sell-off of a 
major public utility. The Finance minister has admitted the 
absence of the public consultation by the government on this 
crucial issue. In a stand of unbelievable arrogance and defiance 
of democracy, this government still plans to forge ahead with 
their privatization plans. 
 
They say the only problem is that they have do a bigger and 
better selling job to the people of Saskatchewan. Not enough 
people have been conned into believing their lines yet. And they 
never will. And they never will. More and more are turning 
against the government, especially when they use the tactics 
that they are using today, to muzzle the only way that we have 
as a government to change the rules of the legislature, 
especially the rule where the bell-ringing is involved. 
 
The government’s commitment to parliamentary tradition and 
respect for the democratic process is highly circumspect. The 
list of undemocratic actions and practices by this government is 
staggering, Mr. Speaker. The latest reworking of 
Saskatchewan’s constituencies, which will apply to the next 
election if passed by the legislature, represents an unacceptable 
deviation from the democratic principle of one person, one vote. 
 
This is most evident by comparing the ridings of Morse and 
Humboldt, both rural constituencies. In the Morse riding there 
are 7,757 voters, compared with 11,734 in Humboldt. It is 
blatantly unfair to allow variations of up to 4,000 votes between 
some ridings, and the B. C. Supreme Court ruling in April made 
this abundantly clear. 
 
And I say that when you bring before this legislature legislation 
to change the rules in this House without using an all-party 
committee of the legislature, and especially when we’re dealing 
with such a major change as the ringing of the bells in this 
legislature, I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this cannot 
be tolerated and should not be tolerated by this legislature, nor 
by the citizens of this province. 
 
It must be remembered that the present government changed the 
boundary rules before boundaries were re-drawn. They serve to 
ensure the present electoral boundary outcome. The 
commission’s hands were tied before they even began a blatant 
partisan move by a desperate and unpopular government. In 
1971, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Ross Thatcher found out that the 
people of Saskatchewan believe in fairness, and the Premier’s 
government will not get away with this gerrymander. It will 
backfire. And I say that when we debate the rule changes in this 
House, brought forward without an  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1631 
 

all-party commission, that this will come back to haunt this 
government also. 
 
And the same happened with the ward system, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve seen what happened in that. Again in the municipal 
elections of last fall, urban voters endorsed the ward system 
concept and asked for its reinstatement. The Urban Affairs 
minister continues to maintain that he, and he alone, is right 
about this issue. And the only reason that he goes around and 
states that is because the wards were created by a New 
Democratic government. Another Conservative ideology, to 
tear down what has been built up by this government, exactly 
the same way as they’re trying to ram this rule change through 
the legislature today. 
 
(1515) 
 
One of the most significant undemocratic acts of this provincial 
government was their failure to disclose to the people of 
Saskatchewan the actual deficit in 1986. Instead, after a 
provincial election campaign, the Finance minister presented a 
budget which revealed that his deficit forecasting had been 
miscalculated by some $800 million. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — I would ask for leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I thank the hon. member for allowing me to interrupt his 
speech to introduce some guests. 
 
They are a group of 34 grade 3 and 4 students from Fairview 
School in the city of Yorkton, and they’re sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery. And they are accompanied today by two 
teachers, Sally Struthers and Mary Beth Kolhert, and 
chaperones, Millie Sharp and Mrs. Tate, and bus driver, Bradley 
Westerhaug. We want to welcome you here to the Assembly 
today. 
 
You’re witnessing the debate on Bill No. 33. The member from 
Athabasca is speaking at the present time. And we hope you 
enjoy your stay at the Assembly this afternoon, and that you 
enjoy your tours that you have through the building. And I will 
meet with you at 4 o’clock for refreshments and a question and 
answer period, if that’s what you wish, out on the lawn. 
 
And I would ask all members to please welcome the students 
from Fairview School here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As I said before I sat down, prior to 1986, the Minister 
of Finance, in calculating his budget, was out $800 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That’s what he was. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The relevance of bringing this 
into the debate, I don’t see it as being relevant. The question 
before the Assembly is the changing of rule 33(1), and the 
process is certainly relevant, and any processes that were done 
before, but no specifics are relevant to this debate. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I will try and speak to the motion and not get off track. 
 
I was only using these examples, as I have done throughout my 
speech, to indicate that the opposition needs this type of a rule. 
We need the bell-ringing rule so that we can fight the type of 
privatization and the situations that are taking place in this 
province. And I respect your ruling and I will not refer to the 
budget again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But this is why we are here today. We are debating a rule 
change, a rule change that I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will muzzle the opposition. It does not give us the opportunity 
to be able to ring the bells so that we can call in our members 
when we want to vote on an important issue, whether that issue 
be the privatization of SaskPower or whatever it may be. 
 
This is what we need. We have to have this rule, and that’s why 
I’m here today debating the fact that we have to have that rule 
in there, and that rule is bell-ringing which allows us to call in 
our members, and should not be limited to one hour. And I say 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is what we are doing. 
 
If we did not have that tool at our disposal, we would not be 
able to fight such legislation that the people of Saskatchewan 
totally oppose, and the polls have shown that. Citizens in this 
province have spoken out, and they have come in, they have 
signed petitions, they have answered polls. And as Angus Reid 
says, that over 80 per cent of the population in this province are 
opposed to the sell-off of SaskPower, and over 80 per cent of 
the population in this province agree with the tactics that we are 
using, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in using the rule that we have at our 
disposal to ring the bells. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is a parliamentary 
tradition, and if it is ever going to be changed, it should never 
be changed unilaterally by a government that is desperate to 
ram through legislation that is unpopular. 
 
If we want to change the bell-ringing rule or any other rules of 
the legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then what we should be 
doing is getting an all-party committee together, and the 
government, the opposition, should sit down, discuss what the 
rule change is going to be. Like the Premier indicated when he 
came back into the  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1632 
 

House, he indicated that there should be a change and that we 
have to take a look at the rules of bell-ringing. 
 
But then they changed their mind, brought in legislation without 
any consultation with the opposition. And I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that that is why we are here today, and that is 
why we are debating this rule change. And we will continue to 
debate this rule change, we will continue to fight so that we can 
have access to the rule that states clearly that we can call in the 
members, and there is no time limit as to when we bring them 
in to fight the type of legislation that 80 per cent of the 
population of this province want us to stand up and fight for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — We have to have this access, and I say to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — . . . if that fundamental democratic right is 
taken away from us, I don’t see how we can operate as an 
opposition. If this rule change goes through, it just clearly gives 
the member from Yorkton, who is pointing his finger at me, an 
opportunity to continue on the type of destruction that he has 
been involved in, a member of that Conservative government, 
in the sell-off of our assets. And this bell-ringing change in the 
rules came about because of the stand that the New Democratic 
Party took, especially on the sell-off of SaskPower. That’s why 
we’re in here debating it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And one can go back, and you can look at 
the statements of the member from Yorkton who used to be the 
minister in charge of one of our great assets, and that’s the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And he was a member 
who always stood up in this House and supported it and said it 
was good for Saskatchewan. We own 100 per cent of it, but 
now he is a party to that and wants to sell off the potash 
corporation to 45 per cent foreign, 55 per cent Canadian. 
 
And I say to the member from Yorkton, if you proceed, and this 
government proceeds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, who now own 100 per cent of that corporation, 
will literally lose control and will lose all that asset to foreign 
and other parts of Canadian investors. We won’t own it and we 
own it now. And I think, Mr. Member from Yorkton, you 
should stand up in this House and you should fight back. And 
you probably will never seek re-election in this province again 
either. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this an important 
rule change. It’s a rule change that takes democracy out of this 
legislature, and we cannot allow that to happen. We want to 
continue this debate; we’ve started on it; we want continue 
debating this rule change, and we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say many more words on this Bill, 
but at this time I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it agreed? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I think one can see here, when we’re 
debating this rule change, what is more important to the 
Conservative government of this province. Is it the business at 
hand, the unemployment rate that we have, the out-migration of 
our young men and women in this province? No, it’s a rule 
change that they want to ram down the throats of the opposition 
so that they can continue to sell off the assets of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That is the only reason. I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that that’s the ulterior motive of this 
government, is to pass this legislation to muzzle the opposition 
so we cannot call in our members to the bell-ringing process, so 
that they can continue to sell off our assets such as SaskPower, 
the potash corporation, SMDC, and many others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — There’s very few members that are even 
prepared, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to get up and debate this. It’s cut 
and dried. They want to ram it down our throats, and that’s the 
way they want to go. And they’re headed down that trail, and I 
say they’re headed down the trail of destruction for that 
Conservative Party in the next election. And I tell you, if you 
keep this up, that election’s going to come a lot quicker than 
you think. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — This is going against democracy, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in closing off I just want to say that we 
here today are debating a very important change in the rules of 
this legislature. And when the Minister of Urban Affairs got up 
and he was speaking here the other day, and he said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we will be judged, the Conservative Party 
would be judged on this rule change, I say to you, and through 
you to those members, yes, they will be judged, and they will be 
judged severely in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I sincerely hope, I sincerely hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that the remarks I have made today on the rule changes 
regarding bell-ringing will challenge some of these members to 
get up and speak. And I sincerely hope that they will take this 
legislation and take it back and forget about it and then bring in 
an all-party commission if they want to make rule changes. But 
let’s get on to running this province, creating jobs, and 
maintaining the assets we have. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — It’s with pleasure that I rise today to speak,  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1633 
 

and to speak to all members of this House and to the members 
opposite. I’m not afraid to speak, and I’m glad to be here to be 
able to speak, and I’m glad that the members are back so that 
we can speak. 
 
I support the motion. And I support the motion to make the 
changes to rule 33 because I’m proud to speak, I’m proud to be 
here, I’m proud to hear the members opposite, and I’m proud to 
hear the members on this side of the House. This is the place to 
speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was elected to this legislature in December, and I 
must say that the experiences of this spring have been second to 
none, and they’ve been very disappointing — very 
disappointing. Very disappointing to hear that the members 
opposite are afraid to speak. Very disappointing to hear that the 
members opposite are afraid to debate, to debate here in the 
House. 
 
I believe in democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I believe in democracy and I believe in this 
House and I have faith in members on both sides of this 
Assembly. I’m glad to hear them speak. I’m glad to hear all 
members speak, and I’m glad to hear them speak here in this 
House. 
 
I’ve heard many, many things this spring, and some of those 
things come to mind, Mr. Speaker. They come to mind at this 
time. I want to remind the members opposite; I want to remind 
them of a few things that they’ve said, and I’d just like them to 
hear them. 
 
(1530) 
 
I’d possibly like to remind the members why they are here and 
just who they represent and what they represent. I was sworn in 
and remember hearing an allegiance to Her Majesty, Mr. 
Speaker. I remember being told who I represent. I remember 
being told that I represent the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I represent this province. And I’m 
proud, I’m proud to be here and I’m proud to be given that 
honour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just ask everybody here, I ask everybody here to remember 
just who they are and who they represent and what they 
represent and what this House represents, Mr. Speaker. This is 
what makes this House so special, Mr. Speaker. We are truly 
privileged people, and that privilege, Mr. Speaker, is to be here 
and to speak, Mr. Speaker — it’s to be here and it’s to speak. 
 
The word “parliament,” Mr. Speaker, means “to speak.” 
Parliament bases its power on the fundamental right of freedom 
of speech. The members are speaking to and for the people. The 
people give us the power we have, and we have a right and a 
responsibility to speak for those people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — And that right and privilege is to be in this 
House and to speak for the people we represent, and to speak 
for those people here in this House — not in on the  

streets, but here in this House. This House is the place to speak, 
Mr. Speaker, this House is the place for debate. 
 
And the bells are rung for one reason and one reason alone, and 
that’s to summon members here to this House to vote, and to 
speak for the people that we represent, Mr. Speaker. The bells 
are not rung to give us the opportunity to leave and prevent 
debate. What have they to fear? Debate? Free speech? I ask 
you. They are rung to call us here, and if we truly understand 
the rules, we know that, Mr. Speaker, and that is right, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why I’m proud to be here and I’m proud to 
speak today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I want to refer briefly to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s welcoming comments to me when I came to this 
House, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank him. I want to thank him 
very much for his welcome, because I truly believe he meant 
what he said. And I quote from Hansard, Mr. Speaker: 
 

And I really think I speak now to all of the members, 
notwithstanding our differences and our partisanship and 
sometimes the heated nature of our debates, to serve in this 
Assembly is indeed a rare and high privilege. 
 
In a sense, it is a trust — a trust we have to honour as best 
as we can. And I don’t say this by way of a lecture; I just 
simply say that this is, in my judgement, a club, an 
exclusive club that you’ve joined. 
 

And I thank him again for that welcome, and I thank him for 
welcoming me to this exclusive club. Note the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition referred to serving in this Assembly, and he 
talked about this exclusive club. 
 
And I’m proud to serve in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
proud to be able to speak here and support the kinds of things 
that this House represents. And I’m proud to be part of this 
debate, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud to be part of this debate. 
 
I’d also like to comment on a few of the other things that the 
Leader of the Opposition has said. The member from 
Riversdale talked about a mandate; he talked about a mandate. 
What is this government’s mandate? What is the opposition’s 
mandate? What is my mandate, Mr. Speaker? I was elected in 
December. I sought a mandate and I got one. I laid out my plan. 
I laid out my vision and I laid out my mandate. And I got it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I ask the members opposite: did I talk about 
diversification; did I talk about health care; did I talk about 
tourism, mineral resources, and economic development? You 
bet I did, Mr. Speaker. I sought a mandate and I got it. 
 
I’m pursuing that mandate, Mr. Speaker, and I truly feel 
betrayed. I feel betrayed by the members opposite for their 
obstruction, for their obstructionist tactics to make this 
government and this province ungovernable. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1634 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s truly an honour to be here, it’s truly an honour 
to be free to speak, and I feel that this is really history in the 
making. Passage of this motion is essential — it’s essential if 
we are to protect and preserve our democratic freedoms. We 
aren’t restricting speech, Mr. Speaker, we’re encouraging it, and 
we’re enshrining it for all, for all members of this House. 
 
This is the place to debate, not on the streets of Saskatchewan, 
here in this House. We aren’t scared of debate. We’re here and 
we’re here for a reason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, we are not new-found democrats, 
we are representatives of the people of this province. We are 
representatives of this province, and as such we have an 
enormous responsibility. And I think that responsibility has 
been forgotten by the members opposite, and I think it’s time 
that somebody reminded them just who they are and what they 
represent and why they’re here. 
 
That responsibility goes beyond all party lines, Mr. Speaker — 
it goes beyond all party lines, and we must never forget that. 
This is not the time for cynicism and sarcastic remarks. It’s a 
time for leadership and it’s a time for co-operation. It’s a time 
to speak; it’s also a time to listen. 
 
Prolonged bell-ringing is clearly an abuse of our parliamentary 
system. It’s a threat to that system, and it challenges democracy 
itself. It’s a tactic used to avoid debate, not ensure debate. To 
refuse to vote on first reading of a Bill, to refuse to vote on a 
Bill, to hold the government and the Saskatchewan people at 
ransom shows nothing but contempt — contempt for 
democracy and the democratic process. 
 
The bells are rung in this legislature for one reason, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to remind the members opposite again, they 
are rung for one reason and one reason alone. They’re rung to 
call the duly elected members of this Assembly to vote. They’re 
rung to call them here to debate, to speak. They’re rung to call 
the representatives of Saskatchewan people to come and 
exercise their rights under the democratic system. They’re rung 
to call all representatives to come forward, to come forward and 
express that privilege that they’ve been so honoured with, to 
come forward and speak, and speak here in this Assembly. By 
limiting bell-ringing, by adding those rules, we will go another 
step towards protecting this fine democratic system of ours. 
We’ll protect it because we believe in it. We’re not scared to 
speak, Mr. Speaker. We’re not scared to speak. 
 
Look at what happens when we allow the legislature to be taken 
hostage, Mr. Speaker. Look at what happened. The House 
couldn’t function; we couldn’t speak; the members opposite 
couldn’t speak. We weren’t afraid to debate; we weren’t scared 
to see the facts. The members opposite were. Because you 
know why? Because they knew they’d lose the debate. 
 
The debate moves into the media where the public is no  

longer sure of what to believe, of who to believe. When the 
debate is confined to the legislature, the people of 
Saskatchewan can make their own judgements because all the 
facts are available to them — all the facts, not just the ones that 
the members opposite want to give the public. 
 
But when the legislature is closed to debate, Saskatchewan 
people are no longer given a clear understanding of the issues. 
They aren’t given the facts. They couldn’t see them. The 
members opposite haven’t seen the facts, and yet they felt free 
to go about this province and talk about something they hadn’t 
even seen. 
 
Witness what happened during those couple of weeks when the 
legislature was down and when the bells rang. The debate was 
taken out of the Assembly before first reading of the Bill, 
before the elected representatives could see the Bill. The NDP 
packed their bags and left. And do you know why they packed 
their bags and left? Because they were afraid to speak. They 
were afraid to speak for the people that they represent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — They started talking about something that they 
knew nothing about, Mr. Speaker, and they knew nothing about 
it because they wouldn’t let the people of this province see the 
Bill. Shame on the members opposite. Who do they represent? 
Just who do they represent and what do they represent? 
 
They did not have the facts, Mr. Speaker, and I can only assume 
that they did not want those facts to be known. They didn’t 
want them to be known to the people that they represent. They 
didn’t want those facts to be known to the public. 
 
They were wrong. They were very wrong, and they know that 
they’re wrong because I believe they’re afraid to debate. I 
believe they are afraid to debate the Bill. They are afraid to 
debate here today and debate the issues. Instead, they want to 
go around. They talk about everything except what this House 
is all about, and that’s the freedom of speech, the freedom to be 
here, to represent the people that elected you, to be here, to talk. 
We know the facts, and we’re prepared to debate those facts at 
any time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know better also. The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve better, Mr. Speaker. They deserve better. 
And I am sure that they will deal with the members opposite at 
the appropriate time, when the facts are known. 
 
They deserve to know the truth, Mr. Speaker. They deserve 
better than being misled by a group of members opposite who 
were afraid to see the facts, to deal with the issues as they stand 
and for the issues as they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We could not supply the people of Saskatchewan with the facts. 
We respect democracy and we respect the privileges of this 
House, Mr. Speaker — the privilege that’s been given to us. We 
want to let all members and all members of this House see the 
facts first, and then they  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1635 
 

can debate on the facts — not about things that they haven’t 
seen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We could not talk about it, Mr. Speaker, because the NDP 
disrupted the democratic system. They left and the details of the 
Bill were laid here without anyone seeing them. They weren’t 
dealing with the facts, Mr. Speaker, they were dealing with fear 
and the attempt to spread fear throughout this province. 
 
By doing this the NDP made it impossible for a government to 
effectively present a Bill which will benefit all the people of 
this province — the people that they represent, the people that 
we represent, the people that put you here, the people that put 
us here. We’re not scared to debate the Bill. This Bill has a 
whole lot to offer, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The question 
before the Assembly is the rule change on rule 33(1). I would 
ask the member not to bring other specifics into the debate. 
Order. The process of rule change or the specific rule, the rule 
33(1), is certainly relevant, but other issues or grievances before 
this House should be debated at another time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I was wandering. I was wandering because I just 
wanted to remind the members opposite of why they were here 
and why I feel that this rule change is very important. 
 
The rule change involves many things, and they’re going to 
benefit us all. And I think the members opposite truly know 
that. They know in their hearts. They really know in their 
hearts, and that’s why it hurts so much. 
 
At any rate, what happened in those two weeks when the 
members opposite were missing was nothing less than anarchy, 
Mr. Speaker. It was truly sad, and it’s a sad day for this 
province; it’s a sad day for all members of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must make these rule changes so the 
government will no longer be prevented from fulfilling its 
day-to-day obligations to the people of this province, the people 
that the members opposite represent, and the people that we 
represent as government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We set an agenda, Mr. Speaker, and the opposition cannot 
continue to obstruct this agenda. Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about 
potash; let’s talk about it. Let’s talk about SaskEnergy. Let’s 
talk about agriculture. Let’s move ahead. Let’s move ahead. 
Let’s vote. Let’s vote. Let’s move on. 
 
This legislature can’t be held at ransom, Mr. Speaker. We know 
that. Our agenda was laid out in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a government that cares. This is a government that truly 
cares, but it also acts. The agenda has been laid before us and 
it’s been held at ransom, Mr. Speaker, and this is very wrong. 
 
And the members opposite know that. The opposition  

fears debate. It fears debate, Mr. Speaker, or why won’t it 
debate the issues at hand, Mr. Speaker? Why won’t it debate the 
issues at hand? Instead it chose to silence this House, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s why I feel that this rule change is so 
important. This is wrong, and they know it’s wrong, and this is 
why they don’t wish to debate. And this is why they won’t 
resolve the issue at hand, Mr. Speaker. They’re afraid of debate. 
 
They suggest we move on to other things, Mr. Speaker, and 
why? Why might they do that, Mr. Speaker? Why that, Mr. 
Speaker? I suggest it’s for one reason, Mr. Speaker, and one 
reason alone. They’ve just forgotten who they are, and they’ve 
forgotten who they represent, and they’ve forgotten just what 
they represent. Think of China, and think of China today, and 
think of democracy and think of what those people would have 
to say about the members opposite. I don’t think that they 
would be very pleased. 
 
The members opposite fear debate. They fear freedom of 
speech, or they would debate. They wouldn’t leave this House 
and leave it hijacked for 17 days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — They would sooner silence speech. They would 
sooner silence speech than speak, and speak for those people 
that represent . . . that they represent and the people that elected 
them, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I feel that these changes to 
the bell-ringing motion are so important to us all — for all of 
us, for this province. 
 
We have to share in the responsibility, Mr. Speaker. We’ve all 
got to share in this responsibility. We must not allow 
Saskatchewan people to be threatened. We owe it to democracy; 
we owe it to ourselves and the people that we represent. We 
owe it to our past and we owe it to our future, Mr. Speaker. Our 
duty is to serve Saskatchewan people, not put their well-being 
at risk, Mr. Speaker. We must add to these rules. This motion 
protects our parliamentary system and our democratic 
traditions. It enshrines our past and it preserves our future. It 
guarantees free speech. It protects Saskatchewan people from 
being abused by their own representatives. And all 
representatives, all representatives should be truly proud in 
providing protection for what this motion represents, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
It ensures Saskatchewan people that when they elect a member 
to this legislature, that the member will be required to debate 
these issues democratically here in this House where the debate 
should be. This motion will assure Saskatchewan people that 
the democratic freedoms, which their forefathers fought for, 
will be preserved in this province. The place for debate is here 
in this House, Mr. Speaker. The place to debate the issues is 
here in this House, and that’s what democracy is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — When Bills are debated in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, and I remind everyone, all the facts on both sides  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1636 
 

of this Assembly can be heard. The issue can be discussed and 
debated freely here. When the motion is forcibly closed and 
debate is moved outside, the public can see only part of the 
story. The most recent episode did not even allow that, Mr. 
Speaker. The opposition didn’t even allow themselves the 
privilege of seeing the Bill. We’ve been elected to debate these 
issues in this House, and we should debate on the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, not on hearsay, and not in the media. 
 
The Saskatchewan people have placed in our hands the 
responsibility to uphold and protect our democracy and our 
parliamentary system. By making these rule changes we will 
honour that responsibility. By making these rule changes we 
will ensure that the business of governing this province will be 
carried out, where the principles of democracy can be upheld. 
 
I urge all members of this Assembly to search in their hearts 
and do what is right for the people of Saskatchewan, the people 
that they represent, the people that we represent. Do what’s 
right for Saskatchewan. Please do it. 
 
I urge them to take this step forward in protecting our 
democratic system by supporting this motion. I urge them to 
participate in this great opportunity to stand up and say that they 
support democracy, that we respect our forefathers and their 
sacrifices, and that we would like to preserve the tremendous 
rights and these rights for our children — our future and theirs. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to once again remind the Leader 
of the Opposition of his words to us when he first addressed this 
issue, and I quote him again only as a reminder of the words 
that he said to this Assembly on May 11. What did the member 
from Riversdale say? 
 

I think therefore the suggestion of the Minister of Justice 
bears further, very serious consideration. And I’ll 
undertake to him, as Leader of the Opposition, that we will 
get back to him within the next . . . I would hope the 
government would at least give us over the weekend — 
tomorrow is Friday . . . to caucus and to consider what he 
said — I missed part of his remarks; read the written 
transcript, and to get back to him by, say, Monday at the 
latest as to what we would suggest in response to his 
suggestion which, if I may say so and I don’t mean to be 
argumentative here, I would have liked the government to 
have done before it introduced the motion unilaterally. But 
that’s water under the bridge. Let’s not look at the past; 
let’s look at the future. 
 
I think we’ll take up that suggestion and take an example 
of it for the next two or three days and consider it 
carefully, and get back to the government proponent of the 
mover, the Minister of Justice. 
 

And I just bring that to your attention, because I really feel that 
the Leader of the Opposition is an honourable man, and I truly 
respect the comments that he made both in welcoming me here 
and in addressing this motion when it was first introduced. That 
was May 11, Mr. Speaker.  

Today is June 5. 
 
I’d also like to take this opportunity on behalf of all members, 
and particularly myself, to congratulate the Leader of the 
Opposition. Recently the member from Riversdale was awarded 
the Ukrainian World Congress medal of honour for outstanding 
contributions in the area of constitutional rights. And I truly 
want to congratulate him for receiving that medal for his work 
in the 1981-82 constitutional debate, as I understand it. 
 
I ask the members opposite to think deeply about this issue and 
think deeply in their own hearts about it, to take control of his 
caucus, to step forward into the future and do what’s right. All 
members know what’s right. 
 
This is not a partisan issue, it’s a fundamental issue of 
democracy. Stop the debate; ask the question; ask the question 
and vote with your conscience. Vote in favour of this motion. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — After that last speech from the member 
from really, really glad and really, really proud, I think it’s 
necessary to begin by reading the motion. No one, Mr. Speaker, 
who listened to that last speech would have any idea of what 
was being discussed. 
 
The speaker is . . . oh, Mr. Speaker, that member’s speech was 
so inspiring, so brilliant, I think I’ve memorized every word of 
it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Really, really glad and really, really 
happy. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that’s right, the Bobby McFerrin . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I intend to. For members opposite 
who want to hear the truth, you’re in great luck. This is your 
lucky day, because that’s all you’re going to hear. 
 
I want to begin by reading the motion again. As I say, one 
would have no idea what was being discussed after listening to 
that speech. 
 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended by adding the following after rule 33(1): 
 
When the Speaker or the chairman of Committee of the 
Whole, or Committee of Finance, has put the question on a 
motion and a recorded division is requested under rule 
33(1), the bells to call in the members . . . 
 

I didn’t hear the member opposite. 
 

. . . the bells to call in the members shall be sounded for 
not more than one hour, provided that while the members 
are being called in, either the government or official 
opposition member serving as House Leader, Acting 
House Leader, chief whip, or deputy whip, may approach 
the Speaker  

  



 
June 5, 1989 

1637 
 

(or chairman) to request that the division be deferred . . . 
 

That in substance, Mr. Speaker, is the motion we are debating 
and have been debating for some time. The pith and substance 
of the motion and the change it would really effect is that it 
would limit the right of an opposition — and I suppose a 
government too — to ring the bells for more than one hour. 
 
I want to read a short quotation by a former member of the 
federal House — a cabinet minister, Speaker of the House, and 
Governor General, I think in those orders — and, I might add, a 
distinguished broadcaster in Montreal before she became a 
member of parliament. 
 
I refer, of course, to Jeanne Sauvé. She said, after the 
bell-ringing incident by the Conservatives in 1982, she said: 
 

I may point out that obstructive tactics are allowed by the 
rules; however, the use must be regulated so as to 
safeguard: (1) the government’s right to have the House 
consider its order of business, and the equally important 
right of the opposition to criticize, oppose, and even 
obstruct a government measure. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s worth while to consider what purpose the 
bell-ringing serves. Why do we have that? The bell-ringing . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I suggest to the members 
opposite . . . The member from Yorkton, I think, made that 
contribution. No, I suggest to the member from Yorkton that it 
serves a broader purpose then simply to summon members. It 
serves as a legitimate tool in an opposition . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I don’t know that the member from 
Weyburn would see any difference. I’m surprised that you don’t 
find those one and the same. 
 
The bell-ringing is more than just a means of summoning 
members for a vote. That could be done, Mr. Speaker, by any 
number of methods. The opposition has a legitimate right to 
obstruct. That is a part of what an opposition may do, and has 
been so since the beginning of parliaments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bell-ringing goes to the manner in which a 
legislature operates. It is worthwhile therefore, I think, to 
consider for a minute what the function of a legislature is. 
 
I want to, before doing so, I want to deal with the comments of 
the member from “glad and proud”. He stated that his side want 
debate, and they say we are afraid to debate. As I shall point 
out, Mr. Speaker, we’re not afraid to debate. We are afraid that 
the government’s not listening, and were afraid the 
government’s not listening. Indeed, it’s worthy of note that the 
member opposite spoke a great deal about talking and debating. 
I did not hear the word “listen” said once. It is far more 
important that elected members listen than they talk. Indeed, I 
think that’s what, throughout this entire affair . . . the member 
from Melville’s counting, to see whether or not he may leave. It 
seems you can, Mr. Member. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s out of order. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Yes, perhaps that was out of order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Resign, resign. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite want 
me to resign over that. I’ll consider that in the course of my 
comments and give it earnest consideration. The comment 
comes from the member from Maple Creek, and I’ve not heard 
her make a suggestion which wasn’t wise and sound so . . . 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg spoke a great deal 
about listening, spoke a great deal about debating — never once 
mentioned the word “listen”. That is a far more important 
function. It is far more important that members listen than they 
speak. I don’t recall the public ever criticizing any politician for 
not speaking. I have often heard members criticized for not 
listening. Indeed, the most common criticism one has of the 
current government, with respect to this and such a large 
number of other issues, is that they are not listening. 
 
Someone said that the good Lord gave us two ears and one 
mouth, and did so for a good reason. I suggest to the members 
opposite that if they had a reputation for listening, the 
bell-ringing incident would never have taken place. It was in 
fact the reputation this government has established for being 
intransigent, out of touch and arrogant, which brought all of this 
on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Thunder 
Creek seeks my advice on how they might have listened to the 
debate which has not been introduced. 
 
In fact, the contents of that Bill were well-known. It came, Mr. 
Speaker, as no surprise when we saw the Bill some three weeks 
later . . . ten days later. It came as no surprise. We knew what 
was in the Bill; so did the public. The public knew precisely 
what was in the Bill. They didn’t want it at that point in time, 
Mr. Speaker; they don’t want it now, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t 
changed our view after seeing the Bill, and in fact neither has 
the public. 
 
This government has developed a reputation for not listening, 
for being intransigent, stubborn, arrogant, aloof, and insensitive. 
If we had felt, Mr. Speaker, that this government was amenable 
to debate and rational logic, all this would never have 
happened. It happened because of this government’s approach, 
which is sort of: my way, or no way. It happened because this is 
a government which has grown to an arrogance which leads 
them to disregard the rules. If they can’t be disregarded, they 
change them. But they do not, Mr. Speaker, play within the 
rules. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the bell-ringing goes to the manner in 
which a legislature functions. It’s worthwhile to consider for a 
moment what the function of this legislature is. To listen to the 
member opposite, the member who spoke for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, or for that matter the Premier in his 
comments in the press, one would suspect that they believe that 
this is a debating society. It is not, of course, a debating society. 
 
As one who was active in a debating society in years gone  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1638 
 

by, I have some understanding of how they function. The 
audience is not, of course, the other participants in the debate, 
but a third party altogether. 
 
Our audience, in part here, is members opposite, and if they 
aren’t listening, then this place doesn’t function very well. It is 
in part a debating society; it’s in part a place where we seek by 
rational argument, by logic, to persuade others to our point of 
view. And with a different government in office, that sometimes 
happens. I think it’s accurate to say that with this government in 
office there is not a single example of any suggestion ever being 
made by the opposition which actually found its way into 
legislation. I don’t think there’s an exception to that since this 
government has taken office. Even relatively . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Is this going to be an hour? 
 
An Hon. Member: — It may take a while. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Oh it may take a while. If the member has 
to leave the Chamber for any purpose, you may feel free to do 
so. You don’t need to raise your hand to leave, at least from my 
vantage point. 
 
It is partially a debating society; it partially serves that function. 
We seek to persuade others through logic, but it’s more than 
that. A legislature or parliament is something infinitely more 
complex than a simple debating society. 
 
But to listen to the comments of the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and the Premier on occasion, you’d 
think that’s all it was. You’d think the function of this place was 
to serve as a forum for debate which would rage on, and then 
lights would go on and they’d do what they always intended to, 
which is really the effect of a debating club. It may serve some 
entertainment, often serves as a training for the participants, but 
rarely changes many views and rarely affects things. I suggest 
that the Premier does take the view that this a debating society, 
with little practical effect on his affairs and no control over it. 
 
The legislature, as I said, is much more than that. And that 
brings me, in part, to the way in which the bells operate. Bells 
are more than simply a means of summoning members to the 
Assembly. They are a part of the tactics which an opposition 
might use to call the government to account. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who said that, Ned? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Oh, well I just finished. The member from 
Thunder Creek wants to know who said that. I just finished, and 
I thought it was very well said indeed. I’m surprised that the 
member from Thunder Creek would look for any higher 
authority. 
 
The members of the legislature are not a part of government, 
and that’s also relevant to the way in which we behave. I’ve 
spent many years in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, understanding 
that. I thought when I was first elected that — and I was elected 
to a party in office — I thought when I was first elected that 
what we would do in this Assembly and in this Chamber was 
play a role in drawing up Bills; we would play a role in striking 
the  

budget. I thought I would do all of those things. 
 
I found out, Mr. Speaker, that this legislature does not operate 
in that fashion, nor do any other. That, in a sense, is a 
congressional form of government. This would never happen in 
a congressional form of government because members of the 
Congress are, in fact, a part of government. They play a role in 
passing the laws, in drawing up the budget. They’re an integral 
part of the government itself. 
 
As I say, I spent some years in discovering that we’re not. 
Members of the opposition are not in any sense a part of the 
government. We play no role . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thank goodness. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, the member for Maple Creek says, 
thank goodness. That may or may not be. Each system of 
government has its advantages and its disadvantages. We are 
not a part of government; we don’t play any role in passing the 
laws, in the budget. Not a single, solitary one of the suggestions 
that has ever been made by members of this side of the House 
has ever been taken into effect. I think that’s accurate. If 
members opposite can think of a single suggestion the 
opposition ever made which was ever acted upon, then I stand 
corrected, but I think that’s true of this government. 
 
This government has regarded the opposition as some sort of a 
nuisance. As I say, the Premier regards us as a debating club 
with about as little effect on his actions as a debating club at a 
university might have. 
 
It is different, of course, in the American system, the 
congressional system. There, members are a part of 
government. They pass the laws. Their suggestions are heeded. 
A bell-ringing would never make any sense in their form of 
government because the members there are a part of 
government. 
 
Our function is much less than that, and in some ways much 
more. Our function, our purpose at one level is to call the 
government to account. We do that each day in question period. 
We attempt to bring to public attention, through question 
period, those things which should be brought to public 
attention. 
 
I may say, lately in this session there has been no shortage of 
items which need to be brought to public attention. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know that I’ve ever sat through a session in 
which a government made such a concerted effort to assist the 
opposition with question period. This spring has really been one 
of a kind. 
 
Our function as well is to offer an alternative to the government 
in office. We have a role in preparing ourselves for government, 
in giving to the people an alternative when an election comes. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker — and this is not a function which this 
legislature exercises very often, but this legislature also serves 
as a check on the government. It provides what is virtually the 
only check on a government in a parliamentary system. 
 
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1639 
 

Mr. Speaker, the bell-ringing and that sort of tactic is virtually 
the only way that an opposition can do that. Parliaments have 
changed very, very dramatically over the last hundred years. Let 
us just recount for a moment what this government has done to 
anger and outrage the Saskatchewan people over the last six 
months. Let’s just do a quick tour of what’s happened. 
 
During the by-election and the federal election, which were held 
in the latter part of 1988, the farmers of Saskatchewan were 
promised drought assistance of $45 an acre, but they didn’t . . . 
but the farmers and rural people did not elect very many federal 
Conservatives. Indeed it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
NDP is the voice of rural Saskatchewan in the federal House of 
Commons, and it is fair to say that after the next election, I 
believe that the NDP will be the voice of rural Saskatchewan in 
the provincial legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And if your interpretation, Mr. Speaker, of 
those polls is any different than mine, I’d be interested in 
hearing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the election, after the election . . . what led 
up to the bell-ringing was a boiling over of public frustration 
with this government. In a sense, it was not us who spoke, but it 
was the public who spoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just review briefly what caused the degree of 
public frustration. I may say, and I will, I think, say so more 
than once in this speech, we would never have done what we 
did if we hadn’t had solid public support. If members hadn’t 
been besieged at every street corner by people saying, keep 
those bells ringing, as we were, we would never have done it. I 
had that said to me by people who have never voted NDP, and I 
don’t think ever will, but who were outraged at the way that this 
government has behaved this spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite want me to use names. One 
of the reputations that this government has developed is a 
reputation for being very, very vindictive and mean spirited 
with its enemies. This government is as intolerant as any 
administration in the recent history of Canada. This government 
has a reputation which really prohibits anyone from using any 
names, because of course the person would be singled out. The 
members opposite would check out their affairs, find out if 
there were some soft underbelly — they might have a brother or 
sister working for the government somewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would never have done what we did without 
solid public support. And they rang for 17 days, not because we 
initially set out to do that, but because public opinion continued 
to urge us to keep those bells ringing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why’d you come back in then? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why did we come back in? The member 
wants to know why did we come back in. Just stay tuned and 
I’ll get to that in a moment. I don’t mind answering the 
questions of members opposite, but I’d just as soon the member 
from Arm River didn’t craft this  

speech for me. He’s never shown any ability to give a speech or 
write one, and I’d just as soon he didn’t structure mine. So I 
thank the member for his intense interest, but I think I’ll get 
back to my own comments. But if you stay tuned, I will answer 
that question. I assure the member from Arm River, your 
curiosity will not go unsated. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You’re welcome . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I don’t think there will be any need to sit 
on the edge of his chair. He’s obviously fascinated by my 
comments and that’s why he’s shown an element of native 
shrewdness in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had the deficiency payment, a promise made 
during an election in the most cynical, conceivable fashion . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I think the hon. 
member is going to have to convince the Chair that that’s 
related to the topic under discussion, and so far he hasn’t. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me tell you what . . . Let me describe 
that, in summary form, the point that I was making. I was 
making the point, Mr. Speaker, that what happened with respect 
to the bell-ringing was a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Lloydminster has never shown respect for 
anything; I don’t know why he should begin with the Speaker 
of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was making the point that, in supporting us, the 
public had acted out of a spring of utter frustration. The 
deficiency payment, oats taken off the wheat board after a clear 
undertaking during the federal election that free trade wouldn’t 
affect the marketing of grains — another promise made, another 
promise which Conservative members felt perfectly free to 
break just as soon as it became convenient for them. 
 
Then comes March and we . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
the member from Souris-Cannington is becoming impatient. I 
ask the member to listen. 
 
Then we had the Rafferty shemozzle — a government in too 
much of a hurry to do things properly, a government that 
barrelled ahead, cut corners, and presented the public of 
Saskatchewan with a $250 million hole — a pile of excavation 
and steel in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Then after that came a sale of SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation), something they had clearly undertaken not to do, 
and public frustration simply boiled over. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, had this happened a century ago in England, 
there’s no question, I think, that the government would have 
fallen. And that’s how parliaments used to operate. A 
government which tested public opinion too much was defeated 
in a motion of non-confidence. There are any number of 
examples of that. Winston Churchill’s father, Lord Randolph, 
changed parties two or three times;  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1640 
 

Winston Churchill changed parties from Liberal to 
Conservative. That’s how things operated a century ago. 
 
But parliaments have changed very, very dramatically in the 
last century. Party discipline has become very, very tight. It is 
almost unknown for members to vote against the government. I 
don’t know of any example of any member opposite voting 
against the government on any issue. It happened occasionally 
when we were in office, and I always admired the courage of 
those who did. But it doesn’t happen very often. It happens 
very, very rarely. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, as parliaments have developed in this 
century, once elected they have a very, very free hand in what 
they do, and there’s virtually no check over them. That, Mr. 
Speaker, occasionally creates some serious problems and 
occasionally provides a government which is arrogant, 
insensitive, and unconcerned to do things that should not be 
possible in a democracy. 
 
No one is suggesting that government ought to be slavishly tied 
to the latest public opinion poll. I’m not suggesting that to 
members opposite. Indeed, I’ve been critical of the government 
opposite in times gone by for being too slavishly tied to public 
opinion polls. I’ve often felt that they try to run a government 
by watching the latest public opinion poll. It’s been compared, 
Mr. Speaker, to trying to drive a car by watching through the 
rear-view mirror. 
 
But in this instance, Mr. Speaker, the government has erred in 
the opposite extreme. The government has flatly refused to pay 
heed to public opinion on a vital issue which I think is fairly 
well understood. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the public opinion 
has a fair grasp of what was at stake with respect to 
privatization. Mr. Speaker, this government promised during 
the election that they would never privatize a utility, never do 
that. Why did they do that? Well they did that because they 
knew it was utterly unacceptable. 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg’s back in his seat. 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg stated that he got . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It isn’t any of my business what seat 
he’s in. The member from Maple Creek made a reference . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I’d like to ask the Assembly if I could have 
leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me pleasure to introduce, through you and to members of 
this Assembly, some 17 students from Shoal Lake Collegiate in 
Shoal Lake, Manitoba — grade 10 and 11 students, I believe. Is 
that right? 
 
And I would like to say they’re accompanied here today by 
their teachers, Dennis Schoonbaert and Les Grills; and also 
chaperons, Jan Wilson and Bessie Stewart. Their bus driver, I 
believe, is Tom Sedgewick. I hope I pronounced  

all the names correctly. And I’d like to take this opportunity to 
welcome you to Saskatchewan and ask all members to show a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to also welcome the students from out of town. We are in a 
debate which is of fundamental importance. It concerns the 
rights with which members operate and the manner in which 
this place functions. In a way, you’re fortunate to be here during 
this period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as legislatures are now structured, it’s very, very 
difficult to control an executive. An executive, which is the 
cabinet in this case, virtually do whatever they want, given the 
current level of party discipline. 
 
As I say, I can recall some examples of members on this side of 
the House, members of my party, I guess I should say, voting 
against the government when we were in office — didn’t 
happen often, but it happened. But I’ve never seen it happen . . . 
members opposite, like so many trained sheep, they applaud 
when requested, vote when requested, and appear to give very 
little thought to the substance of what they’re doing. 
 
Thus, the function of a legislature in maintaining a check and 
balance against the government is very, very difficult given the 
way the legislature’s developed. In this respect, it’s very 
different than the congressional system south of the border 
where the Congress can impeach people, plays a part in passing 
laws and drafting the budget, where budgets are drafted in large 
part by committees and dealt with in the House. That isn’t our 
function, Mr. Speaker; we don’t play a part in that. And that I 
guess is the nature of a parliamentary government in the 1980s. 
 
So the checks and balances have become much more difficult. 
Nothing illustrates that more than this government during this 
spring. I know Mr. Speaker cautioned me about getting into 
extraneous topics, but I think this spring illustrates how difficult 
it is for a legislature to exercise any control over government. 
Bell-ringing is one way that could be done, but there aren’t 
many ways of doing it. 
 
This is a government, Mr. Speaker, which promised a $45 
deficiency payment, produced a small fraction of that, and there 
was little the legislature could do. This is a government which 
assured western people that free trade would not affect 
marketing of grains. Shortly after the election, it did. It took 
oats off the wheat board, and once again there was not much we 
could do except criticize. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake thinks that breaking the 
commitment to farmers to maintain the present grains under the 
wheat board is a trivial thing. All I can say, Mr. Minister, is 
you’re badly out of touch if you think that’s  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1641 
 

not an issue. It is indeed an issue. 
 
Well I think we have done that, Mr. Speaker, and the marketing 
of oats is an issue. It is an issue in your riding as much as it is 
everywhere else. And, Mr. Minister, if you don’t know that the 
marketing of oats is an issue, then all I can say is I hope for 
your sake you have kept your teaching certificate valid because 
you’re going to need it after the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government felt free to break its promise with 
respect to deficiency payment. There was not much the 
legislature could do. It felt free to break its promise with respect 
to oats, and there was not much we could do. 
 
We knew, Mr. Speaker — Elizabeth May told us that the 
government was short-changing with the environmental process 
on the Rafferty dam. There wasn’t much the legislature could 
do. I suggest to you that none of that would have happened in a 
house of representatives south of the border where the members 
are a part of government and have some very real means of 
keeping a government within the bounds of what’s acceptable. 
 
One of the reasons why bell-ringing has come into vogue here 
is because parliaments really have lost that ability. We have lost 
the ability to keep a government in check. This is an example. 
Mr. Speaker, this debate, this is by and large part of a 
privatization package. I think no one is deceived about why 
members opposite are so stubborn with respect to the 
bell-ringing, for two reasons, I guess — one, because they’re 
angry, bitter; secondly, Mr. Speaker, because they want to pass 
the privatization Bills. They want to bring back potash . . . 
privatization of the potash corporation. They want to bring back 
the . . . what is I guess called SGI. I note, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the privatization of SGI, this obscenely lavish annual 
report. Mr. Speaker, I was informed that the printing of this 
annual report cost $75,000 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Regina 
Centre fully realizes, I’m sure, that he’s certainly straying from 
the topic under discussion. He’s been given wide latitude and is 
seeking further latitude. I’d just like to remind the hon. member 
that, following his course of debate, the issue could really 
wander off into almost any area, and that’s really not what he 
wants to do, I’m sure. And I think he should direct his remarks 
more specifically to the issue under discussion, which is rule 
33(1). 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I will, as requested, leave the 
subject, except to say that this government is intent upon 
privatization. Our only sure means of preventing that is 
bell-ringing. You think they don’t want — and I’ll make the 
point very quickly and get off it — you think they don’t want to 
privatize SGI? Why on earth would they print such an 
obscenely expensive annual report? It certainly isn’t needed for 
anything that’s done in this legislature. 
 
That annual report had a $20 million profit, which they show, is 
carefully engineered to make SGI attractive. The public have 
said with crystal clarity, they don’t want that. They don’t want 
SPC privatized, they do not want Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan privatized, and they don’t want SGI privatized. 
 

What is our response to that? Well that’s one of the difficulties 
with legislatures as they’ve developed in this century, as we 
don’t have much of a means of dealing with that. Given the 
party discipline that has developed, we have only a very few 
tools left at our disposal to prevent the kind of outrage — and I 
think that’s not too strong a term — the kind of outrage that 
occurred with respect to the SaskPower. And the privatization 
of SaskPower is nothing short of an outrage. 
 
(1630) 
 
This government promised not to privatize it, said so with 
clarity. The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg stated that 
he got elected and got elected with a mandate for — and he 
listed several things. I note the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg never stated he got elected with a 
mandate to privatize SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation), 
because if he’d have sought such a mandate he’d have run a 
distant third. If he’d sought such a mandate he’d have run a 
distant third. 
 
There is no question that members opposite know they’re flying 
in the face of public opinion. And we then have to ask 
ourselves: what is our response? Is the Premier right? Is this a 
debating society? Do we simply debate it for two weeks, then 
the government goes merrily on its way? We said no; we said 
we have a broader function and a more important purpose than 
to simply sound off. We said the legislature still retains its 
primary function of keeping the executive arm in check. 
 
And there aren’t very many means left for us to do that. Many 
of the things that would have been done in days gone by have in 
fact been lost. We no longer have the means that we once did. 
Parliaments were developed, one should remember . . . The 
British trace their constitutional history to the Magna Carta. It 
should be remembered that what the nobility was attempting to 
do with King John was not very different than what we were 
attempting to do with this government. We were attempting to 
rein in a government which was flying in the face of popular 
opinion. That is what the nobility did with respect to King John, 
and he signed the Magna Carta, the great charter. 
 
British people trace their constitutional history to that. I’ve 
actually tried to read the Magna Carta; it’s very difficult 
reading. It says nothing about bell-ringing. It may surprise 
members opposite, but that was not the import of the document. 
 
What it was, within the institutions of the day . . . and one has to 
remember they were extremely crude. This was the Middle 
Ages, and not the most sophisticated part of Europe either. 
Within the institutions of the day, the Magna Carta was an 
attempt to place some limits on the executive arm of 
government, then embodied entirely within the royalty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Magna Carta is obviously of more symbolic 
importance than actual importance. Parliaments did meet 
sometime later, again with that express purpose of keeping a 
check on the executive power. They sought to impose some 
limits within which  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1642 
 

an executive might operate. That’s what we were doing. We 
were doing in the bell-ringing nothing very different than what 
the nobility had done with King John. 
 
They sought not to replace him, in spite of the fact that he . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from Yorkton 
doesn’t like the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . but I’m sorely 
disappointed. I was just so certain that the member from 
Yorkton would find this appealing. 
 
Notwithstanding a clear victory at the meadow called 
Runnymede, the nobles never sought to replace King John; it 
was never suggested he abdicate. They simply wanted to place 
some limits on the manner in which he acted. That’s all we 
sought to do with the bell-ringing. We simply sought to place 
some outside limits on the way in which a government can 
function. 
 
As parliaments developed and began to meet a few centuries 
later, they again served the same purpose. With respect to 
school children who come and go, I feel an obligation to remind 
them that Canada is a child of both England and France, and our 
culture comes from both, but our institutions of government 
very much are British. The French system, of course, is quite 
different. The French National Assembly was the government. 
They made the laws, passed them, drew up the budget, as do the 
Americans, but that was not the function of the British 
parliament at all. The function of the British parliament was to 
receive what we would now call budgets, to say yea or nay, but 
not to draw them up themselves. 
 
Parliaments have always been an attempt to impose some 
effective limits on the fashion in which an executive operates, 
and they have never been more than that. In attempting to 
impose, I could, Mr. Speaker, refer to the Plantagenet kings and 
the struggles with parliament. Parliament sought, not to replace 
them but to impose some limits; to say there are some limits 
beyond which you shall not go. 
 
And later, at the time of the Seven Years War with France and 
the American Revolution, during the period of Robert Peel and 
Sir Robert Walpole, in effect at a time when monarchs were 
German and foreign, some of them unable to speak the English 
language, executive power moved from the hands of the 
royalty. The Tudor kings had exercised it with considerable 
skill. Executive power moved from the hands of the royalty, as 
the Tudor kings had exercised it, to a prime minister and a 
cabinet. 
 
Once again, parliament retained that function. It sought not to 
pass the laws, to pass the budget; parliament was simply an 
attempt to provide some check and balances, an attempt to say 
to the executive: you may govern within reasonable limits, but 
there are some limits. And thus parliament continued, and does 
to this day in England, and does to this day in Canada, serve to 
provide some checks and balances. That’s all we were doing 
with respect to the bell-ringing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue, the bell-ringing, grew out of the 
SaskPower issue. Members opposite say you ought to come and 
debate it. You ought to come and speak to the issue. You should 
come in here and debate it. You must be afraid to debate it. 
We’re not afraid to debate it, nor  

afraid — as members I think have discovered, we’re not afraid 
to debate this motion. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are afraid of a government opposite which 
has shown itself to be very, very irresponsible. What is one to 
do with a government which is as irresponsible as this? The 
examples of the irresponsibility continue to . . . new examples 
continue to be seen every day. 
 
I won’t get into this in detail, Mr. Speaker, but I think we’re to 
be forgiven for not trusting a government which gives $4 
million to what turned out to be a high roller, ignored . . . and 
we don’t criticize them for a bad investment. Everybody’s made 
. . . nobody who has invested money has . . . everybody who’s 
invested money has made a bad investment. That’s a common 
experience. 
 
What we criticize them for is being irresponsible, not observing 
the ordinary, well understood principles of protecting public 
funds, such as having two signing officers. We criticize them 
for being irresponsible. How are we to trust members opposite 
who will behave in such a fashion? 
 
I have had some conversation with members opposite. You say, 
oh surely you don’t think we would bring back the SPC 
privatization. Oh surely you don’t think we’d use closure. Oh 
surely you don’t think we’d do that. 
 
I say to members opposite and to Mr. Speaker, we don’t trust 
you. Neither do the public of Saskatchewan; the public of 
Saskatchewan, by and large, think you people have taken leave 
of your senses, and they don’t trust you to operate in a fashion 
which is fair and reasonable, and we don’t trust them to operate 
in a fashion which is fair and reasonable. 
 
If there were some evidence that members opposite had some 
respect for the rules with which governments traditionally 
operate, if there was some evidence that the government 
opposite had some respect for public money, for public funds, 
we might feel differently about this. But, Mr. Speaker, we are 
dealing with what I fairly believe to be the most irresponsible, 
to be the most lawless, to be the most arrogant, insensitive, and 
out-of-touch government in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if members opposite behaved as other 
governments do — other governments simply don’t do this — 
if members opposite behaved as other governments do, if 
members opposite were to play by the rules — and you don’t. 
 
And I will . . . well I’m apparently irritating the member from 
Shellbrook-Torch River. I intend to get on in a moment, Mr. 
Member, to illustrate how little regard this government has for 
the rules of fair play. That’s really what we’re talking about 
here, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about fair play. This 
government opposite has shown no capacity for fair play, no 
capacity for respect for public property, no capacity for keeping 
promises. 
 
In order for us to vote for this motion or to let it pass, we’d have 
to have some degree of confidence in their sense of  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1643 
 

fair play, in their integrity. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 
absolutely none. This government has a history of broken 
promises, of the most irresponsible use of public property; a 
government which makes it impossible to deal with them on 
any ordinary basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a couple of weeks I will have completed my 
14th year in this legislature. I’ve seen other governments come 
and go. I may say that this one behaves very differently than 
others. This government has behaved in such a fashion that no 
one can believe what they say. No one can trust their sense of 
fair play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen a day in this legislature when a person’s 
word was their bond; it was never broken. However 
inconvenient, however ill thought out, and however ill 
considered, the undertaking it gave or the promise you made, if 
it was made to a member of this Assembly, you kept it. 
 
This bunch of scoundrels, Mr. Speaker, members opposite, have 
no respect. Nothing they say can be relied upon for longer than 
10 minutes; they feel perfectly free to break undertakings to us 
and do so regularly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we never used to get undertakings in writing. We 
didn’t get them, and we didn’t give them; that just wasn’t done. 
A member’s word was respected. These people, if it isn’t in 
writing, it doesn’t exist. They will break their word within five 
minutes, just whatever’s convenient. 
 
So when members opposite say, but it has been abolished in 
other provinces, my response to that is, but in other provinces 
we don’t put up with the sort of scoundrels, they don’t put up 
with the kind of scoundrels that we do here. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the hon. member to refrain from 
. . . to watch the language like that. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’ll refrain from provocative 
language. I’ve certainly not tried to be provocative. 
 
Just some good old Regina water, nothing else in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot function without some assurance, some 
assurances that members opposite will not run roughshod over 
us. The ordinary trust which would exist between members is 
completely lacking, and I may say has got a whole lot worse 
this year. Members opposite have proceeded this year as if they 
were a law unto themselves. One would think that they were a 
government in office in South America. They behave as if they 
can do whatever they want, as if they can do whatever they like, 
and we are simply critics. 
 
But we say we’re more than that. We say if you want to behave 
in such a fashion, if you insist on breaking your promises on 
everything, if you insist on squandering public funds in an 
extravagant fashion — and I won’t get into the subject of the 
Rafferty dam — but how could one trust a government which 
wastes money as extravagantly as they do. They obviously feel 
no sense of responsibility  

to the public, and obviously have no sense of integrity. Mr. 
Speaker, the bell-ringing is an essential check on a government 
which has as little sense of fair play as this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think this province is different. We think the 
public in this province . . . first of all, Mr. Speaker, the public in 
this province, I think, to some extent agree with this. I was 
interested to note, Mr. Speaker, that during the bell-ringing 
incident, the support which we got from people of all parties. I 
had people who, as I say, have never voted NDP and probably 
never will. There’s getting to be a far smaller . . . that group is 
getting far smaller as this government proceeds in office. But 
there’s still some of them who (a) were outraged at the 
government’s behaviour; (b) signed the petition; and (c) said 
when they were leaving, keep those bells ringing. 
 
These were people who I know have never voted for me and 
never will. They were simply outraged at the way this 
government had behaved this spring. It was an outrage in part 
borne of the SPC issue, but the frustrations went much deeper 
than that. They said to us in effect, not in so many words, but 
they said to us in effect, how else can you deal with such a 
bunch except to let the bells ring? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You meant scoundrels. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I may have meant it; I didn’t say it though. 
I may have meant it, but I didn’t say it. 
 
They said to us, how else can you deal with such people? 
They’ve no respect for anything. They make promises for $45 
an acre during the election; when the people don’t vote for 
them, they break it. They said that they . . . during the last 
election produced a budget of 500 million; in fact bring in a 
$1.3 billion . . . a budget with a deficit of 5 billion . . . in fact, 
bring in a budget with a deficit of 1.3 billion. 
 
They said to us, as we stood with the petitions in the Cornwall 
Centre, or the corner of Main and Hochelaga in Moose Jaw — 
or wherever the Moose Jaw members stood, and wherever 
Moose Jaw people stood with them — they said to us: how else 
can you deal with such a bunch? This is not a normal group of 
people that you’re dealing with. 
 
This is a government which shows a flagrant irresponsibility 
when dealing with public money. The $4 million in GigaText is 
the most recent example of a government which cannot be 
trusted, but it’s by no means the only one. This government, 
from the very beginning, has taken the position that seems to 
have proceeded with the view that they have no responsibility 
and there’s no onus on them to be responsible of public money. 
 
They were elected in ’82, campaigning on a promise to abolish 
the sales tax — nothing to substitute for it, no programs cut; so 
you run up a huge deficit, so what? That’s the attitude of the 
members opposite — so what? 
 
The public said to us as we stood with the petitions: keep those 
bells ringing. What they were saying in effect is: how else can 
you deal with such a group of people? 
 
This is a government whose approach to the management  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1644 
 

of public affairs is very, very different than any other. The 
members opposite . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a very kind way of putting it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’m not being provocative. The 
members opposite have disregarded the principles which have 
governed democratic government during the three-quarters of a 
century, the 80 years . . . 84 years that this province has been in 
existence. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is like none other. No other 
government came in . . . You would be hard put to find such an 
irresponsible campaign as 1982. You would be hard put to find 
as blatant a deception as the 1986 budget. You’d be hard put to 
find a government which has as blatantly broken its promises as 
this government did with respect to SPC, and have supported 
the federal government in their broken promises. 
 
So when we met the people on the . . . when I met the public on 
the corner of . . . in front of the Cornwall Centre, or the member 
from Saskatoon met the public at the co-op centre or at the 
shopping mall in Moose Jaw, as the case may be, people didn’t 
say to us, sure don’t like those bells ringing; sure don’t like that 
tactic. 
 
Their response was exactly the opposite. Their response was, in 
all cases, keep those bells ringing. What were they saying? 
What they were saying, Mr. Speaker, was that it is the only way 
you can deal with a group of people such as this who have an 
almost complete lack of integrity, and certainly have a complete 
lack of a sense of responsibility with respect to public property. 
 
Members opposite believe, Mr. Speaker, that public property 
exists for only one purpose, and that’s to get their re-election. 
This arose out of a move to privatize SPC. If, Mr. Speaker, they 
were going to use the money from SPC to pay down some of 
the debt, one could be a little more forgiving. That at least 
would be an honest choice. 
 
But what did they say they were going to do with the money 
from SPC? They’re going to lower power rates; that will 
obviously work for a while. I think everyone knows that you 
can sell a quarter section and you can spend the money, which 
is really capital, on operating, but you can’t do it for long. How 
does it relate to bell-ringing? Well if the member had listened 
throughout the speech, you would know that what I have said to 
members opposite, what I have said to Mr. Speaker and to 
members opposite is that the reason why the public said to us 
— and it was universal — keep those bells ringing, is because 
they believe there’s no other way of dealing with you. And 
indeed, having watched this government for seven years, having 
sat in virtually the same seat for seven years, that’s accurate; 
there isn’t any other way of dealing with this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . for years and that’s why I’m here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I must say I’m pleased to 
hear that. I have never been able to figure out why the  

member is where he is. I have always been confused about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the atmosphere in this House, in this Legislative 
Assembly, is deteriorated to a point which I have never seen . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Wilkie is saying 
it’s just on that side. Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why that 
has happened is because this government approached this 
session with the view that they can do whatever they want. 
They will proceed with whatever they want, when they want. 
And their view is, we really don’t play a part in it at all — oh, 
sure, it’s a nuisance; we’ve got to put up with all the noise, and 
they’ll argue and debate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we say the legislature is more than that. We 
say this legislature is more than just a debating society. We say 
that where we have solid public support, where the public are 
adamantly opposed to what the members opposite are doing, 
this legislature should have some means of bringing public will 
to bear on the issues of the day. That’s what the bell-ringing 
was all about. The bell-ringing was not so much our 
mechanism, it was really the people who used the mechanism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what . . . I know, Mr. Speaker, that I 
was nervous, as I always am, about letting the bells ring very 
long. I may say that was my first reaction to it, was that we 
shouldn’t do it for too long. But, Mr. Speaker, when I actually 
got out of this place and met the public and began to listen to 
the public, who said to me, keep those bells ringing; and when I 
thought about why they were saying that; when I asked myself, 
why are they supporting a move which in a way prevents the 
legislature from functioning; why are they doing that; why do 
they feel that way? I came to the conclusion that the public had 
come to the same conclusion we had, and that is that there’s 
simply no other way of dealing with a group such as this. They 
don’t listen to reason. They are absolutely impervious to any 
logic. They don’t have a sense of fair play. Members opposite, 
in one sense, have no tradition here, and that may be why they 
lack a sense of fair play. That’s really what lies at the bottom of 
the bell-ringing, is a lack of a sense of fair play. 
 
Bell-ringing, in a sense, is a sign that things are not working as 
they should. If things were working as they should, such a tactic 
would not be necessary. But they’re not. This government 
solemnly promised at every turn of the road that they wouldn’t 
privatize a public utility, and then go ahead and do it anyway. 
 
So we think, Mr. Speaker, that bell-ringing — we think 
bell-ringing plays a legitimate part in this legislature. We think 
by and large, if you look in past instances, we think by and 
large it has not been abused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bell-ringing was first used in 1978, I believe, by a 
Conservative party in Ottawa which was outraged at the 
behaviour of the federal Liberals. And I frankly didn’t blame 
them. Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals brought in a Bill with 
respect to . . . an energy Bill, but encompassed in the same Bill 
four different pieces of legislation — they called it an omnibus 
Bill — made it virtually impossible for the Conservatives to 
deal with. In a mood of frustration, they let the bells ring. Public 
opinion  
  



 
June 5, 1989 

1645 
 

supported the opposition all of the way, and eventually after 
some 11 days, if my memory serves me correctly, the 
government relented. The government split the Bill up into four 
different Bills, and the Parliament of Canada went on to 
consider them — something it really could not have done in any 
sort of a fashion; it really could not have done in any sort of a 
fashion if it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


