


















































June 19. 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 19. 1989 
 

1985 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present approximately 600 names of 
people who are opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. 
These people have asked the Premier and the government 
opposite to not privatize SaskEnergy but to leave it with the 
public so that the benefits can be obtained by all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from such areas as 
Humboldt, Muenster, Lake Lenore, White City, Moose Jaw, 
Southey, Lintlaw, Regina Beach, Belle Plaine, Pense, 
Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Assiniboia, Lafleche, just to name a 
few of the areas where these people come from. And I ask the 
Premier and the government opposite to listen carefully to these 
people who have signed these petitions. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
under rule 11 to present several hundred petitions of people 
who are convinced that this government’s stubborn insistence 
on privatizing SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) is not in 
their best interests. Mr. Speaker, virtually all corners of the 
province are represented. These petitions are from people living 
in Clavet, Cadillac, Swift Current, Langham, Saskatoon, Maple 
Creek, Sceptre, Gull Lake, Fox Valley, and Richmound. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present to the Assembly hundreds of names of people who 
are opposed to the privatization of SaskPower, the energy side 
of that corporation. This will add to the already thousands of 
names of people who have put forward their names in a 
petition, and as well the thousands of people who have rallied 
right across the province opposed to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I must say that in the presenting 
of the hon. members’ petitions up to this point, by and large 
members have been very good. This afternoon, however, I 
construe us maybe getting into some debate, so just stick to the 
presentation of your petitions, please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. I had not 
wanted to get into a debate when I talked about the thousands of 
people who are opposed, but I wanted to include the names 
from places like Osler, Hepburn, Maidstone, Melville, 
Weyburn, Midale, Spruce Lake, Vanscoy, Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present petitions to the Assembly by several hundreds 
of Saskatchewan residents, and these petitioners are urging the 
government not to privatize SaskPower and to keep it as a 
public utility. 
 
These petitioners are from Hudson Bay, Maple Creek,  

Gull Lake, Aberdeen, Martensville, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, 
Estevan, Kelliher and Biggar. It is my pleasure to present these 
petitions. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present over 600 names of Saskatchewan 
petitioners who are opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. 
These petitioners come from such communities, Mr. Speaker, as 
Mortlach, Caronport, Moose Jaw, Silton, Caron, Lampman, 
Radville, Weyburn, and Yellow Grass. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I join with my colleagues 
in rising to present several hundred petitions from 
Saskatchewan people with regard to the privatization of 
SaskPower not being in the public interest. The petition in part 
says that the privatization of SaskPower will lead to higher 
utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will benefit only the 
wealthy investors. 
 
In presenting these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, I believe I 
have presented the names of over 4,300 people from 
Saskatchewan. The petitions today come from such widely 
separated areas in Saskatchewan as Moosomin, Rocanville, 
Regina, Pierceland, Goodsoil, Turtleford, and my own city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to stand to present 
to this Assembly on behalf of several hundred Saskatchewan 
residents their objection to the government’s announced 
intention to privatize or piratize SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from all corners of the 
province of Saskatchewan and include people from the 
communities of Shaunavon, Regina, Lumsden, Qu’Appelle, 
Langham, Melfort, Middle Lake, Kincaid, Mankota, Swift 
Current, Kyle, Blaine Lake, Martensville, Perdue, Weyburn, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Yellow Grass, Esterhazy, my home city of 
Moose Jaw, and others. Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to present 
these on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly for several . . . about 600 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are 
urging the government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep 
this major public utility in service of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
These petitioners are from the following communities: Unity, 
Nipawin, Ridgedale, Success, Maple Creek, Carnduff, 
Sintaluta, Montreal Lake, Pilot Butte, Odessa, Kinistino, Spy 
Hill, Langenburg, Meota, Holdfast, Maple Creek, Buffalo 
Narrows, and La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present petitions from residents of communities in 
Saskatchewan including Sturgis, Regina Beach, Estevan, 
Regina city, Yorkton, Balgonie, and Lumsden. All these 
petitioners have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, because of 
their continuing concern over the possibility of the privatization 
of SaskPower. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well,  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1986 
 

pursuant to rule 11, to present to this Assembly several hundred 
petitions with respect to the privatization of SaskPower. These 
petitioners are asking the government not to privatize 
SaskPower, and they come from the following communities: 
Churchbridge, Langenburg, White Fox, Nipawin, Radville, 
Atwater, Broadview, Creelman, Grenfell, Lumsden, Wilkie, 
Hudson Bay, Endeavour, Dinsmore, Rosetown, Wadena, 
Wynyard, Biggar, Chaplin, Melfort, Star City, Rose Valley, and 
Rosthern. There’s approximately 600 here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too join 
my colleagues on this side of the House in rising pursuant to 
rule 11 in order to present to the government of this province 
the opposition of people from around Saskatchewan to the 
sell-off of its public assets, particularly, to wit, the sell-off of 
Saskatchewan Power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who signed these petitions here today 
that I’m presenting come from places such as Weyburn, 
Wawota, Swift Current, Battleford, Broadview, Indian Head, 
Blaine Lake, Maple Creek, Christopher Lake, Borden, 
Kamsack, Rosetown, Nipawin. Christopher Lake, Borden, 
Kamsack, Rosetown, Nipawin. 
 
I notice there’s a very great many here from the city of Estevan, 
and I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are several 
hundred here from the constituency of Regina Rosemont that I 
have the opportunity to represent. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to join with my colleagues today in presenting several 
hundred more names of Saskatchewan residents who are 
opposed to the privatization and the sell-off of SaskPower. 
 
These signatures come from communities across our province, 
including Prince Albert, Kelvington, Humboldt, Watrous, 
Choiceland, Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current and, Mr. 
Speaker, from the community that I’m proud to live in, the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join my 
colleagues in rising pursuant to rule 11 to present some 
400-plus signatures. 
 
These signatures represent many hundreds of hours of volunteer 
work from people right across the province, and they come 
from towns and communities such as Fenwood, Indian Head, 
Danbury, Coronach, Rabbit Lake, Ogema, Grandora, Estevan, 
Kronau, Govan, Fort Qu’Appelle, Semans, Southey, Cochin, 
Glenbush, Yorkton, Markinch, Cupar, Outlook and, I note with 
some joy, a considerable number of signatures from Lloyd 
Crescent, which is in the constituency of Regina North, the 
constituency that I represent. 
 
It’s my pleasure to present these 400-plus petitions on behalf of 
the signatures. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly for 
several hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners 
are urging the government not to privatize SaskPower but to 
keep this major public utility  

in the service of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
And these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from a number of 
communities, including Wolseley, Indian Head, Grenfell, 
Pangman, Tuxford, Allan, Chaplin, Rouleau, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present several thousand petitions to the 
legislature on behalf of people who have signed the petitions to 
urge the government not to privatize SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy. I wish to report, Mr. Speaker, that this brings to 
100,000 the number of people who have petitioned the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — One hundred thousand people who have 
petitioned the government, urging the government not to sell 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy. The strength of that kind of 
democratic exercise, Mr. Speaker, surely no government can 
ignore, unless it does so at its own peril. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions on 
behalf of people who have lived in communities all over 
Saskatchewan, communities such as Nipawin and Clavet, 
Dundurn, Kipling, Regina — my city — Rockglen, Shellbrook, 
Buffalo Narrows, North Battleford and many, many other 
communities. It’s a pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to present 
these petitions on their behalf, as my colleagues have on behalf 
of people from every place in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you I 
would like to introduce to the Assembly some special guests 
from Fort Qu’Appelle. They are participating in the seniors’ 
life-style research project through the University of Regina and 
the Saskatchewan Parks, Recreation and Culture at the (Dr.) 
Paul Schwann Centre. They are Derek Harrison, Albert 
Longpré, Mrs. Sonia Morrell, Reinhard Mohl, and Alex 
Kovacs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our guests are seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and 
I would like all hon. members to join with me in welcoming our 
special guests from Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure on 
behalf of my colleague, the member for Regina North West, to 
introduce a group of grade 5 students seated in the east gallery. 
They number 28 students. These students are from MacNeill 
School in the constituency of Regina North West. The teachers 
are Cameron Thomas and Jon Kincheloe, and the chaperon with 
them today is Bev Waters. 
 
I will be meeting with this group on the front lawn, and I 
understand we’re having pictures as well as refreshments right 
after question period, shortly after 2:30. I ask all  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1987 
 

members to join me in welcoming this group of grade 5 
students from MacNeill School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one other 
introduction that I’d like to make at this time. It is my pleasure 
to introduce a gentleman seated in your gallery, in the centre of 
it. Lloyd Martin is a farmer from Cupar, and, as I’m sure you 
are aware, is one of five people seeking the nomination for the 
New Democratic Party in the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. I ask all hon. members to join me in 
giving Lloyd Martin a great welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
an individual who many of the members here will know from 
previous sessions, but an individual who used to work for the 
Star Phoenix, Larry Johnsrude, who is seated in the opposition 
members’ gallery. I don’t know if that’s significant at all, but I 
wanted to say that Larry’s parents live in the riding of 
Elphinstone, and I just wanted to welcome Larry back, and I am 
sure you will enjoy question period today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I also would 
like to introduce to the House some students from St. Theresa 
School. They are a class of grade 4 students, 61 of them. They 
are seated in your gallery. 
 
Visitors from St. Theresa are always special to me because 
that’s the school in which I taught in for some three years 
between 1982 and 1985 here in Regina. They are accompanied 
by their teachers, Elaine Pack and Edith Seiferling, and 
chaperons, Mrs. Jantzen, Mrs. Venne, and Mrs. Kuntz. 
 
I do believe, and I hope I’m not wrong, that St. Theresa School 
this year won the Catholic school track and field championship. 
It’s a program which I was involved in in my capacity as one of 
the phys ed teachers at the school. I want to congratulate them 
for that achievement and ask the members to join me in 
welcoming the students to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I too would like to take this opportunity to 
welcome my friend, Lloyd Martin, who is in the Speaker’s 
gallery. He farms just a few miles down the road from me, as a 
matter of fact, and it’s not uncommon for Lloyd and me to sit 
and talk about farming, as well as other things. 
 
I trust he enjoys question period from the Speaker’s gallery 
today and will for a good long time to come. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Barber Commission on SaskEnergy Public Participation 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that you 
indicated today that there’s not going to be an election for a 
couple of years, and in light of that, I want to address the 
question to the Premier of the province. 
 
Today, Mr. Premier, you saw the hundred-thousandth name 
being presented here of people who signed petitions opposed to 
the privatization of SaskPower, the natural gas side. I want to 
say that this past weekend in Regina, 6,000 people were out, 
6,000 people were out on the steps of the legislature protesting, 
protesting against this government’s attempt to privatize 
SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say as well that the expensive illegal ad 
campaign, the illegal ad campaign that you carried out for a 
month, that you pulled, did nothing to turn people around, did 
nothing to turn people around. The 80 meetings that you held 
around the province that had fewer people out in total than the 
one rally here on Saturday, had fewer people out than 80 
meetings you held around the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In light of all the evidence, in light of all 
the evidence — the 100,000 names, the thousands of people 
who have rallied in favour of our position, the 5’s and 10’s who 
have rallied in favour of your position — will you not cancel 
the Barber Commission and come to your senses and just 
announce today that you’re not going ahead with privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve often made the offer to 
the Leader of the Opposition: if he wants to debate the 
SaskEnergy legislation and vote on it, we’ll cancel all the 
meetings; we’ll say let’s forget about it. And all they can say is, 
well, we have to, Mr. Speaker, call an election or do some other 
things. 
 
I don’t know if the people in the rest of the province can hear 
the members opposite call from their seats when I put that offer 
out there. But I’m very serious about it and very sincere. If you 
want to debate the legislation here and vote on it, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d be more than glad to say you don’t need any of the hearings; 
you don’t need any of that stuff, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said that 
many times. 
 
Let me point out to the hon. members, there’ve been 123,000 
participants in the province of Saskatchewan since 1982 by 
bonds in various Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker; 10,800 
individuals in Saskatchewan have share purchases, Mr. 
Speaker; 280 employee-owner operations in six new 
Saskatchewan companies, Mr. Speaker; 757 employee share 
holders at Saskoil or WESTBRIDGE alone; 1,760 permanent 
and temporary jobs created or protected, Mr. Speaker; 1,000 
more jobs projected as a result of public participation and 
privatization. 
 
I just say to the hon. member, that’s 136,597 people in 
Saskatchewan who have voted with participating, Mr. Speaker. 
And they’re saying, I like the bonds and I like the  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1988 
 

shares; I like the lower rates; keep it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, new question to the 
Premier. Obviously he is trying to misrepresent the facts. It is 
he who pulled the Bill to privatize SaskPower. He pulled the 
Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Now you may be able to fool a few of the 
people some of the time, Mr. Premier, but you can’t fool the 
people of the province about who pulled the legislation when 
you came up against the people being opposed to it. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, Dr. Lloyd Barber has indicated 
that he feels that the result of his commission, that his hearings 
will be ignored by the government. He’s given that indication 
— that he feels that you will not listen whether he says yea or 
nay to the SaskPower privatization. 
 
In light of that fact, the fact of all the people who are opposed 
— now even the president or the chairman of the commissions 
which you have appointed is saying that you’re not going to 
listen — will you end this expensive whitewash and listen to the 
people, and cancel your plans to privatize SaskPower? Will you 
do that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. 
member that the NDP members opposite have said that the 
Barber Commission is a whitewash. Then they go on and say 
that the Barber Commission will not be listened to. Then they 
go on and say that Mr. Barber can’t run a university. Then they 
go on and say, well, if you would just operate and debate in 
here, Mr. Speaker, then in fact . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order! Order, 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They have been 
making the allegations inside the House and outside the House 
with respect to public participation and privatization, and we 
know, Mr. Speaker, that when they were in office people 
couldn’t purchase bonds or shares in Saskatchewan. We know 
that. They would nationalize companies, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’d put all the debt in the Crown corporations and jack up 
rates and jack up rates. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, they were 
thrown out of power. 
 
We have offered SaskPower bonds, Saskoil shares, bonds 
converted to shares, and it’s been publicly accepted, Mr. 
Speaker. Now when we have the president of a university say, 
we will examine in detail the economic consequences of 
allowing the people of Saskatchewan to participate in 
SaskEnergy to reduce the debt, Mr. Speaker, and to lower the 
cost and to lower rates, Mr. Speaker, they say, oh my gosh, it 
might be popular as well; we’d better walk out of here and we’d 
better raise an awful lot of Cain and furore. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we didn’t say that we would raise rates in 
SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask another question to the 
Premier, but in doing so, I want to say again that you’re very 
loose and quick with the facts as usual today, Mr. Premier, 
misleading the Assembly. 
 
I want to say that the debt in the Crown corporations has gone 
from 3.3 billion, which it was from 1905 to 1982, and is now at 
— what? — $9 billion under your administration, to say that 
previous governments, is completely misrepresenting the facts 
and misleading the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say, Mr. Minister, that we have 
seen that the Barber Commission chairman, Lloyd Barber, has 
said that he doesn’t think he’s going to be listened to. We have 
seen thousands of people opposed the plan coming to meetings, 
even your own minister of privatization. I want to say, in terms 
of getting on with your backward right-wing agenda, and I want 
to quote, he says: 
 

I think the people of Saskatchewan will issue the only 
protest that really matters when they cast their ballots in 
the next election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to say I couldn’t agree more. 
Will you today screw up your courage, and if you’re not going 
to back off of the SaskPower issue will you call an election and 
let the people decide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite were 
telling me last week and the week before that they had so many 
people on side that there would be 10 or 15,000 individuals 
show up on the steps of the legislature on Saturday, Mr. 
Speaker. The opposition members were telling the public there 
would be tens of thousands of people show up here and say, oh 
isn’t it just going to be terrible; we don’t like SaskPower bonds; 
we don’t like telephone bonds; we don’t like Saskoil shares; we 
don’t WESTBRIDGE; we don’t like Weyerhaeuser. They said, 
there’s going to be tens of thousands of them show up here on 
the steps of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think there was 
many over 2,000, and 25 to 30 per cent of them were children, 
Mr. Speaker. They interviewed little people. Some of them 
were five years old and the media interviewed them and said, 
for Heaven’s sakes young fellow, what are you here for? The 
little guy five years old didn’t know, but his dad is in the back 
row and he says, you’re supposed to be against Grant Devine 
and SaskPower bonds, and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll say they tried to tell the rest of the world that 
we don’t know what we’re doing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. On Saturday they failed, Mr. Speaker. We’ll call 
an election when people have the opportunity to see the kinds of 
things that we can do to and for the  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1989 
 

people of Saskatchewan. And when we do, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that the real folks in Saskatchewan will speak as they 
have in ’82, and they did in ’86, and they will in 1990 or ’91, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of SaskEnergy Advertising 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I can tell 
you there’s one thing in the province that the people of 
Saskatchewan like, and that’s the fight that we’re carrying on 
against your attempt to sell off our private assets. That’s what 
they like, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And one of the reasons, Mr. Premier, they like 
that is they know that we’re not going to waste the money that 
comes from those public assets in illegal and expensive 
advertising campaigns. 
 
Mr. Premier, two weeks ago or thereabouts I asked the Minister 
of Justice and on his word he said he would give this House the 
costs of that illegal and ineffective advertising campaign. Will 
you today, sir, honour the commitment made by that Minister of 
Justice and tell us and tell the people of Saskatchewan precisely 
how much that illegal and expensive advertising campaign cost 
us all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ve said to the hon. member in the House 
that if . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Premier has risen to answer. 
Let’s give him the opportunity to. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said to the hon. 
members that if they would participate like normal participants 
in democracy and debate and vote, then there’s no need for 
hearings and there’s no need for commissions; and invite them 
all in here, Mr. Speaker, and we could have had a very 
productive session this session, if they wanted it, but they didn’t 
— they walked out. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member 
says where, where, Mr. Speaker, where’s this comment about 
Mr. Lloyd Barber not being able to run the university. The 
member from Regina Rosemont just stood up . . . I just want to 
say, Mr. Speaker . . . No, I will just say because they challenged 
this. On June 1, 1989, the member from Rosemont stood . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, order, order. 
Order. Order. Order, order. I think there’s a good example of 
what can lead to when we get into debate with our questions 
and answers, and I think that’s kind of what is happening here. 
And the hon. member from Regina Rosemont began his 
question with raising some other issues. And I just want to 
bring to the attention of both sides of the House that we tighten 
up our questions,  

tighten up our answers; we’ll have better question periods. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ll just say to the hon. member, he can 
— I won’t repeat it — he can refer to it on June 1, Mr. Speaker. 
On June 1 in Hansard he questioned the university president’s 
capacity to run the university, and it’s here. 
 
I’ll say to the hon. member: when you ring the bells, Mr. 
Speaker, on something like SaskEnergy, that’s where the costs 
are incurred. The hon. member asks about costs: it’s $30,000 a 
day, Mr. Speaker, and running for 55 days and nothing done as 
a result of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina North, I know, he can 
quite emotional into the debate. But I think he should control 
himself; he should control himself and not overdo his 
involvement. 
 

Free Trade and the Balance of Payments 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Trade and development. My colleagues have raised the 
issues of privatization. I want to go from those questions to the 
result of this government’s blind drive for privatization and free 
trade. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would remind you that on Friday, Statistics 
Canada reported that Canada’s trade surplus had dropped to an 
eight-year low. Many observers believe can be attributed to free 
trade. Mr. Minister, that’s reflected at the local level by Ipsco, 
which has laid off 100 people and has said it’s going to lay off 
another 213 next month. Free trade seems to be working about 
as well as many people thought it would, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly what your government 
is going to do to try to repair some of the damage done by free 
trade? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 
from Regina Centre would even agree that it’s somewhat 
stretching to say that the lay-offs at Ipsco, which are primarily 
driven by the oil industry in the province of Saskatchewan and 
Alberta, are any way related to the free trade agreement. 
 
The hon. member asked what we are going to do with regard to 
improving and increasing our trade with the United States. Of 
course, the province of Saskatchewan has a significant surplus 
of trade in the United States, and we intend to make that larger. 
 
One thing that we’ve done of recent was to assist with 
Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon to expand, almost double the size of 
their operation. Most of that product, and certainly the largest 
amount of that increased production out of Flexi-Coil, is going 
into the U.S. market. That’s what we intend to do with regards 
to that. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1990 
 

With regards to Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, instead of sending 
fence posts down to the United States, we’re now making fine 
paper in the province of Saskatchewan, exporting a great deal of 
that into the United States, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If you look at the most recent expansion 
of Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon, which again increased 
the number of employees by some 2 to 300 people, the bulk of 
that new processed food, Mr. Speaker, is going south into the 
United States, creating jobs both in the city of Saskatoon with 
Intercontinental Packers and creating jobs for the people that 
are growing hogs in the province of Saskatchewan, and of 
course for anybody processing and transporting that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are doing in the province of 
Saskatchewan is significantly increasing our sales to the United 
States. Now certain parts of Canada, particularly the automobile 
industry, are running into some problems, Mr. Speaker, but 
Saskatchewan is doing very well, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This was to be a supplementary, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’m going to raise a new question because I want 
to just take the opportunity to ask the minister to reflect upon 
the specious nature of your last answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, you referred to a manufacturing plant which 
opened up in Saskatoon. That in fact replaces one that closed 
down in Frontier, Saskatchewan — Friggstad. Mr. Minister, 
what we’re asking you to do is not to play games with these 
people and their unemployment but to deal with it seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, at the national level we’ve seen 
a trade surplus, a healthy trade surplus last year, degenerate into 
a marginal trade surplus this year with free trade. Similarly with 
Ipsco, last year they recorded a record $28 million profit, and 
this year they’re laying off 300 people. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: how much worse does this 
situation have to get before your government will admit that 
free trade isn’t working, and before you take some corrective 
action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member 
was interested in looking at the Saskatchewan trade figures of 
what we trade with the United States, what we export to the 
United States, the hon. member would find that in fact that has 
increased, Mr. Speaker, not decreased — it has increased. 
 
What you see, Mr. Speaker, by way of increase is certainly the 
potash sales have been increasing this year over last year. The 
oil exports have been about the same, but the price of oil seems 
to be going up at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. Certainly from 
the food processing end of it, we are seeing increased sales, 
both by Gainers and  

by Canada Packers and by Intercontinental Packers. 
 
Some of the manufacturing sector . . . simply go ask the people 
in the farm machinery manufacturing sector. I would ask them 
to call any one of them, Mr. Speaker, and what they will tell 
you is in fact sales are increasing over the last six months in the 
United States — manufactured here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So all the major components that we’re selling into the United 
States, we’re increasing our sales to the United States. Free 
trade is good for a province like Saskatchewan. We’ve said that 
before. The people of Canada endorsed that, Mr. Speaker, and 
now it’s time to go on with it, expand those markets, build new 
industries that we can tap into that very large and lucrative 
market in United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
shame that the 13,000 people who left didn’t hear that very 
convincing answer. I’m sure they’d stop in their tracks, turn 
around, and return to this promised land that you’re building. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have spent an enormous amount of taxpayers’ 
money peddling . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I think the member’s 
having a little difficulty putting his question because of some 
interference. Let us allow the member from Regina Centre to 
put his question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you have spent an enormous 
amount, many millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money, 
peddling free trade and privatization. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: are you going to try and peddle 
that tripe to the 300 people who don’t have a pay cheque this 
month? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this province for a long 
time, since its beginning when it was first developed, has relied 
upon trade, both trade to other parts of Canada — trade, a major 
trading partner being the United States — and trade to the rest 
of the world for our livelihood, for our employment, and for the 
creation of our wealth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we must do in this province is to continue on 
that course, Mr. Speaker, to look for new trading opportunities, 
whether it’s in eastern Canada, whether it’s in United States, 
whether it’s with the rest of the world, quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s exactly what we have to do. 
 
Now the hon. members in their policy of the NDP is for 
isolationism, Mr. Speaker. If you really blister down the NDP 
policy, economic policy for this province, is a policy of 
isolationism. It defies me, Mr. Speaker, how we as a province 
of one million people would want to go into a policy of 
isolation where we simply manufacture or process for our own 
one million people. Mr. Speaker, that does not create jobs, that 
destroys jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1991 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Accusations Against Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Justice. Mr. Minister, not so long ago in this House you told this 
legislature and you told the press that you would refer to your 
department, for criminal investigation, accusations made by 
yourself of the Provincial Auditor that he had offered to trade 
material considerations for adjustments in his annual report. I 
believe, Mr. Minister, you have not done so. 
 
My question to you therefore is this: why, after making those 
serious accusations against the Provincial Auditor, did you not 
refer to your department for criminal investigations those 
accusations that you made of the Provincial Auditor? Why did 
you not do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think any fair review of 
the record of Hansard in this Assembly, at no time did I make 
any statement suggesting criminal activity by the Provincial 
Auditor. Any reference to the Provincial Auditor of criminal 
activity came . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order, 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Any allegation of criminal nature came 
from the Leader of the Opposition in his questions, Mr. 
Speaker. What I indicated to the media outside this House, Mr. 
Speaker, was that that matter would be referred . . . Mr. 
Speaker, once the allegation being made from the Leader of the 
Opposition, the matter would be referred to my department for 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can report that I in fact did refer that to my 
department for investigation. They reviewed (a) what had 
happened. And the statements of both myself and the Leader of 
the Opposition conclude there’s no such thing as criminal 
activity in that particular . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — A new question to the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, next thing you’ll have us believe that you made no 
scurrilous attack against the Provincial Auditor. It’s just a big 
fairy-tale — just a big fairy-tale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, you also told this House, Mr. 
Minister, that you would register a complaint about the 
Provincial Auditor’s behaviour to the chartered accountants’ 
association. You told this House that. Mr. Minister, you told the 
House that you would also register a complaint against the 
accountants’ association against the Provincial Auditor. As far 
as I know, you’ve not done that. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you make these accusations against the 
Provincial Auditor, you tell this House you are going to take 
action and then you don’t. Doesn’t that tell you  

that maybe your arguments, your allegations, were completely 
groundless and that you made those accusations only because 
the legitimate criticisms of the auditor were against your 
government, and the only way that you could defend your 
government was to make personal attacks on the Provincial 
Auditor? Isn’t that the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, what I indicated in the 
House is clearly set out in the record of the Hansard of this 
House. I made those statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With regard to any reference — and I think what the hon. 
member is referring to is professional conduct committee of the 
chartered accountants of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — I have 
been advised that some of the local chartered accountants were 
in fact proceeding to do that. I have not heard whether it has in 
fact been done or not. I will certainly inquire into that. 
 
I think it’s something that should duly be considered by the 
professional conduct committee of the chartered accountants of 
this province. Should it not be done by a local chartered 
accountant, then I would certainly undertake to refer that for 
clarification, if nothing else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Further question for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, isn’t it true that upon investigation you have found 
that your attacks on the Provincial Auditor were completely 
groundless; that’s why you didn’t refer for a criminal 
investigation? You also found that the Provincial Auditor did 
nothing that was illegal or unprofessional or unlawful or 
unethical; that’s why you didn’t refer anything to the 
professional accountants association. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, don’t you think it’s time now that you do the 
honourable thing and apologize in this House for your 
accusations against the Provincial Auditor which were 
completely groundless? Would you do that now in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I understand at this point 
in time that that particular auditor’s report is being now dealt 
with by the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, of which 
I understand the hon. member from Regina . . . Saskatoon South 
is a member. 
 
(1445) 
 
What I would hope, Mr. Speaker, what I would hope, Mr. 
Speaker, is that Public Accounts Committee will review and 
investigate into the allegations or the statements that I have 
made to determine whether or not what I said in fact was 
substantiated, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s only proper that 
both I and this House wait for that determination by the Public 
Accounts Committee because that is what they are designed to 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1992 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting Personal Care Homes 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to explain the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The question period is 
over. We’ll have another one tomorrow. Let’s allow the 
Minister of Health to continue with his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I was saying, I’m pleased to explain the purpose of this Bill, 
Bill No. 45, which is to enact The Personal Care Homes Act. 
I’ll be moving second reading at the end of my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This Act will govern care homes that are not currently regulated 
by the province. These facilities provide room and board plus 
care services to adults who cannot manage entirely on their 
own. I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that this new Act will 
not affect the care facilities we already license and approve 
under other legislation. 
 
A personal care home in this province is usually in a 
family-type house or duplex. In many cases the operator lives in 
the house with family members as well as residents who need 
care. Staff are sometimes employed to provide services. 
 
Under this Act, Mr. Speaker, every personal care home will 
need a licence to operate. To qualify for that licence the home 
will meet standards to be set in the regulations. Our government 
consulted with health care groups, facility operators, and other 
interested groups, and with individuals, about the need for this 
Act. Public meetings were held in Regina, in Saskatoon, in 
Prince Albert, in North Battleford, and in Moose Jaw, and these 
meetings were very well attended. 
 
A public consultation paper was widely distributed so everyone 
interested could look at our detailed proposals. There was a 
clear consensus: we need this legislation to provide protections 
for the elderly and younger disabled people who live in these 
homes. 
 
With this Act in place, Mr. Speaker, some 200 to 300 personal 
care homes can be officially recognized through licensing as 
part of the continuum of long-term care. Most importantly, we 
will be able to monitor the quality of services that personal care 
homes offer. 
 
This new Act is another step toward our goal of providing 
people with a full range of good quality options when they need 
long-term care, Mr. Speaker. We believe that the licensing 
provisions proposed in this Bill will assure residents a 
reasonable standard of care and safe,  

comfortable housing. 
 
This Bill sets out a framework for mandatory licensing of 
personal care homes. It has provisions to make regulations 
about standards and to issue licences with terms and with 
conditions. Licences may be amended or suspended when it is 
necessary to protect the public interest. A licence will not be 
transferable from one operator to another, or from one facility 
to another. In each of these cases, a new application for 
licensing would be required. 
 
The Bill has provisions for the inspection of facilities and 
provisions to require operators to submit information and 
materials needed to establish compliance with the Act and with 
the regulations to this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made provisions to allow an operator 
to request and obtain a review of a licensing decision. In such 
situations, the operator will have the right to make a 
representation personally or with legal counsel. 
 
The Bill contains provisions for penalties that will apply to 
persons convicted of contravening the Act. We believe these 
penalties are sufficient to encourage compliance. 
 
It is my intention, Mr. Speaker, to start the groundwork for this 
new licensing system just as soon as The Personal Care Homes 
Act is passed by this legislature. My staff will be scheduling 
meetings this fall with personal care home operators to review 
the standards we’re proposing. At the conclusion of these 
meetings, we’ll be finalizing the regulations we need to 
administer the Act. 
 
We will give personal care home operators a year of notice to 
prepare for the new standards. I will expect operators to use this 
notice period to examine the services they provide and, if 
needed, to upgrade their facilities and their services. 
 
We will also be consulting with the cities and with health care 
agencies that work closely with personal care homes as we 
develop our standards and our monitoring system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this statute is an important step in ensuring the 
well-being of our seniors and our disabled citizens. I’m 
therefore pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 45, An 
Act respecting Personal Care Homes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
welcome the legislation coming to the floor of the House. It 
provides recognition and regulation of private care homes, and 
we believe that this recognition and this regulation is long 
overdue. 
 
There are many people who use these homes, Mr. Speaker, and 
the legislation or the regulations that will follow the legislation, 
as I understand, are going to be requiring that certain standards 
be met before a licence is issued. This will provide protection 
for the people who use the homes, and it will provide protection 
for their families. 
 
We feel that this legislation is also good because it gives  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1993 
 

the private care homes the recognition that they have deserved 
for a considerable length of time. Many of these homes already 
meet very high standards, and now they will be licensed 
pursuant to the Act. 
 
Our critic for senior citizens is not here today, Mr. Speaker, so 
I’m going to ask to adjourn the debate because I know that she 
is going to be carrying this Bill through the House. So I’m 
going to ask of the government that we adjourn the debate until 
she’s in the House. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 47 — An Act to 
amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a 
second time 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of a Bill, Bill No. 47, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1989. And as 
many members will know, the Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
establishes the level of provincial operating assistance to be 
allocated to both urban and rural municipalities. And 
accordingly, the amendment gives legal effect to many of the 
decisions that were reflected in this government’s 1989-90 
budget. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is a budget that is very 
good for municipalities across Saskatchewan, and I’d like to 
highlight for a few moments some of the initiatives under that 
budget. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, there is in that budget and by way of this 
Bill a new $100 million capital program for municipalities. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as you may well know, across 
Saskatchewan and primarily in rural Saskatchewan in smaller 
communities there is very much of a need for funding from the 
provincial level of government to assist these municipalities in 
building infrastructure. What I’m talking about Mr. Speaker, is 
roads and sewers and lagoons and water treatment plants, and 
on and on down the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within this Bill there is a $100 million capital 
program for these municipalities. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is 
proof positive of this government’s ability and willingness to 
co-operate with junior levels of government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I submit to you that this initiative will be welcomed by the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that I call on the opposition, I call on the 
opposition to assist this province in another initiative to help 
build Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I and the public of 
Saskatchewan will be watching to see if indeed the members of 
the NDP support this very good, worthwhile building initiative 
of $100 million. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, another major thrust of what this Bill 
will allow is under the recreation and cultural  

facilities program, 33 millions of dollars to be put into 
recreational facilities across this province of ours. I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this need, this need is most acute in small and 
medium-sized towns across this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
coming from a rural area myself, I feel that I can very much 
appreciate the need for improved recreational and cultural 
facilities in small towns in Saskatchewan. 
 
When I look at my members on this side of the House, on the 
government side of the House, Mr. Speaker, most of the 
members here coming from small town Saskatchewan, I say 
that there is an understanding and an empathy and a genuine 
concern on the government’s part to assist towns and villages 
and hamlets and small cities with their recreation and cultural 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within this Bill 33, millions of dollars that will not 
only help the communities build these structures, but indeed 
will create many hundreds, if not thousands of jobs in building 
these facilities. 
 
I thirdly submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that within this Bill are 
contained provisions for the increase in urban assistance 
respecting highways for our cities and towns across this 
province — here again, Mr. Speaker, something that is near and 
dear to my heart, and I believe near and dear to the hearts of the 
members on the government side of the House — increase in 
funding for highways that run through towns and villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these moneys will assist in resurfacing highways, 
they will assist in putting in curbs and gutters, they will assist in 
improving safety measures with such things as lights along 
highway routes through towns, flashing lights, guard rails, and 
various assorted infrastructure needs for highway routes 
running through towns and villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all told, the passage of this Bill will allow $115 
million to flow in 1989 to Saskatchewan urban and rural 
municipalities through revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I would say that this particular Bill, 
in summation, would be a Bill that allows for further 
diversification and further building in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, from the government’s perspective, the building of 
Saskatchewan, which creates jobs and investment, I believe is 
of utmost importance today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would call on all members of the opposition to 
support this Bill today, at least in general principles. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we all know of the opposition’s mentality over the last 
while, that they have been against every major building project 
that this government has initiated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am calling today on members of the opposition 
to support this Bill. I am calling on members of the opposition 
to stand up for Saskatchewan communities. I’m calling on 
members of the opposition to stand up for the creation of jobs 
with which this Bill will create. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I therefore, in summation, do move second 
reading of Bill No. 47, The Municipal Revenue  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1994 
 

Sharing Amendment Act, 1989. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
might say how pleased I was that you read out the Bill number 
because, listening to the Minister of Highways, I wasn’t sure 
what particular piece of legislation he was talking about, 
because his remarks certainly didn’t have anything to do with 
Bill 47, An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
(Act). Nothing. 
 
The Minister of Highways talked about capital grants, he talked 
about recreational grants, he talked about diversifying the 
economy, but did not talk about revenue sharing. In fact his 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, probably had more to do with the price 
of tea in China than they did with revenue sharing. There’s just 
little or no relationship with the Bill before us. 
 
(1500) 
 
The Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, does two very specific things, 
two very specific things. In the case of urban municipalities, 
and secondly in the case of rural municipalities, it means that 
the amount of money that goes from the provincial government 
to urban and rural municipalities for revenue sharing will be 
exactly the same in this fiscal year as it was in the last fiscal 
year. 
 
That’s what the Bill does, those two things. For urban 
municipalities and for rural municipalities, that’s what it does, 
nothing more, nothing less. It means the amount of money 
going to urban and rural municipalities for revenue sharing to 
help them with their operational programs will be exactly the 
same. There won’t be a penny more, not a penny more this year 
than there was last year. That’s what the Minister of Highways 
was trying to tell us, Mr. Speaker, in a very roundabout way and 
never got around to it. But that’s what he was trying to do — 
not a penny more! 
 
Mr. Speaker, now one might well ask that in light of all the 
difficulties facing this government, and the difficulties facing 
this government are considerable, many — and most, I would 
say — because of their own making, because of their own fiscal 
irresponsibility, the difficulties facing them, one might well ask, 
well, so what’s the big problem with the zero per cent increase 
to municipalities; not giving them an increase this year over last 
year in the amount of money for revenue sharing, when the 
government has all these other challenges before it. And I 
suppose one might say if this were an isolated example or an 
isolated incident when it comes to this government’s 
relationship with municipalities and this government’s transfer 
of funds from the provincial treasury to municipalities, one 
might say, well, perhaps it’s no big deal. 
 
But when you begin to look at the history, the history, Mr. 
Speaker, we can see that this Bill is part of an ongoing trend by 
the government, an ongoing trend by the government to slow 
down the transfer of revenues, the transfer of funds from the 
provincial government to municipalities. 
 

And I just want to go into this in some detail, Mr. Speaker. 
When it comes to urban municipalities, as an example, urban 
municipalities, we see that in 1984-1985, the amount of money 
under revenue sharing which went from the province to urban 
municipalities was $65,171,700. That was the amount. 
 
The following year there was a zero per cent increase — no 
increase. So the increase between ’85-86 over the previous year 
was zero, even though the inflation rate in Saskatchewan 
increased by 3.6 per cent. Now one might hold, one might hold 
that a zero per cent increase in the amount of money from the 
province to municipalities, in the context of an inflation rate 
increase of 3.6 per cent, represents a real decrease to 
municipalities. 
 
The following year, ’86-87, there was an increase. Now we 
should not be surprised by that because ’86-87 was an election 
year in Saskatchewan. And even though I’ll go into ensuing 
years, I want to point out to municipalities that there’s just no 
doubt in my mind, that come election year, that the provincial 
government will again offer them a small increase in revenue 
sharing. One can bet a few dollars on that, Mr. Speaker, and 
when it comes to election year, that they will increase the 
amount of money for municipalities. But in ’86-87, the increase 
was 3 per cent, even though the inflation rate increase was 3.1 
per cent. But they said that your municipalities should be happy 
because there was an increase. 
 
Well now was this something that held, Mr. Speaker? Did this 
signal a turn in the attitude of the Progressive Conservative 
government towards municipalities? Did ’86-87, with a 3 per 
cent increase, even though it was less than the rate of inflation, 
signal a turn in the attitude of that government towards 
municipalities? 
 
Well we only have to look at the following year to note that in 
’87-88, not only was there no increase, there was, in fact, a 
decrease. There was a 1 per cent decrease in the amount of 
money going from the provincial government to municipalities, 
even though the inflation rate in Saskatchewan increased by 4.9 
per cent. 
 
So here we have inflation going up, and one would say that the 
cost of municipalities are going up, whether it’s in terms of 
wages or whether it’s in terms of purchases that they must 
make, that those costs were going up. But the provincial 
government decided to cut back. Now this is the year after the 
election, Mr. Speaker, it cut back in its funding to urban 
municipalities. 
 
The following year, the following year the increase was less 
than 1 per cent. There was a 0.88 per cent increase in funds 
under the revenue-sharing program from the province to urban 
municipalities — a 0.88 per cent, so that there was a slight 
increase. But again we have to put this in the context of 
inflation, Mr. Speaker, which that year was 5.7 per cent, so that 
even though the government that year in its budget was crowing 
about the fact that it had more money for municipalities, one 
needs again to put this in the context of inflation, and inflation 
that year was 5.7 per cent. 
 
Now this year, this year, Mr. Speaker, they’re proposing to hold 
the line again, that there won’t be any increase to 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1995 
 

 urban and rural municipalities, notwithstanding the fact that 
inflation at this point is projected to increase this year by 4.4 per 
cent over the previous year. 
 
So what they’re saying to municipalities is that there’s no 
money for you even though we recognize that inflation will 
mean that you will have higher costs — higher costs for the 
programs and services that you deliver. 
 
Now those are things that the Minister of Highways did not 
mention in his opening remarks, Mr. Speaker. He did not 
mention that the trend, the trend line on the part of this 
government is very clear, and that is, we will slow down or 
decrease the amount of money going from the province to 
municipalities, with the exception, of course, of an election year 
in which there will be a modest increase to try and soften up the 
municipal leaders; to try and soften up those that might be 
concerned about that in order to see if we can’t get them to vote 
for us. 
 
But by and large the trend is very clear, and that is to reduce the 
amount of money going from the provincial government to 
municipalities. So the one thing the Minister of Highways did 
not do was to put this in the context of any historical 
precedence in terms of the government. 
 
Now one might ask, well, so what? I mean, what’s the big 
concern about money going from the province to urban 
municipalities or rural municipalities? What’s the big concern? 
I mean urban municipalities had the power to raise taxes and 
rural municipalities had the powers to raise taxes. 
 
Well all municipalities, Mr. Speaker, urban and rural, depend to 
a certain extent on provincial revenue sharing for part of their 
revenues. And if the revenue sharing is down, then in order to 
provide the same level of services, recognizing that there is 
inflation, or to increase services either means you start to 
increase taxes, or if you want to keep tax levels the same, 
property tax levels the same — and there’s a reason for that and 
I’ll get to that, Mr. Speaker — but to keep tax levels the same, 
then you’re faced with the prospect of holding the line on 
services. And in many cases it means that municipalities are 
forced to cut back in services or to decrease services. 
 
Now there may be good reason where from time to time you 
want to encourage municipalities to do that. But I can tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, as a person who was a member of a municipal 
council for a period of six years, my experience was then and is 
now, after many discussions with municipal leaders, that this is 
a process that municipalities go through every year, that they try 
and hold back, that they try and provide services at the best cost 
available to their taxpayers. That is the situation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Municipalities are fiscally responsible and municipal leaders in 
Saskatchewan are people who have a very keen eye for 
expenses on the one hand, and a very keen sensitivity about not 
wanting to raise property taxes on the other hand. In many 
instances, if they do raise taxes they are able to hold this below 
the line of inflation to spare the taxpayers the need for huge 
increases, and municipal leaders in the main in Saskatchewan 
have  

been able to do that. And they’ve been able to do that because 
they take their job seriously and because they have a very keen 
sense of what it is that their constituents want and what the 
market will bear, so to speak, but yet what is required in the 
way of services. 
 
And I think there’s no better testament, no better testament to 
the kind of leadership that our municipal leaders have been able 
to provide. Notwithstanding the actions of the provincial 
government in slowing down the amount of money going from 
the province to local governments, notwithstanding that, one 
needs to look only at the situation of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
Saskatoon has a rating from the Canadian Bond Rating Service 
of AAA. This means that Saskatoon — as far as this particular 
credit rating agency is concerned — puts Saskatoon at the top 
of the list. As an agency to which it would loan money or 
provide when it comes to funds for bonds, it’s prepared to give 
it a very high rating. 
 
When it comes to Regina, Regina has a AA-plus rating. Again, 
it’s a very high rating for municipalities and it means that 
Regina’s reputation when it goes to borrow money is a very 
good one indeed in the context of other Canadian cities and in 
the context of other Canadian provinces. 
 
But the province of Saskatchewan, by way of contrast, has a 
AA-minus rating, Mr. Speaker — a AA-minus. So when those 
credit rating agencies look at those three jurisdictions — 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Saskatchewan — as a separate and 
distinct jurisdiction, they say, we tend to take the point of view 
that Saskatoon and Regina are more fiscally responsible than is 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that is a strong testament, Mr. Speaker, to the fiscal 
responsibility of municipal leaders in Saskatchewan, and a 
strong testament to the strong leadership that municipal leaders 
provide in Saskatchewan when they try and juggle the matter of 
providing services on the one hand for people in our cities, 
towns, and villages, but trying to keep taxes to a reasonable 
level on the other hand. And it is a very strong testament of the 
ability of municipal leaders in Saskatchewan to balance those 
kinds of expectations and necessities and needs, and to do it 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other impact, one other impact that the 
slowing down of provincial funds to municipalities has to the 
revenue-sharing pool, it means that an objective of the 
revenue-sharing pool, which is to equalize the tax burdens 
between municipalities, is something that is much less 
achievable now than it was some years ago. 
 
The Local Government Finance Commission in its very 
definitive report on local government financing, indicated that if 
we are to achieve the objective of equalizing the tax burden 
between municipalities of different means, then more money 
needs to be put into revenue sharing to allow that to take place. 
 
Now they used the example, I think it was, of Kindersley or 
Rosetown versus Meadow Lake, and pointed out that the one 
community has a much higher local assessment as opposed to 
the other community; meaning that in  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1996 
 

order to provide the same services, the one community would 
have to exact far more in property taxes from its citizen than the 
other community would in order to be able to provide the same 
services, because each community had an unequal assessment 
base. 
 
Now the equalization or the revenue sharing in the case of 
urban municipalities is intended to in part equalize the property 
tax burden between municipalities. What the Minister of 
Highways did not mention in his remarks, that by not providing 
for any increase — and to put that again, Mr. Speaker, in the 
context of previous years where the increases have . . . well in 
fact there have been decreases, actual decreases, and certainly 
decreases put in the context of inflation — that one of the things 
that the Minister of Highways did not mention is that this year 
again we go that much further from achieving the objective of 
equalizing the tax load for people in various municipalities in 
Saskatchewan. He didn’t mention that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one might ask, what is the big concern about property 
taxes. If the money’s not forthcoming from the provincial 
government, why can’t municipalities simply raise their taxes to 
provide the services and programs that they are either (a) 
obligated to provide, or (b) feel it’s necessary to provide, in 
addition to whatever statutory obligations there may be? One 
might well ask. 
 
(1515) 
 
But the reason that we have always taken a keen interest in this 
and the reason that we have always expressed a very keen 
opposition to the approach of this government when it comes to 
revenue sharing, is that we take the position that the property 
tax is an unfair tax that bears little or no relationship to the 
ability to pay. 
 
We take the point of view that taxes, if they are to be supported 
and if they are to be effective, need to have more rather than 
less . . . a relationship between the ability to pay than no 
relationship whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly in terms of property taxes there are many, many 
observers who would hold — those who have no axe to grind 
on this, or no political axe to grind — would hold that there is 
very little relationship between property taxes and the ability to 
pay. In fact they would say that the relationship is a spurious 
one, that there is no strong relationship. 
 
And I illustrated this a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, and I 
just want to go back to this illustration to show people and to 
lay it out very clearly for the members of the Legislative 
Assembly why we take this position. I used, a couple of years 
ago, the example of the minister of Urban Affairs. And that 
minister, we knew what his property taxes were by going to city 
hall or getting that from the real estate industry. We were able 
to compute that his property taxes were $2,320.16. 
 
We also knew what his income was, what his income was from 
the government alone. His income that year was $68,000. Now 
his income may have been greater than that; he may have had 
income from other sources, but we  

would not be aware of that. So we can only take the income that 
he very clearly and specifically derived from his being a 
member of the Legislative Assembly and from his being a 
cabinet minister. And we know that his income was $68,000. 
Property taxes, his property taxes represent 3.4 per cent of his 
known income. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I had an elderly widow who 
lives in my constituency. She lives in a very modest home in 
one of the poorer areas of the city. Her property taxes that year 
for this modest home on a minimum lot, I might say, were 
$712.81. Her income, including pensions and including the 
senior citizens’ heritage grant, all the income she had was 
$12,000. Her property taxes represent 5.9 per cent of her 
income, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why we take the position as we have 
throughout the years and continue to take the position that when 
it comes to revenue sharing, that revenue sharing needs to be 
increased, because ultimately the impact will be on property 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan, and the relationship between the 
property tax and the ability to pay is simply not there, which 
means that the property tax by and large is not a fair tax. 
 
The objective of a provincial government should be to reduce 
the property tax, as opposed to slowing down the amount of 
money from the province to municipal treasuries and having the 
reverse effect, and that is to say, of increasing property taxes in 
Saskatchewan. The tax is simply not a fair one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Local Government Finance Commission in its 
final report which was tabled with the people in October of 
1986, made some observations in this regard in terms of the 
impact on people in Saskatchewan. They looked at property 
taxes as a percentage of the Saskatchewan gross domestic 
provincial product, the GDPP, for the period 1968 to 1985. 
 
And they note, Mr. Speaker, that the high point occurred in 
1970 when property taxes amounted to 5.1 per cent of the gross 
domestic provincial product. The low point occurred in 1980 
when property taxes had fallen to 2.7 per cent of the gross 
domestic provincial product. And subsequent to the low point in 
1980, property taxes had risen to 3.5 per cent of the gross 
domestic product in 1985. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, we know, even though the Minister 
of Highways neglected to mention this, that the trend since that 
time has been to slow down the transfer of funds from the 
province to municipalities, meaning again that property taxes 
will inevitably have to go up, and meaning, Mr. Speaker, that 
property taxes, again as a percentage of the gross domestic 
provincial product, are very much on the rise and will increase 
more in the future, and that we’re moving back to the time of 
the late 1960s when we had a right-wing Liberal government 
and when property taxes as a percentage of the gross domestic 
provincial product were very high indeed. 
 
The Local Government Finance Commission report, Mr. 
Speaker, also goes on to say that the reliance on the property tax 
was higher — higher — in Saskatchewan compared to Canada 
as a whole for 1968 to 1973  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1997 
 

inclusive and in 1982 and subsequent years. Between 1974 and 
1981 inclusive, the relative reliance is lower in Saskatchewan as 
a whole. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t need to outline for you the history of 
Saskatchewan, but you will know — and perhaps the people at 
home don’t know — but Saskatchewan had a Liberal 
government until 1971, an NDP government from 1971 to 
1982, and a PC government since that time. That the relative 
reliance on property taxes was and is higher — higher — during 
Liberal and Conservative administrations and lower during 
NDP administrations comes as no surprise to us, Mr. Speaker, 
because it reflects a very major philosophical difference 
between the Conservative Party and our party. 
 
They favour shifting the tax burden away from the province to 
municipalities, whereas we would take the position, Mr. 
Speaker, that the property tax is an unfair tax and therefore the 
total tax load of the province, there needs to be less reliance on 
the property tax as a means of funding government programs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to make one further comment about relative impact, 
Mr. Speaker. In 1985, that’s 1985, our per capita net property 
taxes — now net property taxes is taxes less provincial credits 
and rebates — were the third highest of any province in 
Canada, the third highest of any province in Canada. So that in 
Saskatchewan we tend more to rely on the property tax as a way 
of funding municipal administrations. 
 
We tend to rely more than other jurisdictions do to fund our 
municipal administrations as opposed to a situation some years 
previous to that when there was a property improvement grant 
which was a means of lowering the effective property tax for 
people when the per capita net property taxes was of course 
much lower in Saskatchewan. But that was as a result of a New 
Democratic Party administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to dwell on the future, but I think that 
it’s fair to say that our objective as a government in two years 
time would certainly be to reduce the reliance on property tax in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the particular Bill, the Minister of 
Highways could have said a lot of things about revenue sharing 
in Saskatchewan — the impact that the Bill will have on 
municipalities, the impact that the Bill will have on property 
taxpayers. He chose not to talk at all about revenue sharing, but 
to talk about other things that the government is doing. Now we 
certainly have a lot of questions on those areas. 
 
And he went on at some great length. And I may want, Mr. 
Speaker, upon further review of his comments, to also digress, 
if you like, from the Bill at hand. Although I can certainly 
appreciate your frustration as a Speaker to have someone rise 
and to say, these comments of mine are appropriate to the Bill, 
when upon reflection and upon further study they’re not at all 
appropriate to the Bill at hand. Because that’s the kind of thing 
that wastes the time of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to have the opportunity, however, to 
review the comments of the Minister of Highways further, and 
perhaps, if necessary, to speak further on this matter at some 
future time. And therefore I would beg leave to adjourn debate 
at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, could I ask for leave to introduce some 
guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Chairperson, I would like to introduce 
a group of grade 8 students, 14 in all, from Churchill High 
School in La Ronge, along with teacher Martina Cain. I would 
like to ask the members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 15 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The next item of business before the 
committee is Science and Technology estimates. Would the 
minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, it gives me pleasure 
today to introduce my deputy minister, Harley Olsen, on my 
left. Behind Harley is Peter McNeil, the director of advanced 
technology programs; and behind me is Raman Visvanathan, 
who is the administrative services co-ordinator; and beside me 
is Wayne McElree, who is the director of policy and planning; 
and in the back row we have Irene Ositis-Schmeiser, who is 
acting director of administration, and Dona Miller, director of 
communications. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, on June 8 I wrote you 
requesting information to expedite the estimates process, and 
I’m wondering if you can supply that information at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, I have it right here. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, do you have in that information 
— I haven’t had a chance to look it over yet — a list of your 
present staff and their salary levels? That’s in there? Okay. 
 
Do members of your personal staff have access to government 
vehicles, either permanently or intermittently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, they do not. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1998 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to begin this afternoon 
by asking if you could explain your relationship to the advanced 
technology development grants that are made through the 
economic diversification and investment fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Those are grants that we administer 
in Science and Technology. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — These are grants that you said you 
administered through, or we administered through, Science and 
Technology. What is your relationship to the approval of the 
grants made under that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, grants up to $10,000 
are approved by the minister. They are put forward in 
recommendation by the officials of the department. Anything in 
excess of $10,000 goes to cabinet for approval there. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How is it that you can’t make approval of 
grants more than $10,000? That’s a relatively small amount for 
a minister to approve of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — It’s my understanding, Mr. 
Chairman, that that is a rule under legislation. It applies to all 
departments right across the government, that a minister can 
only approve funds up to $10,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Do you feel that that’s appropriate with 
respect to this fund? Do you feel any need for authorization to 
approve funds of more than $10,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I would say, Mr. Chairman, in 
answer to the member’s question, that at the present time we 
haven’t seen any reason why it should be increased. We haven’t 
had any problems in so far as grants larger than that, taking 
them to cabinet and having them discussed there and approved 
at that level. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I note that your funding for 
research and development has steadily declined since the 
inception of this department; that in 1983-84 you estimated that 
$5 million would be spent and you spent one-tenth of that. In 
’84-85 you estimated that $5 million again would be spent, and 
you spent not even a third of that, 1.469 million. In ’85-86 you 
began to be more realistic, and you lowered that down to 4.5 
million in estimated spending, and you actually spent 2.8 
million, almost half this time. 
 
In ’86-87 you’ve bumped it down to 4 million, and you’ve 
spent 3.6. In ’87-88 you estimated 3 million, and you spent 2.2. 
In ’88-89 you bumped it up to 3.5 million — we don’t know 
whether you spent that much; your past trajectories would 
indicate that you haven’t; you had no intention to. And, of 
course, the trajectory in estimates now with your most recent 
tabling of spending estimates this spring indicates that you cut 
that fund to $3.5 million. 
 
Now why is it, Mr. Minister, when this is the principal fund for 
research and development work in technology, high technology 
in the province, that you consistently  

countenance — in fact, not countenance, but you advance cuts 
in this research and development spending? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the member on the 
other side obviously doesn’t realize how the granting procedure 
works in so far as Science and Technology is concerned, the 
grants that are approved for companies that are going to be 
doing research and development. Money is not given to the 
companies until the money has been . . . or the expenditures 
have actually been incurred by the company for doing the work. 
 
The amount of money that we put into our budget is based on 
the amount that we consider that we will need for the year. 
Obviously there are some very large projects that we may very 
well have given approval to, but in view of the fact that the 
moneys are not forwarded to the company until the work has 
been done, the companies in all cases certainly cannot estimate 
whether or not they are going to finish the work in any set 
period of time. 
 
So in some cases we find that we may very well have budgeted 
for some of these larger expenditures over the course of the 
year, but in fact the company that has been eligible for the grant 
has not completed the work. As a result, we find that at the end 
of the year, sometimes we’re in a situation where we have not 
spent all the money that we have budgeted. 
 
I would point out as well that in so far as Science and 
Technology is concerned, that we have, with the small amount 
of money that we had in our budget, or have had in our budget 
over the last four or five years, have triggered a tremendous 
amount of money from the federal government through their 
federal programs. And if you look back at the record and 
consider the amount of dollars that have been triggered through 
these federal programs, I think that we can take pride in having 
done a tremendous amount of work in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But with regard to the grants going, or the total amount going 
down a bit each year, it certainly isn’t because we have been 
declining requests that we’ve had from the different companies 
that have been contacting us. In some cases certainly we do 
decline because they don’t meet the criteria for a particular 
program. 
 
But we have, I think, been able to meet the demands of the 
industry and have been doing a very good job in that regard. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How do you explain the decline, Mr. 
Minister? How do you explain the decline in funds for research 
and development programs? You say it certainly hasn’t been as 
a result of companies not approaching you. Is it a factor of you 
not having money to fund grants and research projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well the amount of work that the 
department has been able to do in the province certainly has not 
been hampered by a shortage of funds. 
 
And I would point out to the member that Saskatchewan’s 
research and development infrastructure base includes over 30 
agencies and organizations with industrial  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

1999 
 

oriented expertise and facilities. And total research and 
development in Saskatchewan amounted to over $157 million 
in 1987-88 alone, so if you consider the fact we had a very 
small budget, but a tremendous amount of money has been 
spent in that particular area over the last few years. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re certainly honest 
about one thing, that you have a very small budget. I would go 
further and say you have a shrinking budget. Annually your 
budget is shrinking. And I would claim, on the basis of my 
contact with the high-tech sector and people in the science 
sector, that this is because — not because that they aren’t 
requesting funding from you, but because you are not able or 
willing to provide funding for people engaged in sciences, and 
high technology, and research and development work here in 
this province. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, are presiding over a shrinking empire. And 
when it comes to your advanced technology grants and the 
economic diversification fund, for example, you give the money 
to the high players, the big rollers of the high-tech community. 
Develcon, for example, can pull in $632,000 in the year ’87-88, 
according to public accounts. That’s fully one-third — one-third 
— of all of the advanced technology development grants given 
in that year, given to one company. 
 
The POS (Protein/Oil/Starch) Pilot Plant can pull down a cool 
quarter of a million dollars in one year, in that same year. And 
if you add to those two figures — the Develcon expenditure, the 
POS expenditure — if you add to that the funding for the 
University of Regina and the U of S research offices, you’ve 
got well over two-thirds of the money in that fund going to four 
participants. 
 
So people are concerned that you have a shrinking fund, first of 
all — annually shrinking, shrinking, shrinking. 
 
Secondly, that you don’t even approximate your own spending 
estimates because you’re chiselling, you’re playing politics with 
this expenditure. You’ll announce these expenditures at budget 
time, but you won’t really expend them, and you won’t stand up 
to your colleagues in cabinet and fight for the science and 
technology sector when it comes to spending funds such as this. 
 
And thirdly, when you do spend, the overwhelming majority or 
the percentage of the funds goes to the big players, the high 
rollers in the high-tech community. 
 
Well I think the small, high-tech firms in this province that are 
struggling for start-up capital and for research and development 
funds to get them airborne are owed a bit more of an 
explanation from you as to why you allowed this situation to 
continue and to get worse from year to year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as usual the 
member opposite likes to stand in his place and make all kinds 
of statements that are just totally out in left field, and this of 
course is not new to this member. He likes to talk about the fact 
that the budget has been shrinking. Well I would point out to 
him that it has been pretty well staying about the same each 
year; it has gone down  

slightly. 
 
As I had indicated to him before, we’re not going to be going 
out and twisting the arms of the companies to come to us and 
get grants. They certainly are open to approach the department 
and request these grants. I indicated to him earlier that we have 
not declined to give grants where they have met all of the 
criteria. 
 
And he talks about a declining empire and about R & D 
(research and development) in this particular province. Well let 
me just quote to the member opposite from a publication put 
out, StatsCanada, that indicates that on a per capita basis the 
Government of Saskatchewan is one of the top funders of 
research and development in Canada. 
 
Now what would the member opposite say to that? He talks 
about our expenditures on research and development going 
down. 
 
One other point that I would make as well, that the provincial 
government on a per capita basis, in comparison to other 
provinces, is the third largest funder of its universities in 
Canada. And you like to whine and wail over there about 
cut-backs in education and other areas in this province, but it’s 
totally inaccurate. So I think you need to check a little bit 
further there in some of the things that you’re saying and make 
sure that you’re talking with a little bit of a factual basis. 
 
Now you talk about us giving money to the high rollers. Well 
let me point out to you that we do in this province have a 
differentiation between the high-tech or the different technology 
companies. Certainly we do have the larger companies like 
Northern Telecom, Develcon, and SED Systems, but the 
majority of the companies in this province are those that have 
probably around 10 to 15 employees. 
 
And you talk about the high rollers. Well obviously we have 
given a fair bit of money to some of these larger companies, but 
don’t forget the nature of the projects that they’re involved 
with, the number of employees that they have there, and the 
type of work that they’re doing. The higher the technology, the 
more expensive it becomes, and the more risk that there is. And 
certainly there is every reason for supporting some of these 
larger companies and the type of technology that they’re doing. 
 
Let me also point out that we spend a fair bit of money each 
year with our universities. We spend a fair bit of money with 
regard to companies like the POS Pilot Plant. And these 
companies are involved in helping many other smaller 
companies, some of which, I might add, you would like to see 
closed down, in fact have played a little bit of a role in some 
cases in having some of these smaller firms shut down. 
 
Now let me just mention some of the companies, and this is 
information you’ve got before you. You asked for some of the 
different companies that have received money over the past 
number of years. Let me point out a company like International 
Road Dynamics. You talk about the high rollers; well here’s a 
small company of, I think, about 15 employees that is now 
selling products world-wide. Is this  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2000 
 

a high roller? Is that your idea of high roller? 
 
(1545) 
 
We’ve got other companies here that have only a very small 
number of employees. Beck Technology would be another 
example. I’m not going to get through all of these because there 
are a good many of them. Philom Bios certainly is not a very 
large company. Is this another example, as you would say, the 
high rollers? 
 
I think if you just take a little bit of time and go down through 
the list there, take a look at the companies that we’ve got, 
consider the number of employees that they have and the type 
of work that they’re doing. 
 
What about RhizoGen, a very small company with, I think, 
somewhere around 14 employees just teamed up now with a 
large British company which is going to give them a lot of 
potential for marketing products world-wide and now an 
international company that they’re hooked up with? 
 
What about SCI-TEC Instruments? Is this another high roller 
that you’re talking about? I’d really be interested in knowing 
what your definition of a high roller is. Just another example, I 
think, Mr. Chairman, of the member opposite trying to put 
statements out that are totally lacking in any kind of substance 
whatsoever. And I would suggest to him to just take a little bit 
of time and study the list that he has before him and see the 
breakdown of the moneys that have been spent over the years 
and just really who has received them. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I think I indicated, Mr. Minister, who some 
of the high rollers are. A high roller, in my book, is Develcon, 
when they can get $632,000. That pales into insignificance 
when a firm like SCI-TEC gets 33,5 from that same fund, or 
Canaerotech will get $2,623, or Agtron will get $3,316. Agtron 
happens to be a business in my constituency, and they can get 
$3,000 from you. Well that’s not doing a whole lot to develop 
small, fledgling, nascent Saskatchewan high-tech firms. 
 
My case, Mr. Minister, is not made on facts pulled out of the 
air. It’s made on facts presented in your government’s annual 
reports for the Department of Science and Technology and in 
the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan that are 
tabled annually in this Legislative Assembly, such as they are. 
 
Often, as we know, it’s impossible to get information from your 
government. The auditor can’t even get it. I use the information 
that is made available to me by your department as required by 
law — thank heaven that there is a law requiring some of this 
disclosure. And when you want to talk about research and 
development grants and Saskatchewan status in that regard, 
we’ll get to that, and I think you’re going to be hanging your 
head then as well. 
 
I rest my case with anyone who wants to examine the facts 
found in your own department’s spending estimates tabled 
annually in this Assembly, and with the facts provided annually 
in the Public Accounts tabled in this Legislative Assembly, as to 
the nature of the shrinking empire of Science and Technology 
in this province. 
 

And you say, Mr. Minister, that I invent a lot of these statistics 
or these so-called facts that I present. I claim that the invention 
and the inventiveness and the duplicity is on your side of the 
House, and it comes from none other than your Premier 
himself. This is the Premier who on Friday, October 10, stood 
in Saskatoon — Friday, October 10, 1986, during the provincial 
election campaign — stood in Saskatoon and promised $50 
million in high-tech seed money for the high-tech industry. And 
to date we have seen nothing approximating that at all. 
 
What we do see is the shrinking empire, the shrinking 
expenditures from your department. And they don’t even begin 
to approximate $10 million per year that the Premier of the 
province talked about in 1986 as seed money for high-tech 
firms. We don’t see anything approximating it. In fact, in your 
most recent spending estimates you estimate that you will spend 
3.05 million this next year in advanced technology development 
grants. That’s not even a third of what your Premier promised. 
Now I want to know how you explain that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have all 
those technology wizards on the other side, so it doesn’t 
surprise me that they wouldn’t know where money has been 
spent in so far as technology transfers applies. And I’ll give him 
some of those examples in just a few minutes. 
 
But the member opposite again talks about the grants to the 
different companies, and trying to say that we’re not being fair, 
and about the fact that there are several hundreds of thousands 
of dollars, in some cases maybe 2 or 3 million, going to some of 
these larger companies. 
 
The projects that are approved by the Department of Science 
and Technology are based on the total costs of the project, and 
the same formula applies to all companies that apply for grants, 
in that we put up 25 per cent of the total cost of the project. We 
have to consider the fact that the company also puts up money 
and so does the federal government. So our share is 25 per cent. 
 
So when you use an example like Agtron, which is in your 
constituency, that’s all that they had applied for. The total 
project, the total cost of their project probably then must have 
been in the neighbourhood of, I would say, maybe $25,000. 
And if they put up a portion of it, our share of that would be 25 
per cent, so we’re not treating them any differently at all. 
 
There’s a big difference though when you consider some of the 
advanced or high-technology projects that a company like 
Develcon might be making, or doing, where you’ve got several 
hundred people that are involved in the research and 
development and something that’s been carried on for two or 
three years. 
 
I’ve mentioned to you in this House before about the fact that 
some of these projects and the products that they’re working on, 
you don’t just develop the product overnight. In some cases it 
might take anywhere from two to three to maybe five or six 
years or more to develop a product. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2001 
 

So you’re not going to be able to employ a hundred or 200 
people who may be involved in doing research and 
development without a fair bit of money. And if you take a look 
then at the total cost of some of those projects that those 
companies are involved in, it’s very, very substantial. Our share 
is only 25 per cent. 
 
We’ve got new programs that SEDCO announced not too long 
ago that the high-tech or the technology companies are very, 
very pleased with. This is going to give them an opportunity for 
access to more funds, and we do know that in many cases they 
have difficulty getting funds from banks or credit unions 
because the risk is greater, but now they are going to be able to 
tap these new programs that SEDCO has available for them. 
 
Now you keep harping on this promise that the Premier made 
back in October of 1986. And I point out to you, you seem to 
think that the Premier, in all cases here, certainly is in there 
telling us what has to be done and what isn’t. He is a very 
strong supporter of advanced technology in this province, and I 
think that that’s very, very much indicated by the fact that we 
were the first province to have a separate Department of 
Science and Technology in this country — the first one. 
 
The policies that have been developed here in Saskatchewan are 
now being utilized right across the country, so we I think can 
take pride in the fact that we have a Premier that is very 
supportive of science and technology. 
 
Now you talk about money being spent on tech transfer. Well 
you, I think, sometimes think that you’re quite familiar with the 
technology sector in this province. What kind of an 
announcement did we have not too long ago with regard to a 
company like Flexi-Coil? Do you not think that technology has 
something to do with the fact that they are now almost doubling 
the number of employees that they have, expanding their 
facilities so that they can meet the demand for the products that 
they’re going to be selling mainly in the United States, thanks 
to the free trade agreement? 
 
Flexi-Coil then is also getting some money from the province of 
Saskatchewan. Is this not money then that is towards tech 
transfer? You talk about $50 million over five years, I think that 
was the promise that was made. I think with one company here 
alone you’ve got a tremendous amount of money that’s being 
spent on tech transfer. 
 
What about Intercontinental Packers? The provincial 
government is also involved there. Do you not think that it’s 
because of new technology that’s one of the reasons why 
Intercontinental Packers is able to compete with companies in 
the United States? Certainly it is. And again you’ve got the 
government that’s been involved there and giving them money. 
 
Weyerhaeuser Canada, what about them? What about the fact 
that they’ve just built a new paper plant up there that’s provided 
many, many new jobs? Do you not think that maybe there’s 
been a little of tech transfer there? Well we know that you and 
your colleagues there, and we got one there from city of Prince 
Albert, you’ve been opposed  

to that deal right along. 
 
But here are three companies that I’ve mentioned where it’s 
because of new technology that they are being very competitive 
with companies not only here in Canada, but indeed in many 
other parts of the world. So I don’t think that we have to stand 
back and hang our head one little bit about what’s happening in 
science and technology in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, can you table plans of the $50 
million high-tech fund? Can you table any expenditure plans 
with respect to that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, I will not be tabling any plans 
with regard to that. I just pointed out three companies that have 
received money that is being used in developing new 
technology and making them more competitive with companies 
all over the world. And there’s been lots more spent. 
 
I’ve indicated to you in the past as well about the amount that is 
spent by Science and Technology each year. We’ve got, for 
example, in 1988-89 alone, the economic diversification and 
investment fund, $28 million alone spent that year, some of 
which certainly was towards tech transfer. 
 
The ag development fund — $130 million since 1985-86. The 
Science and Technology programming, I’ve already mentioned. 
The research council — we give grants to them each year. 
They’re very involved with tech transfer. The office of research 
services — in excess of a million dollars since ’85. 
 
And we’ve got other departments as well that are involved in 
spending money each year, some of which goes towards tech 
transfer. But as far as giving you a set plan, we’re not going to 
give you a plan but we can certainly give you lots of examples 
of where money is being spent in tech transfer. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You can’t give a plan, Mr. Minister, because 
a plan doesn’t exist. 
 
A promise was made to the high tech community before the ’86 
election that there would be $50 million over the next five 
years. They now know that that is an empty promise. It’s a 
promise that was not kept by the Premier of this province. They 
know that because they can go to the economic diversification 
and investment fund and look at the grants for high technology, 
as I say, and see those grants consistently shrinking — 
consistently shrinking. 
 
They know you don’t have any plan other than to chisel away at 
what small funds you have in the first place. And the Premier 
has the gall, a year after he made the original promise, on 
October 19, 1987, to get up in this Legislative Assembly when 
he was questioned by myself and to say: 
 

I promised in the next five years that we would have a 
program in this province that encourages high-tech 
development, that we would rank among the best in the 
country, and that we would spend up to $10 million a year 
over a five-year program. I promised that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2002 
 

All I say to the hon. member: you watch — you watch us 
deliver on a five-year program in high technology . . . 
 

That was the Premier of this province speaking in the 
Legislative Assembly on October 19, 1987. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not just myself that’s been watching his 
actions. The science and technology community in this province 
has been watching the Premier and watching yourself, and they 
know that you have nothing to offer but empty words and 
hollow promises. 
 
What we have is hype about high tech, all sorts of hype, but no 
hope. No hope and no help. And as one person in the 
technological community said to me, better to have no hope at 
all than to have false hope — than to have false hope that has 
been provided by yourself and the Premier. 
 
Two and a half years ago, Mr. Minister, when you took over as 
Minister of Science and Technology, you had the opportunity 
and the option to stand up to the Premier and to call for 
implementation of that promise, and you haven’t done it. How 
have you held the Premier to that promise of $10 million a year 
over the five-year period that he talked about? How have you 
done that, when your own figures reflect cut-backs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
still likes to stand up and make ridiculous statements in the 
House, and I’ve given him the answers to some of these things a 
couple of times, but he’s obviously not listening. 
 
(1600) 
 
I would point out to him, he’s so insistent on talking about a 
plan, but I think that all we have to do is look at the results. A 
plan certainly in itself is not important when you look at the 
results, and I think that I’ve given you several examples of 
positive results that we’ve had in this province with regard to 
the transfer of technology. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 
that the statement that was made by the Premier did not just 
apply to high-tech companies, but he seems to be implying over 
there that it does. The idea is to transfer technologies to many 
different companies so that they can become much more 
efficient and effective in so far as processing and manufacturing 
is concerned. 
 
Nobody said anything about it just applying to high-tech 
companies. If you take a good look at the record, you’ll 
probably find that we’re spending in excess of $50 million a 
year which is going towards the transfer of technology to many 
of these other industries. 
 
So there’s lots being done there. And I would say again, Mr. 
Chairman, that our Premier is very, very supportive of what is 
happening in science and technology in this province. There are 
many, many areas that other provinces are looking at what 
we’re doing here in Saskatchewan, in particular with regard to 
diversification, the types of things that are happening with 
regard to privatization and all the new jobs that are being  

created in those new areas. 
 
I would also add, Mr. Chairman, that there have not been any 
requests for funding from the Department of Science and 
Technology turned down where the situation has been that they 
have met the criteria of the different areas in which they’ve 
been applying for these funds. So the member certainly is 
inaccurate in saying that companies are being denied funding 
because we haven’t got it in our department. That’s totally 
inaccurate. 
 
We have always listened and worked with the companies that 
have come to us with new ideas, whether it’s a new company 
that wants to start up or whether it’s an older company that 
simply wants to make some changes and to change some of the 
ways in which they’re doing things and get more technology in 
their shops. We are certainly there to listen and help them in 
developing their proposals, and we certainly make the money 
available to them, providing certain criteria is met. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you say that nobody had said 
anything about the Premier’s promise of that money applying to 
high-tech firms. Mr. Minister, it was your Premier himself who 
said that. It was the Premier who said that the $50 million 
would be seed money for high-tech firms in this province. He 
didn’t say it would go to paper mills and to all sorts of other 
projects across the province. He talked about it being seed 
money for high-tech firms. 
 
There’s high tech involved in virtually every aspect of life. We 
could probably justify the $50 million assistance in high-tech 
money through the home improvement program, if you wanted, 
by saying, well people are getting money for jacuzzis. That’s 
high tech, isn’t it? 
 
I mean, it’s ludicrous for you to stand up here and justify that 
broken promise by virtue of expenditures that are all across the 
boulevard when people in the high-tech community have been 
looking for money directed toward them, as they were entitled 
to believe it would be directed. 
 
As you know, Mr. Minister, one of the principal problems of 
the high-tech community is undercapitalization. 
Undercapitalization is probably the single largest problem 
facing Saskatchewan’s small, high-tech firms, and it’s for this 
reason that I make the case that I am today. You simply aren’t 
meeting these capitalization needs for the many of the 
province’s small, nascent high-tech firms. 
 
What kinds of consideration have you given to SATMA’s 
(Saskatchewan Advanced Technology Management 
Association) proposal for a high-tech equity pool. Can you 
report on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to start 
by indicating to the member what the Premier had said in 1986 
with regard to a commitment. And his commitment clearly 
states it was to assist Saskatchewan business to equip itself of 
the most effective, efficient technology available in order to 
promote the health and growth of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Now you like to talk so much about high tech here. High  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2003 
 

tech can cover a lot of ground depending on how you want to 
define it. I think that if you’d take a look at innovative 
technology, it might be a more appropriate definition. Now you 
talk about companies that are undercapitalized, and there’s no 
doubt that some of these companies do have difficulty because 
they don’t have the financing that they need, and the higher the 
risk the greater the problem that they have, or difficulty in 
getting these funds. 
 
With regard to problems that they might be having, I’d point 
out that the purpose of the Department of Science and 
Technology is to assist companies with new ideas as far as 
research and development is concerned, but I don’t feel it’s a 
responsibility of the Department of Science and Technology to 
ensure that all of their expenditures are going to be met in other 
areas as far as their overall operating expenses are concerned. 
 
Now we met with SATMA and we keep in close contact with 
them. We’ve had more than one meeting with them, and they 
are very interested of course now in the new SEDCO programs 
that were announced not too long ago, and I believe went into 
effect around May 1. So with regard to some of the problems 
that these companies are having, and I would hope that the 
SEDCO programs are going to be very beneficial, we have had 
very positive response from all of these smaller companies that 
you’re talking about. 
 
Another area that the companies are interested in is the 
immigration fund, where it is going to be an opportunity for a 
pool of money to be developed which will be at a lower interest 
rate for some of these companies. And these are areas that are 
going to help considerably. 
 
But in so far as setting up an equity pool that SATMA has 
requested, we are still looking at that; we’re still in close 
contact with them. But to this date — and this was something 
that was only proposed to us I believe about a month ago, 
maybe a little more than that — but certainly to this date we 
have not set up the equity pool that they have asked for. 
 
But as I indicated, they feel that in many ways some of these 
other programs will now be very beneficial to them. That’s not 
to say that they still don’t want the equity pool, and that’s 
something we have to continue to look at and discuss with 
them. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I certainly agree that that is something that 
you have to continue to look at with them, and I would urge you 
to do that. I’d remind you that you have $9 million to celebrate 
Saskatchewan’s 85th birthday party with the Future 
Corporation, and you’ve somehow rolled that Future 
Corporation project over into a celebration of Saskatchewan 
technology. 
 
Saskatchewan’s technology firms, I say and they say, would be 
far better served if you were to take that $9 million from the 
Future Corporation and put it as a down payment on an equity 
pool such as SATMA has been talking about. What do you say 
about that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m glad the 
member raised that because I really wanted to talk  

about the Future Corporation. I had indicated to him when we 
were doing estimates in Consumer Affairs, when he raised the 
same topic, that indeed that it’s anything but a birthday party 
and the money is going to be very, very well spent as far as the 
Future Corporation is concerned. 
 
Let me just comment, Mr. Chairman, before I go into that, 
though, when you talk about SATMA and the idea of having 
equity pools and so on, I’m very proud of the fact that we have 
a minister’s advisory council on science and technology now set 
up in the province of Saskatchewan, and they are going to be 
providing a lot of good assistance to my department with regard 
to some of the types of programs that we need to be looking at 
and problems that we have within the industry. 
 
So we’re going to be meeting again on Thursday and taking a 
look at some of these different areas. Financing certainly is one 
of the issues that we’re going to be dealing with, so I’m very 
pleased to have that counsel available now to provide us some 
assistance. This is a group of individuals who come from a wide 
range of industry, research, from the universities, and also from 
government. 
 
Now you talk about the Future Corporation and taking some of 
that money. I suppose too that if one would consider, let’s see, 
17 times $30,000, that amounts to a fair bit of money — you 
know, the 17 days that the opposition had the House shut down 
through their strike — that’s probably about half a million 
dollars. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, we could have taken that $500,000 
and put that into an equity pool; that would have really helped 
the advanced technology sector. So the member opposite, he 
was part of the gang over there who decided that they would 
walk out of this place. 
 
Well let’s talk about the Future Corporation. You’re saying that 
this is money that’s not being well spent and we should be 
putting that into technology. Well the first project that was 
announced, Mr. Chairman, by the Future Corporation was a 
grant of $500,000 to the Saskatchewan Science Centre. Now I 
think, Mr. Chairman, that that’s money very, very well spent 
because this is going to be helping young people in our 
province for generations to come — $500,000. 
 
Well let’s take a look at another one here. Veterinarian and 
Infectious Disease Organization, VIDO, in Saskatoon — 
$10,000 funding to support an agricultural and 
bio-technological research initiative as it relates to livestock 
used for food. Now does that sound like a birthday party, Mr. 
Chairman? Now VIDO, of course, is a good example of one of 
the advanced technology firms that we have. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Chairman, if you check where that 
company’s located . . . I’m not sure if it’s in Sutherland 
constituency or not, but if it isn’t, it’s pretty darn close. And I 
would have thought the member would have known about that. 
 
Well let’s take a look at another one. Let’s go over here to fibre 
optic technology pilot project, $47,500, a joint  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2004 
 

venture with SaskTel and the Regina school division to enable 
Campbell Collegiate to test new fibre optic technology and 
empower the teaching staff to use technological advancements 
that will enhance educational opportunities. That’s going to be a 
terrific birthday party there, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Well let’s take a look at another one: dust abatement pilot 
project, $50,000 funding to apply and monitor the use of the 
internationally patented Saskatchewan product, para seal, on a 
20 kilometre stretch of grid road in the R.M. of Spalding. Now 
this is a project, Mr. Chairman, that wouldn’t have been 
possible without the assistance from the Future Corporation, 
and this is a product that has been developed in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and certainly they’re going to be testing this in 
more detail, and it’s going to be very advantageous to the 
province, it’s going to create more jobs, and, I think, going to 
have a lot of beneficial effect. Very, very good work there. 
 
Well here’s one I’m sure that we should all be very, very 
pleased with. Let’s take a look at this one: rehabilitation 
technology pilot project, $100,000. Now listen to this one, Mr. 
Chairman, because this is really good stuff. This is being done 
by the Future Corporation, funding for the Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council to establish a resource and service centre in 
southern Saskatchewan. This centre will have the first ever 
mobile outreach function that provides assessment and resource 
needs to disabled residents outside of Regina. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, what this project is going to do, it’s going 
to allow disabled people in the southern part of the province and 
in the city of Regina to enjoy the same types of services that 
have been provided by the Saskatchewan Abilities Council in 
Saskatoon for quite a number of years. And that is really good 
stuff, and that is being done by the Future Corporation. So, Mr. 
Chairman, I think money that’s being very, very well spent. 
 
I could go on here. I think that there were some 21 different 
projects that were announced last week in the city of Saskatoon, 
and they include areas all over the province. They’re going to 
be projects that are going to help out in so far as diversification 
is concerned, and also are going to mean many benefits as far as 
the province of Saskatchewan is concerned. 
 
So I don’t think, Mr. Chairman, that we need to be concerned 
one little bit about the expenditures of the money by the Future 
Corporation or the value that the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan are going to get for having the Future 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Chairman, I beg leave to introduce some 
guests in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — I’m standing in for . . . I’m sitting in the seat 
and standing in for the Hon. Colin Maxwell, who is out doing 
something today, I’m not sure what it is, but he’s  

busy as usual. And so it’s my pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to 
introduce to you, and through you to all the members of the 
House, some students from grade 5 and 6 from Medstead 
School in Medstead, Saskatchewan. 
 
They are numbering in 28 students, and we have as well several 
chaperons. The teacher, first of all, is Mr. Terrel Hill; the 
chaperons are Mrs. Bargen, Mrs. Johnson, Mrs. Janzen; and the 
bus driver is Mr. Olson. I will have an opportunity to meet with 
these students in a few minutes and have our picture taken on 
behalf of Mr. Maxwell. 
 
(1615) 
 
Just for your edification, what is going on here this afternoon at 
this particular time is the Minister of Science and Technology is 
being questioned by the member from Saskatoon, the member 
of the opposition from Saskatoon, about the operations of 
Science and Technology, about how the money is spent, etc., 
etc. That’s what we call estimates, and it’s part of the House, 
the day-to-day workings of the House. So that’s what’s going 
on here now, and you’ve been witnessing it for some time. 
 
So on behalf of Mr. Maxwell, the Minister of Parks, Recreation 
and Culture, it is my pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to introduce these 
students in the Speaker’s gallery to you and all members of the 
House. Please join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 15 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, that’s all very interesting for 
you to read about the Future Corporation’s projects. Would you 
care to share that list with me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I would be very happy to share that 
list with the member opposite, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’d like to have it this afternoon, if possible. 
It still begs the question about funding for an equity pool. It’s 
all very interesting to talk about individual projects funded by 
the Future Corporation, but Saskatchewan’s high-tech firms are 
looking for an equity pool for them to do a little bit more than 
just celebrate the province’s 85th birthday. And I certainly 
commend to you their concern in that regard. 
 
You have an opportunity to make good on the Premier’s 
promise in implementing this kind of proposal. That would go a 
long way toward implementing that promise. If you were to put 
$10 million initially into such an equity pool for technology, 
and then an additional $5 million a year for the next five years, 
that would be $35 million. That would be something that I 
would give you credit for because credit would be due. You 
would be fulfilling a good measure of the Premier’s promise in 
that regard. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2005 
 

I’d like to also question you, while I’m talking about SATMA, 
as to whether you’ve done anything regarding the government’s 
procurement policy for science and technology. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out 
with regard to the western procurement, along with other 
concerns that we have in western Canada, that we do have now 
a group or a committee of the four ministers of Science and 
Technology from western Canada, and this is something that we 
have been working on over the last several months now with 
regard to trying to get more money spent in western Canada on 
the part of the federal government. 
 
Certainly we know that there are other opportunities that we can 
tap into here in western Canada. And we met, as a matter of 
fact, just a few weeks ago with the federal minister responsible 
for science and technology, or for Industry, Science and 
Technology, and discussed this matter with him. 
 
There has also been a group quite actively working with the 
minister out of Ottawa with regard to the government 
procurement and, as I understand it, that there are signs 
certainly of an increase in this particular area. But it’s 
something that we’ve got to keep working on, and we will be 
doing that as a group with the other provinces in the West, but 
we also will be doing it in conjunction with colleagues here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, what about more specifically a 
Saskatchewan procurement policy, a policy whereby 
Saskatchewan firms could use contracts from the Crown 
corporations, for example, to help with research and 
development work on a contractual basis? Rather than to try to 
twist Ottawa’s arm — as important as that may be — why don’t 
you start closer to home? Have you given any thought to 
implementing a Saskatchewan procurement policy that would 
serve Saskatchewan high-tech firms, starting with the Crown 
corporations, for example. Or don’t you believe in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know 
whether the member opposite has not heard of the Buy 
Saskatchewan agency, but they’ve probably only been in 
operation for close to two years now. And I think that there’s 
been tremendous success in that particular area as far as 
companies in Saskatchewan getting work with the Crown 
corporations and other government departments. So Buy 
Saskatchewan, I think, is very successful and will continue to 
work in that regard. 
 
I know that members of SATMA have also met with this group 
and are pursuing other options that they have there. 
 
I would point out as well, Mr. Chairman, that we are involved 
in a study right now with the other provinces, taking a look at 
the advanced technology procurement opportunities in the 
whole area of high tech or in advanced technology, and looking 
at areas like federal space communications and events projects. 
Because there’s a tremendous amount of money being spent on 
those particular areas, and I think it’s estimated that some 11 to 
$16 billion will be spent between now and the year 2000. We 
certainly are going to be working hard to  

ensure that we get our fair share of that money. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’m well aware of the Buy Saskatchewan 
agency, Mr. Minister. I ask you, why do you think that SATMA 
is asking about a procurement policy if the Buy Saskatchewan 
agency is doing such a wonderful job to serve their interests? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well don’t make it sound like the 
advanced technology sector has not had any success with regard 
to selling products or services to the Crown corporations or to 
other government departments, because that’s not true at all. 
What they are trying to do, the same as everybody else, is to get 
more, and it’s a process that takes time. But as I understand it 
— and I talk to these people as well on a fairly regular basis, 
and I think that they feel that progress is being made — but you 
have to keep working at it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, can you supply a listing of the 
high-tech procurements that have been facilitated through the 
Buy Saskatchewan agency? Maybe that would alleviate some of 
the concerns of SATMA’s companies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well that’s a question certainly for 
Buy Saskatchewan. We’ll be happy to follow up on it and see if 
we can get a list from them on it. I shouldn’t think there would 
be a problem, but we’ll have to take a look at it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That would be very helpful. I’m sure that 
SATMA would be interested to know in what respect the 
Crowns are contributing to their economic well-being. 
 
I’d like to turn now, Mr. Minister, and ask you: what has been 
spent to date under the ERDA (Economic and Regional 
Development Agreement) program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — It’s approximately $5 million, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is that $5 million to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, it is. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And, Mr. Minister, how do you get those 
figures? Could you break that down for me, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — It’s around $5 million, as I indicated. 
That’s the total amount that’s been spent, and half of that would 
have been spent by the provincial government and the other half 
by Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can you break that down, Mr. Minister, for 
expenditures for each year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — For the year 1985-86, total 
commitment was $971,085; Science and Tech would have spent 
$652,442. In ’86-87, of a total of $1.9 million, our commitment 
in that year was $1,141,812. In 1987-88, the total commitment 
was $243,807, and Science and Technology spent $148,735. In 
’88-89 — and this was to February 15, so it was prior to the 
program coming to an end on March 31 — total commitment 
for both governments was $1,802,000, and Science and  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2006 
 

Technology in Saskatchewan put up $696,315. That was up to 
February 15, ’89. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And how much, Mr. Minister, was to have 
been spent under this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well initially what was indicated 
was $33 million, but that was a figure that was simply put out 
there. I’m not sure at that particular time what it was based on. 
The actual expenditures, of course, though, are a result of the 
requests that have come in. 
 
So again, it’s similar to other programs that we offer in the 
Department of Science and Technology; it’s based on the 
demand. It’s not something that we would go out and be 
twisting arms for people to come and take advantage of this 
money. It was open, again, for companies to apply for, and 
providing certain criteria were met they were eligible for the 
funds. 
 
One, I suppose, can always ask the question as to why more 
wasn’t spent, and I would think that one possibility was the type 
of criteria that was applied in this particular case. And we had a 
committee of industry people and research people involved in 
looking at this and looking at the criteria; spent a lot of work on 
it and did come forward with a proposal last year that was 
passed on to suggesting some changes that should apply. 
 
So we’re still hoping that if we are still going to be getting some 
funding through this program, that we will be able to put some 
of the new criteria into place. But to this point in time, a definite 
decision has not been made in that regard as far as the federal 
government is concerned. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is quite amazing that 
we can have an agreement that’s signed for $33.2 million, and 
that when it’s terminated, as you indicate, there’s only $5 
million been spent by both parties combined. 
 
Under the ERDA agreement, I will point out, Saskatchewan’s 
contribution should have been $16.6 million, and what you’ve 
done is you’ve indicated here today that there’s been 
approximately $2.5 million spent under that program. Spending 
by the province of Saskatchewan alone should have 
approximated $4.2 million a year. 
 
This, Mr. Minister, is yet another reason why people in the 
scientific community and the technological community 
maintain that you are presiding over a shrinking empire — a 
shrinking empire. Not only does your economic development 
and diversification fund shrink, your ERDA funding shrinks, 
your grants to the research centres at the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina shrink. You should 
be shrunk right out of office, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — This, Mr. Minister, many people in the 
technological community feel is scandalous — is scandalous. 
And for you to get up here today and to say that perhaps the 
money wasn’t expended because people didn’t meet the criteria, 
and we have to look at the  

criteria, is patent nonsense. I simply don’t believe it for one 
minute, and neither does anyone else in the technological 
community. 
 
They know your game, they know your Premier’s game, and 
you have bought into that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The jig is up. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The jig is up. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The gig is up. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The gig is up as some say. You have hype 
about high technology, but no help. 
 
And now what possible reason do we have to believe you that 
there may be some further amendments to qualifications for 
such ERDA funding. You know, what kind of plans do you 
have on the horizon to replace this ERDA agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, it’s really a joke to 
listen to the member opposite. You know, he just really gets 
carried away with some of these things. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would challenge the member opposite to give 
us one example of a company that applied for funds under the 
ERDA program and was refused. I challenge him to give me 
one name. 
 
You talk about the fact that they didn’t meet certain criteria. I 
tell you that for any of these programs there are obviously 
criteria that you have to have. You’ve got to have the criteria, 
but I certainly am not aware at this time of one company that 
did not meet the criteria for the ERDA program. 
 
Keep in mind that this program was a federal program. It was a 
federal program that we were able to participate in it. So the 
fact of the matter that there might have been $33 million 
originally allotted, if only $5 million was spent, had absolutely 
nothing to do with the shortage of funds. If all of those 
companies that applied for grants got them, how could you 
stand in your place and say that it was because we were cutting 
back and were doing a lot of these other things? That’s totally 
untrue. 
 
(1630) 
 
You talk about cut-backs as far as the universities were 
concerned. This department had an agreement with the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan with 
regard to their offices of university research. That was a 
three-year . . . that was supposed to be a three-year program. 
And I believe that the University of Saskatchewan received 
$200,000 a year for each year for three years, and the 
University of Regina, it was $100,000 a year for three years. 
 
Well we decided we’d extend that because it was taking them 
just a little bit longer to have that transition. But the original 
intent with these offices was that they were supposed to be 
self-supporting after three years. They signed the agreement. 
They felt quite strongly that they could meet that particular 
target. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2007 
 

And I would point out that when we started this program with 
the two universities, that the amount of money that was being 
triggered for research and development was somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of a million and a half dollars. But after the 
three years that this program had been in operation, the amount 
of research money that these universities were receiving had 
risen to over $30 million, which is a sure sign, Mr. Chairman, 
that this was a very, very successful program. 
 
In fact then, at the end of three years we extended the amount of 
the money to both universities so that they could still make that 
transition to when they could be self-supporting. We have done 
that. We phased it down last year, and we also provided them 
with some funding for this year, Mr. Chairman. But that was a 
very successful program. But it was originally only supposed to 
have been for three years. We have now extended it a couple of 
times so, in fact, it is going to be over five years. 
 
In so far as a program to take the place of the ERDA program, 
the federal government had indicated in its budget that there 
was still going to be some money in the ERDA program 
because there were several areas. To this point in time, we don’t 
know the actual allocation as to the funds that are going to be 
put out for the different areas that were provided before. 
 
In the meantime, I indicated to you the new programs that 
SEDCO has put out is certainly going to allow companies 
access to some other funding that they didn’t have access to 
before. We will have to continue to work to see whether or not 
their needs are going to be fully met or whether, in fact, we 
have to look at other types of programs. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, what representations did you 
make to the federal government to keep this ERDA program 
alive and to extend it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well as a matter of fact, we made 
several presentations. On every occasion that I met with the 
federal minister, the topic was discussed. We also had written 
representation that was made to the minister responsible, so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table it, table it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Oh, I’d be happy to table it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I think many people suspect 
that this ERDA agreement was cancelled in spite of your 
representations because of the silence that was there from your 
department. You may have made representations, but they 
couldn’t have been very effective in convincing the federal 
government to continue this fund. And what is now the case is 
that Saskatchewan firms are left in the lurch without a lever to 
access, a mechanism to access federal funds. 
 
And I say this is just yet another piece of the puzzle in terms of 
the shrinking empire of science and technology in this province; 
that you simply don’t have a realistic program to help 
Saskatchewan firms. You have a lot of hype but very little help. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, you mentioned earlier the advisory 
committee on science and technology. When was this 
committee set up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The first meeting of the advisory 
council on science and technology was held February 29 or 28, 
somewhere around there. 
 
I would point as well, Mr. Chairman, that in so far as the ERDA 
programs, they were not just for the province of Saskatchewan, 
they were for all provinces across the country. And as far as I 
know, all ministers from the different departments that were 
involved with them were also lobbying the federal government 
to continue those programs. So, I mean, some of the arguments 
that you make are just, you know, not based on any reality 
whatsoever. 
 
We certainly would like to see those programs carry on, but the 
member opposite seems to fail to recognize the fact that the 
federal government is faced with a growing deficit each year 
and that they have to continue to take a look at some of the 
programs that they have and make some changes, in the same 
way that we had to make some changes. You’ve got to try and 
balance everything out. But you seem to think that there’s just 
an unlimited pot of money out there, that you can pull 
everything out that you need. 
 
As I indicated to you earlier, though, the shortage of the take-up 
of money, as far as the ERDA program was concerned, had 
nothing to do with a shortage of funds. The applications simply 
were not there. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, it seems to many people that 
there is an unlimited source of funds when it comes to certain 
companies in the technological sector. I could mention 
GigaText, that gets $5 million worth of taxpayers’ money to 
produce nothing. 
 
I’d like to talk more specifically about Joytec, for example, and 
I’d like to know when we’re going to see the $1.125 million in 
venture capital tax credits returned to the people of 
Saskatchewan where it rightfully belongs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well the member opposite talks 
about GigaText and he’s going to hear a little bit more about 
that. I don’t think he’s taken the time to go down to visit 
GigaText yet. He makes the big argument that he’s so interested 
in high technology, and maybe you should take some of those 
other technological wizards along with you over there at the 
same time. 
 
I might ask the member opposite, too, what was this Nabu 
Network Corporation that we hear about? What was that? What 
was that, Mr. Chairman? 
 
You know, I’m looking at a headline here, Mr. Chairman. This 
is from Saturday, June 17, Regina Leader-Post, and it said: 
“NDP had high-tech flop, too”. I think that was about $5 
million and that was back in, oh, 1981 — that’s about $8 
million today — and not one job created. 
 
Now he talks about GigaText and he doesn’t have any idea 
what it’s doing. I would suggest he go down and visit  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2008 
 

it. 
 
He makes mention of Joytec. Mr. Chairman, let me just get the 
facts straight on this Joytec. Is that the same company that the 
member opposite was responsible, along with some of the 
others on that side, for chasing out of Saskatchewan? Is that the 
same company? Because, you know, he makes these statements 
about Joytec, and he had a good deal to do with some of the 
negative publicity that surrounded Joytec. 
 
He asks a question with regard to the venture capital program. 
Well I would point out to you that it wasn’t Joytec that received 
the benefits from the venture capital; it was the shareholders — 
several hundred of them, I believe; some of them, no doubt, 
probably belong to the NDP Party. 
 
But he asked, now when are we going to hear some results or 
when are we going to start getting some returns on this money. 
Well the agreement with the venture capital fund is that the 
company has up to two years after they have left the province in 
which they can still reinvest that money back in the province. 
 
So there’s nothing that’s going to be happening here. I believe 
that March 1991 would be the time line that they have. And the 
company has indicated that they know that’s a liability and that 
certainly if the investment isn’t made back in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that they are going to have to pay back the 
$1.125 million, I believe, which was the tax break that the 
shareholders got that invested in this particular company. 
 
So you’re going to have to wait a little bit longer then, and 
that’s of course part of the agreement, the way it was set down. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, on March 21 of this year when 
you were asked about the 1.125 million in tax credits from the 
venture capital corporation of Joytec, you said, and I quote: 
 

And with regard to the money and how this government is 
going to get it back from the company, I would dare say 
probably that they will be getting a cheque within the next 
few months to take care of it. 
 

Those were your words, Mr. Minister. Now you’ve switched 
your story. When are we going to see that 1.125 million from 
Joytec? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, you’re right. Those were the 
comments that I made at that particular time, but I’d also point 
out to you that I am not the minister responsible for the venture 
capital corporations. But I indicated to you just a few minutes 
ago, and this is information that I received from the department 
on June 7, that if the VCC (venture capital corporation) does 
not have an eligible investment by March 1991, the company 
will be deregistered and recovery action initiated against its 
assets. So you want to know when they have to pay this money 
up. It’s going to be after that period of time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, as you may know,  

according to the venture capital regulations, there’s provision 
for 30 per cent of the venture capital project to be held in trust, 
in a trust fund. This is according to the venture capital 
legislation. Is there 1.125 million in the trust fund with respect 
to Joytec? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s a 
question that I can’t answer. I would suggest that you ask the 
minister responsible for the venture capital program when she’s 
in her estimates. 
 
I’ve indicated to you the information that I have with regard to 
when it has to be paid back, and as far as the 30 per cent, I 
would suggest that you check with the minister. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you can be sure that I will be 
checking with that minister now that you haven’t been able or 
willing to provide an answer. And so you will be off the hook 
temporarily on Joytec. 
 
I maintain that that money is likely not in that venture capital 
trust fund. I maintain that what we have here is a cover-up and 
that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will never see that $1.125 
million. 
 
I hope that I’m wrong. I hope that I’m wrong, because if I am 
wrong, it means that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan only stand 
to benefit. At least they’ll see something for the thousands of 
dollars, the millions of dollars, that you’ve invested in that 
company. 
 
With respect to GigaText, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know, did 
your department get involved with a review of this technology? 
You point to myself and say that I’ve had nothing to do with 
going down and looking at the GigaText translation operation. 
Was your department consulted at any time with respect to this 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Let me just point out with regard to 
Joytec, and the member opposite, he’s been making a lot of 
wild statements with regard to that company for quite some 
time now and certainly, as I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, was 
partly responsible for that company leaving Saskatchewan. He 
again makes the inaccurate and misleading statement with 
regard to the fact that they’ve got thousands, he started out, and 
then he had to say millions that they’ve got in assistance. 
 
Well they’ve got $76,000 as far as grants from the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman — $76,000. Now as far as any 
other assistance, the company did not get any other assistance 
whatsoever, not one nickel. The shareholders were able to get 
the 30 per cent tax break. That has nothing to do with the 
company. The company got $76,000 from the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now you know, again that’s just a prime example of the 
misleading statements that that member and many other 
members over on that side of the House like to make, and that’s 
exactly the type of thing that the companies in this province just 
get pretty annoyed about. I have an article here too, where 
“Business man tired of negative stories.” And where do 
negative stories come from, sir? They usually come, I’m sure, 
not just from the newspapers, but from people such as yourself 
because you run around and  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2009 
 

make some of these asinine statements. 
 
Now with regard to GigaText, you asked whether or not the 
department was involved in it. The deputy minister certainly 
was aware of it. I visited the technology certainly in Winnipeg 
and saw the program in action, and I’ve also visited the plant 
down here, and Regina is concerned, and I’m very confident 
that that’s going to be very successful technology. 
 
With regard to us to carrying out any assessment: no, we did not 
carry out any assessment. This was a company . . . We were not 
doing . . . they were not doing research and development here. 
This was a company that was set up or hired to do a specific job 
for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well it sounds like another joy ride that you 
were on, Mr. Minister. You can go there and visit the place, but 
do nothing in terms of studying the appropriateness of that 
technology when it comes to protecting taxpayers’ dollars, and 
there’s four or five times as much at stake with GigaText as 
there is with Joytec. 
 
Incidentally, while mentioning Joytec, you talk about negative 
press reports. Well, negative press reports don’t just come from 
this member opposite. They come out of Vancouver recently 
this spring where the president of Joytec, one Lawrence Neisis, 
has been called to appear before a hearing of the British 
Columbia Securities Commission to answer charges that 
between July of ’86 and December of ’87 — precisely the time 
he was promoting the golf simulator here in Saskatchewan — to 
answer charges that he was issuing press releases which he 
knew, quote, “ . . . knew, or ought to have known, were 
misrepresentions.” End quote. 
 
That’s what we’re dealing with, Mr. Minister — your being 
suckered, your government being suckered and the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan having to pay for your ineptitude. And that’s 
when I begin to get negative about your performance. 
 
Did anyone in the GigaText project, Mr. Minister, anyone 
connected with GigaText ever make any representations to you 
about the possibility of your department putting research money 
into this GigaText project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We have not received any 
application from GigaText to put money into that particular 
firm. And with regard to the assessment of the technology, that 
has already been indicated to you that that was being carried out 
by people in eastern Canada, and it was found that it was to be 
very worthwhile. 
 
Again you talk about Joytec, and your misleading statements 
again. One simply has to ask this question to determine whether 
or not there’s any basis to some of the comments that you make. 
I don’t believe, Mr. Chairman, that well-known, world-wide, 
internationally known, and well-recognized companies like 
Marubeni and Sony would be involved in a company if the 
technology really wasn’t any good. And that’s exactly what the 
member  

opposite is saying. 
 
You talk about the money that was spent in this province as far 
as Joytec was concerned. The province of Saskatchewan gave 
them in the neighbourhood of $76,000. The company spent in 
the neighbourhood of 6 to $8 million, most of which was spent 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. They employed 
anywhere from nine to 30 people over a period of time, six 
years, and certainly there was a fair return as far as any 
investment the province of Saskatchewan had. 
 
There’s no question as far as the technology is concerned. The 
member well knows that some of this technology takes a lot 
longer to develop than others. And we’ve got many examples of 
that where you’ve taken anywhere from three to five years 
before technology has been developed to the point where it 
becomes commercially viable, and I think that Joytec is a prime 
example. But you’ve got two internationally recognized 
companies that are now involved with that, and if it wasn’t any 
good, they certainly wouldn’t be there. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, when you deal with making 
grants to technology companies, do you give any scrutiny to 
their track record with respect to the labour standards board, for 
example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the concern that we 
have when a company applies for a grant is looking at the 
project, and it’s determined on that basis whether or not they 
would qualify for the grant. We also, of course, take a look at 
the fact that they are generally applying for grants through the 
federal government and maybe other agencies, and in some 
cases we might be the last ones contacted with regard to our 
approval. But we certainly don’t look at some of the concerns 
raised by the member opposite; we look at the project. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’d like to suggest right 
here and right now that you do take a look at some of the 
concerns that I raise, because I know of individual firms where 
employees have not been paid wages in the high-tech 
community, and there are judgements with the labour standards 
board. 
 
And I think it behoves you, as Minister of Science and 
Technology, if you’re giving out government funds and grants 
to these organizations, that you take some measure of 
responsibility; that you give some small measure of scrutiny to 
some of the activities of these companies; you pay some regard 
to their performance with respect to their employees, and that 
can easily be done by checking with the labour standards board. 
And I just ask you again: do you think that that might not be an 
appropriate action for you to take before you release funds to 
high-tech companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re generally 
in close contact with the companies in the advanced technology 
community, but I would suggest that there are other agencies or 
departments that are set up to look after some of the concerns 
that are raised by the member opposite, whether it’s the 
Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment, the 
Labour Relations Board, and that sort of thing. But certainly 
we’re  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2010 
 

willing to sit down with these groups. And I would suggest to 
the member opposite that if he has details with regard to some 
specifics whereby we haven’t done that, or could be of 
assistance, we’d be glad to look at it, but he’s going to have to 
provide us that information. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well I’m recommending that you do it as a 
matter of policy, Mr. Minister. That’s far more effective than 
me simply trodding one individual circumstance that I might 
know about — that I do know about. 
 
I’d like to change the subject now and talk about centres of 
excellence. How many centres of excellence is the federal 
government going to be funding with its centres of excellence 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, there were about 158 
applications as far as the networks for centres of excellence are 
concerned, and we would expect that the decision will be made 
in early fall, and that approximately 20 of these will be given 
the go-ahead. Now out of the 20, they’re not, of course, all 
Saskatchewan companies; this will be right across the country. 
But there are several Saskatchewan companies which will be 
involved in the network and there will be a lot of benefits here. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Did you have any input into this process, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. We had ongoing 
contact with the individuals or the groups that were putting 
forward proposals, and we assisted in financing or funding the 
development of some of these proposals. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, my understanding is that it’s a bone of 
contention amongst those who participated in this process that 
they were led along the garden path in terms of putting in their 
own particular applications. Some 280 letters of intent were 
filed across the country; that your department did in fact have 
involvement in encouraging Saskatchewan representatives to 
participate. 
 
And then they learned that there won’t just be 20, Mr. Minister, 
but there will be 10 to 20 centres of excellence funded. And 
there’s a lot of resentment in Saskatchewan and across the 
country that individual researchers spent time and emotional 
energy putting these project proposals together essentially for 
nothing, and that you were complacent in that process in 
encouraging them to participate when you knew full well that 
there would only be 10 or 20 centres out of the 280 letters of 
intent’s file. 
 
So if you want to support science and technology in this 
province, next time be honest with them. If you have input into 
that process, that you are aware that there are only going to be 
10 or 20 final projects selected, let people know where they 
stand so they don’t have to waste their time applying for funds 
that don’t exist. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, in all fairness, this is 
a $240 million federal program, it’s not a provincial program. 
And when he talks about 10 or 20, the understanding that we 
have is that about 20 of these  

projects . . . they’re networks of centres of excellence; you 
might have several companies, in fact, there could be 
companies from several provinces that would be involved in 
one network, as far as centres of excellence are concerned. 
 
The Department of Science and Technology, Mr. Chairman, 
assisted the companies in Saskatchewan that were putting 
proposals together to the tune of $40,000. And this is something 
that wasn’t done in all the provinces across the country, but 
here in Saskatchewan we did give assistance to all of those who 
were developing proposals. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, how many Saskatchewan 
awards have been . . . Science Culture Canada awards have 
been made to Saskatchewan participants or applicants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We don’t have that information with 
us, Mr. Chairman, but we’ll be happy to get it together and get 
it to you just as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well you say that I like to bring forth wild 
facts. My information — I’d love to be corrected if this is the 
case — my information is that the second annual awards for 
Science Culture Canada made no awards to Saskatchewan 
participants; that Saskatchewan ranks then along with Prince 
Edward Island, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick in not having 
any projects funded under the second granting year of Science 
Culture Canada awards. 
 
I can’t lay my hands on the previous year’s listing of awards, 
but if I’m not mistaken, I believe that Saskatchewan had not 
one award in that year either. And I’m wondering how you can 
explain it that Saskatchewan has such a poor track record when 
it comes to Science Culture Canada awards if you’re doing such 
wonderful things promoting science and technology here in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again this is an 
example of a federal program. I certainly don’t have any idea 
how many individuals or organizations or agencies have applied 
for these grants. The decisions are all made by the federal 
government and we’ll certainly get the information on how 
many have applied and how many have received them in 
Saskatchewan, if in fact any have applied. I don’t know. But it 
is a federal program, it’s not a provincial program. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, can you give me a status report 
on the sewage recycling project that was initiated with the city 
of Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, we signed the 
agreement with the city, but as I understand it, they’ve 
contracted with individuals from the university who are doing 
the work. And the work is now under way, but there’s no report 
on it yet. So the work is being done at the present time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Just to wind up, a couple brief questions. 
Have you undertaken any initiatives with the Minister of 
Finance to discuss the possibility of the education and health 
tax being removed from purchases of scientific  
  



 
June 19, 1989 

 

2011 
 

research equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Not as yet. We haven’t had any 
discussions in that regard. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Do you think that might be appropriate to do 
so, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — As I said, we haven’t had any 
discussions. That may be a possibility. That’s something that 
we should be looking at. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And just winding down, when will we see a 
new edition of the tech transfer catalogue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I understand that that should be 
ready sometime in October of this fall. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 5 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 15 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Science and Technology — Vote 66 
 
Items 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I too would 
like to thank my officials. They’ve spent a lot of time putting 
information together in so far as the estimates are concerned, 
and I think that they . . . even though we’re small in number, I 
think that they do a very good job in the department and I 
certainly appreciate the work that they’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, I too would like to thank the minister 
and his officials for their participation this afternoon, and to say 
that on this side of the House we look for a science and 
technology policy that serves the people of the province and 
protects the public purse. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Being 5 o’clock, the committee is recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


