


















































May 8, 1989 Hansard Evening


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 8. 1989 
 
 

997 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before dinner I was 
basically trying to point out the issue, and I'll just back up a 
little so that the member from the opposition will understand 
what I was trying to put across. 
 
The member from Regina North will take note as to what I've 
got to say. When the member from Regina Victoria had 
indicated that they were a party that believed in Canadian 
ownership and believed in the national Canadian ownership and 
were promoting Canadian nationalism in this province and 
across Canada, I wanted to draw to your attention and to the 
people of Saskatchewan's attention, basically that if you look at 
where he was coming from in speaking in regards to 
agriculture, I want to indicate to you that the philosophy of the 
NDP opposition is not that at all and is not being practised like 
that at all, Mr. Speaker. Because basically when you look at the 
agenda of the NDP, they have never, never gotten outside the 
boundaries of Saskatchewan enabling outside interest to 
participate and partake in agriculture or anything like that. 
 
So I'm going to indicate to the members opposite — and this is 
a challenge to them — that if such a decree does happen to . . . 
and a decision does happen to come about in the province of 
Saskatchewan that the agricultural community wishes people 
from Alberta, or their sons and daughters from Manitoba or 
wherever, to participate in the family farm, we'll see what side 
of the fence they're on in that issue. Because they have never, 
never wanted anybody — the son or daughter or anyone — to 
own that particular family farm if they happen to have had a job 
in, say, Alberta or Manitoba or elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that the member from 
Regina Victoria had also touched on the fact of the spending 
and the amount of dollars going out of province, and I had 
briefly touched on that, but I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, 
that it is not the case that the $50 million that was . . . The 
member from Regina Victoria was saying that would leave the 
province. I hope, I hope that as they go around the province and 
talk about their ideology and that they would be factual and 
truthful with the people in the province and not use that as part 
of their argument because they know, they know very well that 
that is not fact. 
 
And when I say going around, the member from Regina 
Victoria also indicated that as they were out of the legislature 
here for the last two weeks or I think it was 16 to 18 days, as 
they were travelling the province and talking to the people 
about public participation . . . Well no that's not quite the fact 
either, Mr. Speaker. They were  

not talking about public participation; they were talking about 
privatization, and there's two different meanings there. I'm 
talking about public participation, Mr. Speaker, and those 
people just can't seem to present the facts straight and truthful. 
 
But I want to indicate to you that the member from The 
Battlefords . . . And I hope that all the members of the 
opposition pay attention to this because, Mr. Speaker, I will 
quote to you. As that member from Battlefords was in my 
riding, he was being interviewed by the media, and this is what 
the member from The Battlefords had to say to my media when 
they were out there trying to suggest the fact that they were . . . 
we were selling out Saskatchewan, privatizing. 
 
But he indicated to the media there that this was the only way 
that they'd come back here: the government withdraws the Bill; 
an election is called; or the people of Saskatchewan tell the 
NDP to call off their protest. Pardon me, the member from The 
Battlefords says he doubts Saskatchewan voters will give the 
NDP the last message, and the last message was that the people 
of Saskatchewan tell the NDP to call off their protests. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as you will have seen, the Bill has not been 
withdrawn from the legislature. As you will have seen, an 
election is not called. Well, Mr. Speaker, that only leaves one 
thing left. It only leaves one thing left, and accordingly it's got 
to be fact because the member from The Battlefords stated it, 
that the people of Saskatchewan have told the NDP to get back 
to the legislature and start debating public participation. 
 
The only reason they're back — they lost out there, Mr. 
Speaker, because if they wouldn't have lost out there, if they 
would not have been told to get back to the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, well then they would have still been out there because 
we did not call an election, and the government definitely has 
not withdrawn the Bill. 
 
So these are the kinds of things that, Mr. Speaker, the members 
of the opposition, when they talk about the blood and guts of 
issue, they do not have the issue at hand. They do not have the 
feeling for Saskatchewan and for the youth and for the seniors 
and for the entrepreneurs and the labour force. They don't have 
the feeling, Mr. Speaker, and as you would well have seen 
through the various different forums that they've held in the 
various different auditoriums across this province. They might 
have had about 1,000 people or something show up discussing 
the public participation of potash and energy and etc. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, well will I tell you and the people 
of Saskatchewan that the NDP opposition had to bus those 
people in from all over the province. And I'll tell you 
something, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes down to the fact of 
being able to only house 1,000 or 1,100 people by busing them 
in from all over the province of Saskatchewan, well far be it. 
 
I am well, well interested in seeing just exactly what their 
petitions have got to say here, Mr. Speaker, because they might 
have thousands of names on those petitions, Mr.  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

998 
 

Speaker. But I'll tell you, when I look at the amount of 
thousands and thousands and thousands of people that support 
this Progressive Conservative government . . . And, by the way, 
those people have gone out and asked for people to sign these 
petitions and not putting the facts out. Well, Mr. Speaker, once 
we get into that particular debate and fight, we'll see who comes 
out on this. And, Mr. Speaker, there'll be no doubt in the world 
that the youth and the seniors and all those people that were 
misled by the opposition on public participation will definitely 
come back and will realize that they have been misled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to relate to you now some of the things 
that I have jotted down in a speech here — and so I don't 
wander off, some of the points that I want to make sure that are 
gone into and get on to the record. 
 
I want to ask the members opposite to pay attention because, 
basically, if they will listen to what is documented in this 
speech and to what they've had to say so far in this whole 
debate, they may gain some knowledge. 
 
And I hope they're open-minded enough to absorb some of the 
various different information articles that I have here. And then 
if they are discussing public participation, they may want to use 
some of this information in their deliberations, because I'm sure 
my people are going to be receiving the documentation, and 
they're not going to be misleading my people. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at the future of 
our province and its great potential, the securing of an industry 
is vital; the expansion of an industry is vital; and the 
diversifications and the long-term security of jobs are vital. In 
this day and age, Mr. Speaker, people are looking for that 
security, they're looking for the long-term security, and they're 
looking towards this government to deliver that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has had that vision — has had 
that vision to expand in industry, to allow diversification to 
happen, and to create jobs. We, no doubt, Mr. Speaker, have 
been through some difficult natural problems here with the 
drought and everything else, Mr. Speaker, but as you will well 
know, our government has not turned the back on 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
My comments on Bill 20 would not be complete without the 
reference to the speech made in this legislature by the Leader of 
the NDP. The Leader of the Opposition opened his speech with 
a quote from the supporters of free trade, and I found that very 
astonishing. In the trade debate the supporters — and I'll 
notably mention one, Trade Minister John Crosbie — said the 
critics in the NDP were walking backward, backward into the 
future. Well, Mr. Speaker, I've got a point to make with this. 
You can imagine my surprise when the NDP leader, humbled 
by his failure to stop free trade, elected to use the same 
quotation in this debate, in this debate. 
 
Walking backward into the future. This is a very telling 
quotation and this is why I am mentioning it. For this particular 
NDP leader, the member from Riversdale, it is a  

classic example of self-description — a yesterday's man, 
advocating yesterday's solution, yesterday's rigid NDP 
ideology, as the answer to today's economic issues. It's no 
wonder he uses this phrase, walking backward into the future. It 
has a direct application and meaning for the opposition leader 
and his party. Intellectually, philosophically, and practically 
they are tired and empty, and they are walking backward into 
the future. That's the NDP opposition. 
 
Bill 20 will give the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, to participate directly in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan through share ownership. This Bill provides a 
way for us to attract new money, new investment, and new 
growth into the potash corporation. The government will be free 
to regulate, tax, and benefit from the profits of the corporation 
without having to own the mines and equipment that extract the 
ore. 
 
(1915) 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, does government need to own a 
potash company in order to manage it? Obviously, there are 
ways that an enlightened, modern, and sensible government — 
and I'm describing the Progressive Conservative government — 
there are ways that a government can ensure that all of us 
benefit without risking the future of our children, without using 
taxpayers' money, without borrowing against our heritage and 
staking everything on the management of bureaucrats, 
government administrators, and politicians. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
Bill 20 provides safeguards to ensure that the new modernized 
public potash company remains in Saskatchewan and that it will 
be a major player in our economy. 
 
Let's look for a moment at the history of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. In 1976, when the NDP government 
nationalized the potash industry, they said that the 
American-owned potash companies had to go; they had to be 
kicked out of Saskatchewan. This is, and I want to say, this is 
particularly noteworthy, given the comments of the NDP leader 
who now boasts . . . He now boasts about how he personally led 
the attack in 1976. 
 
So just what did he do? What was his answer? The NDP, as I 
had indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, borrowed money from the 
American and European bankers to buy up American and 
European companies. Brilliant. Really, that was really brilliant, 
wasn't it? 
 
Today, Saskatchewan's people are still paying back that debt to 
the American and the European bankers. Well I indicated that 
earlier . . . in my earlier remarks, Mr. Speaker, who really owns 
it? The same money invested in our economy, and to say that 
same money that the NDP had invested in the potash 
companies, if that same money was invested into our economy, 
into, say, maybe a savings account of a credit union, would be 
worth approximately now, Mr. Speaker, about $2.5 billion 
today. That fund would actually support our health care system 
for nearly two years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask you. Did the NDP look to the 
investment capability of our own people? Did the NDP  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

999 
 

look to Saskatchewan, to Saskatchewan's vision to participate? 
No. They borrowed money from American and European 
bankers to buy out American and European potash companies. 
And this was done by the NDP in full knowledge that the 
potash industry is a cyclical business, its fortunes rising and 
falling with world international fertilizer needs. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the potash business was good — and I agree 
with the member for Regina Victoria — the potash business 
was good in the mid-1970s, and it's good again; it's good now. 
But how did the NDP think that the government ownership 
would carry this resource business through the market slumps 
and declines? I ask you. The old, tired NDP answer is that the 
taxpayer can always be tapped for more money. And that is 
what it is, Mr. Speaker, just that. That is the philosophy of the 
NDP. It's not even good sense when the losses and expenses of 
a government company are borne on the backs of the taxpayers 
and our children and our elderly and those in need. It's just not 
good economics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite — they may not care — but 
I say shame on them. I say shame on them. Shame on you for 
having the audacity to exercise the power of government to 
trick the people of Saskatchewan. That's what you people did. 
You tricked the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
A duly elected government has the obligation, Mr. Speaker, to 
conduct the business of the province with foresight and vision. 
As we examine the history of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, remember that this NDP leader, the member 
from Riversdale, had as his vision, government money, 
government control, and narrow government ownership as the 
answer in both the good times and the bad — the good times 
and the bad. 
 
But I ask you to look at the facts. This NDP leader, the man 
who boasts about his role in the past, borrowed money at 11 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, in your name as taxpayers. Over time it has 
yielded a return, it has yielded a return, and I hope the members 
opposite, the member from Riversdale, will listen to this 
because he was pointing out all sorts of facts and figures that 
just didn't calculate, but the taxpayers and over the time had to 
. . . and only observed a yielded return of 3.7 per cent, 3.7 per 
cent return on the investment — borrowed the money at 11 per 
cent and had a return of 3.7 per cent. 
 
Now I'm not finished yet. I asked the taxpayers of the province, 
would anybody you know borrow money at 11 per cent and put 
it in the bank for an interest rate of 3 per cent? Would you? No, 
I don't think so. 
 
Well at this point I want to examine some statements made by 
the NDP leader and the member from Riversdale. And this I'm 
going to . . . The opposition leader says that Saskatchewan 
people have not benefitted from public participation. He says 
the public participation has not helped drought victims, difficult 
farm times, and escalating health care costs. Well this is rather 
confusing coming from the NDP. Public participation is just 
one year old in Saskatchewan and there have been plenty of 
success stories to tell on both a large and a small scale. 
 

Government employees have started their own companies, 
become entrepreneurs. I look at DirectWEST, Printco Graphics, 
Media House Productions, and the Meadow Lake saw mill. 
Now I have to ask, what are you talking about no benefits? I ask 
. . . You have to ask them, Mr. Speaker, you have to ask that 
question of the NDP: what are they talking about? There are 
just a few examples there. And here are some more. 
Weyerhaeuser, WESTBRIDGE, and Saskoil have brought new 
jobs, growth, and investment into our province. You know, 
what are the NDP talking about, Mr. Speaker, and especially the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale? 
 
And what about the bond issues we've promoted during the past 
year? Power bonds, TeleBonds, sensible and secure investments 
for Saskatchewan people. We've raised, Mr. Speaker, $824 
million through the bond sales and kept at least $80 million 
worth of interest in our province. That's money that doesn't . . . 
And that's money that doesn't go to line the pockets of the 
American bankers as the NDP would so have the Saskatchewan 
people believe. 
 
And look at the White Track ski resort, Mr. Speaker, the 
SARCAN returns depot — direct involvement by Saskatchewan 
people in putting under-used government assets to work and 
creating jobs and benefitting the economy. Public participation 
in potash, and in energy, and in the SGI are major undertakings. 
They are major undertakings, Mr. Speaker, but not one share 
has been offered for sale. The specific investment opportunities 
are not yet public knowledge and yet the NDP has jumped to 
the conclusion that no one has benefitted — simply amazing. 
 
I want to say . . . And I want to say to the NDP opposition, just 
wait, just wait and be patient. We have started by creating over 
400 new jobs and many new opportunities already in public 
participation, and if you'll be patient, just wait and see — just 
wait and see the new investment diversification and many 
opportunities that will come to all Saskatchewan people through 
public participation in potash. 
 
Now look, at the risk of hurting the rather sensitive and delicate 
feelings of the Leader of the Opposition, I must say how 
disappointed I was with his speech on potash. His speech was 
truly a sad example of self-serving platitudes — yesterday's 
hero spouting disjointed memories of the past. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, nowhere did I hear constructive criticism — nowhere. 
Nowhere was there support for Saskatchewan men and women 
in the non-government sector, volunteers actually participating 
in our economy. Nowhere have we heard that, nowhere. 
 
All we heard, Mr. Speaker, is negatives, worthless 
reminiscences of the past, yesterday's man invoking the spirits 
of the past. There's no boss like a government boss, says the 
NDP leader. Well we all remember potash. Commercial 
business, in fact the Cornwall Centre right here in Regina, we 
all remember that. Land banks, auto body shops, even SGI 
proposing to sell life insurance. They were going to get into the 
funeral business. That was the mentality of the NDP 
government. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1000 
 

These were all on the NDP's agenda. Governments as the 
master and not as the servant — a noble philosophy from the 
Leader of the Opposition, Leader of the NDP. 
 
The people of our province remember, and they have good 
memories, Mr. Speaker. The NDP's blind ideology mind-set 
doesn't work any more. The quick fix of state ownership is 
unrealistic and simplistic. The NDP approach is not rational. It 
is not a common sense alternative. And like their leader, the 
NDP is locked into yesterday; the answers of the past trying to 
work in a challenging, complex future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the NDP are good at scare 
mongering. They scare the sick and the elderly and the needy 
with vulgarities and half-truths about public participation. Mr. 
Speaker, as it is in health care, they are doing it now with 
potash. 
 
(1930) 
 
As I deal with Bill 20 it is ironic, almost humorous, to hear the 
Leader of the NDP blame the losses of the potash corporation in 
recent years on the change in Saskatchewan's government. And 
they're doing it here this evening as well, Mr. Speaker. They are 
putting . . . They're saying that the debt was not their fault. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, the member from The 
Battlefords is still upset, but he says it was still . . . It was 
smaller; it was smaller. That's his answer from a small-minded 
member from The Battlefords. 
 
And what is the North Battleford chamber of commerce 
members, what do they think about their member from The 
Battlefords that is against everything — against private people 
getting involved in the running of the province and getting into 
the . . . and becoming a participant, publicly participating and 
helping run the resources in this province — allowing the 
outside of the bureaucracy to participate finally and to take 
part? 
 
The NDP opposition, they don't agree with that. It's just not . . . 
They haven't got a thumbs on, Mr. Speaker. They just don't and 
aren't able to carry on governing unless they know they've got 
full thumbs on control of every little individual in this province. 
That's just the way they are. 
 
Nowhere does the NDP leader mention declining world potash 
prices and declining demand for product. Nor when he 
criticized . . . criticizes the management of PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) in 1982, does he seem to recall 
that these managers were the exact same people who ran PCS 
under the NDP government. The same management that he 
criticized in 1982 ran that potash corporation when they were 
government, and they point the finger at this administration, at 
this government. 
 
And the leader of the NDP has a credibility problem. And that's 
no . . . And I ask the people of the province, wonder why. I 
wonder why he has a credibility problem. Well it's just basically 
things that he's been saying on one side of his mouth, speaking 
out of the middle of his mouth, and  

talking about something totally different on the other side of his 
mouth. Three different directions, Mr. Speaker, and possibly 
even a fourth. Who knows what he is saying elsewhere? 
 
Certainly there is no doubt that the past few years have not been 
easy ones for the potash corporation. The difficult times, 
however, have given us two very good reasons to look 
favourably at public participation in the corporation. First, the 
investor base of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
should be wider. Taxpayers should not be the only base of 
support for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan but many 
more investors from private citizens to businesses to others who 
want to actively participate. Investors from countries outside 
our borders must not be discouraged. And in Bill 20 there are 
safeguards to keep foreign investment to 45 per cent and voting 
control to 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member from Regina Victoria was 
speaking about foreign investments, and he didn't know what 
kinds of people would be investing, you know, are they going to 
be Chinese or are they going to be Indian or what are they going 
to be . . . we're not going to know. Well, Mr. Speaker, in his 
tone of voice here today I'd almost think that there was a 
prejudiced, racial kind of slur about his type of conversation, 
and I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that I was mighty 
disappointed. But it does show up, it does show up when we 
talk about public participation, when we talk about the 
opportunity for the private sector to . . . and the individual out 
in our province to participate. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is just 
unruling of the member from Regina Victoria to indicate that 
those people are not as good as we are. If they're good enough 
to purchase our grains, if they're good enough to do trade, then, 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that they should be good enough, 
good enough to invest and live and become part of our province 
and to allow . . . and take part in the growth of our province. 
 
But no, Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition, the 
members of the opposition don't favour that. The Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale, talks about the 
heritage, talks about his background and where his grandfather 
came from the old country . . . or his father and talks about his 
heritage. Well I take my heritage serious too, Mr. Speaker, and 
my grandfather, when he immigrated to this country, was of 
that belief in building this country as well. But he didn't ask 
whether the member came from, or people came from China or 
Japan or the United States or Germany or wherever. They all 
worked and got along in this country and province, to build this 
Canada and this Saskatchewan to what it was today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the operations and headquarters . . . And I 
want to indicate to them, as they had indicated earlier, the 
member from Regina Victoria indicated earlier that this potash 
corporation was going to leave Saskatchewan. Well it isn't 
leaving Saskatchewan. The operations and the headquarters of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will stay in 
Saskatchewan. The industry control will always be in 
Saskatchewan with government laws, regulations, royalties, 
taxes, and  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1001 
 

special agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are serious, serious things that will be 
discussed in the Bill, and serious points I have referenced, that I 
am making and putting on the record right now. Because the 
members, led by the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Riversdale, led out his troops into the public and told them 
totally the opposite, totally the opposite from what is actually 
taking place, because they would not allow the Bill to be 
properly debated in this House so as to find out exactly what 
was in this Bill. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that if the member 
from Riversdale could control his radicals on that side of the 
House, he may well get along better outside the province 
instead of having the pressure come from the private sector out 
there, the farm organizations and the business world and the 
labour people, and tell them to get back into this House and 
start debating. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that those are some of 
the issues that I wanted to put on record because that is fact, and 
if anybody that is watching this debate tonight, if they question 
it because of the next speaker that may stand up and because of 
the ideology stoop that the NDP are in, because they're going to 
counteract from what I've said, I ask those people to phone in. 
We'll give them a copy of the Bill, and they'll see for 
themselves. They'll just read the Bill and not listen to those 
people. 
 
They wanted to talk about a phone-in the other night. I'm 
prepared to send them a Bill so that they don't have to listen to 
those particular nonsense mistruths that the NDP seem to float 
around the province. 
 
On a broader base of shareholders, also, Mr. Speaker, they will 
lessen the impact on taxpayers. Market losses and expansion 
costs in potash are presently costing our taxpayers about 
$220,000 a day. And you know, that's $220,000 every single 
day — money that could be used for essential government 
priorities, Mr. Speaker, like health care, education, and helping 
the needy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that's just basically something that I want to 
revert back to, too, is to what the member from Regina Victoria 
had indicated earlier about waiting lists and farm crises and 
young people and better where the money could be spent. And I 
agree, that's where this kind of dollars could be spent, Mr. 
Speaker, on just that. 
 
Well we've inherited that problem from the NDP, and we've 
been fighting that through these economic times. Things are 
beginning to turn, and people are beginning to realize that the 
deficit will be coming down and will be getting under control 
here. And I'm just saying here, when you look at being able to 
put another $220,000 that we are now spending, and it's costing 
the taxpayers on the losses and expansion costs that the potash 
had incurred, and be able to put it into these other essential 
services, Mr. Speaker, it will be enhanced even further. 
 
The member from Regina Victoria had indicated about the fact 
of the mismanagement of this government and that we've done 
nothing in that regard to health care or anything else. But I want 
to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker,  

and remind the member from Regina Victoria that it was this 
government — this government — that took the moratorium 
away on hospitals and nursing homes in this province, had once 
again decentralized health care because of the . . . and took it 
back to the rural parts of the province. And Mr. Speaker, I just 
wanted to remind the member from Regina Victoria of that as 
he had indicated that we were mismanaging the dollars in that 
way. But I can indicate to him that if he comes into my riding I 
can introduce him to all our brand-new facilities, health care 
facilities, and nursing home facilities, etc. 
 
By maintaining . . . The second reason, Mr. Speaker, what I 
would like to put across to you as the reason for public 
participation in the potash corporation is to provide an 
opportunity for the potash corporation to expand and diversify. 
If the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan can diversify, then 
the company will no longer be as dependent on the single 
market, and it won't be dependent on the market ups and downs 
of potash sales. By maintaining the status quo, the only way for 
the company to expand is to borrow more money, Mr. Speaker, 
and with the taxpayers once again responsible. However, by 
broadening the shareholder base of the corporation, access to 
the funds necessary for expansion and diversification should be 
more readily available. 
 
And I think that's a big step forward, Mr. Speaker. It takes it off 
the taxpayers' back and puts it directly into the investor. And I 
think everybody would favour that. So as I'd indicated earlier, 
those taxpayers' responsibilities are basically . . . could be 
designated into the essential services area. 
 
(1945) 
 
But expand into what, you might want to ask, Mr. Speaker. And 
at the present time the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
provides the U.S. foreign industry with one of three key 
fertilizer components, potash. The Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan does this through an established distribution 
network. 
 
In Saskatchewan our farmers use very little potash. Our largest 
fertilizer demand is for nitrogen-based products and the potash 
corporation does not carry or produce it. It has been suggested 
that the corporation could diversify into other fertilizers like 
nitrogen and use its distribution network to make the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan a dominant player in the entire 
fertilizer industry. It's obvious that diversification with new 
investment will strengthen the potash corporation. A broader 
shareholder base will make this possible, and public 
participation can make it happen. 
 
The Leader of the NDP, in his rambling discourse in this House, 
talked about many other aspects of potash . . . of the potash 
aspects that will be addressed by other members of our 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to begin my closing remarks, but in that 
I want to say that as I am closing, I want to quote, and I want to 
quote something that the NDP Leader had made on one of his 
statements, and this is a quote from Hansard. The member from 
Riversdale was indicating this about the kind of future for our 
great province, the  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1002 
 

future for ourselves, our families, our children, and our 
children's children. This will determine how our province will 
manage, develop, and sell our most important non-renewable 
resource — potash. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the opposition leader, 
that is what this Bill 20 and this debate are all about — a 
potential world-class, diversified, international company, based 
right here in Saskatchewan, developing, expanding with the 
world on its threshold, jobs, expertise, and more building in our 
province. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is a good idea and it is an initiative of this 
government. I warn that these things will not happen by 
embracing the tired approaches of the past — governments 
running businesses like potash companies and limiting their 
growth. Our future and that of our children, Mr. Speaker, will 
be guided by men and women who are genuinely committed to 
those who want to unlock our true potential, those who have 
vision, determination, and drive. 
 
We have the potash, Mr. Speaker. We have the expertise and 
the ability to take on the world. We do. Our government and all 
of us, as citizens, will reap benefits through a larger, diversified, 
and more profitable potash company that pays its fair share of 
returns back to the government through royalties and taxes. 
 
Public participation in potash will free Saskatchewan to 
broaden its economic base and build a stronger economy, one 
that will support our social foundation now and in the century 
ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no room for people that are frightened. 
There is no room for the NDP ideology, because, Mr. Speaker, 
they are frightened. The NDP are afraid of their own shadow. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you, as they were travelling 
around the province there were young entrepreneurs, men and 
women, young men and women were gathered, finding out 
about public participation, finding out how they could 
participate more, eager to go, not afraid of their shadow, Mr. 
Speaker, not afraid of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are afraid of the future. Mr. Speaker, a 
Progressive Conservative government is not afraid of the future. 
Mr. Speaker, the young people, the people of Saskatchewan, the 
majority in this province, are not afraid of the future and that's 
what it's all about, Mr. Speaker. It's the march ahead in full 
force to diversify, expand, create jobs. It's for the young people, 
Mr. Speaker. That's what it's about. It's for families, young 
families. It's for this province to grow and prosper, Mr. Speaker, 
not for those reasons that the member from Regina Victoria had 
indicated earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the people in the province of Saskatchewan 
thought like the member from Regina Victoria thought, well I 
want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that there would probably 
be no reason to get out of bed in the mornings because there 
would be no reason to do anything — absolutely no reason. The 
member had not once, as you will well know, that not once 
stood and gave one good, positive thing; never  

through his debate speech mentioned one good, positive thing 
that the NDP would do if they were ever government. Mr. 
Speaker, that's because they have no vision. They have no 
vision. They've been trying to grasp for some sort of a survival. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when you look 
at the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition and his 
radicals over there, I want to indicate to you that instead of him 
allowing those people to stand and speak the way they speak, 
Mr. Speaker, that they should get behind this Bill, Bill 20, help 
diversify the potash corporation, Mr. Speaker — get behind the 
Bill, help create jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the people out there are looking 
for good opposition as well as good government, and what they 
tell me is they've got the good government, but they're certainly 
tired of this opposition. They haven't got a positive thing to say 
ever, whether it be through the media, be through this 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, people just shake their heads when 
they think of what they have in opposition to this day. They 
want an opposition with vision as well as a government. 
 
So I invite the NDP opposition to sit down and rationalize this 
Bill, and to come forward and say, for a change, that hey, yes, 
look, there isn't . . . It isn't so bad. It's going to do all these nice 
things. It's going to allow our youth to have the opportunity to 
have new jobs, to go into new business, and to be able to look at 
long-term security in this province. 
 
That's what it's about. It's not about you and I any longer, Mr. 
Speaker. It's about giving the young people of this province the 
opportunities that we once had when we were young people. 
And I want to go back to what I said earlier. As I was young . . . 
When I was young and went out into the work-force, I could 
choose the job, Mr. Speaker. Today that's not the case. The job 
chooses the person. Well, Mr. Speaker, wouldn't it be great, 
wouldn't it be great to see it once again in this province? And it 
can happen through public participation that the individual will 
once again be able to choose the job. 
 
I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank you very 
kindly for taking the time to listen to my remarks that I had. Be 
what they may, they weren't meant to be too negative against 
the members of the opposition. I always hope that they would 
pick maybe a few of the remarks that I made and take them to 
heart and come onside. 
 
Maybe that's not their role as opposition in this day and age. 
Maybe they feel that since the TV cameras and the radio and the 
electronic media is just that much more busier today, that their 
role is to holler and scream and rant and rave. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think really if they wanted to become professional 
about it and everything else like this, they would get behind us 
on this Bill, and I once again invite them just before I take my 
place. And once again I just want to say, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before entering too 
directly the content of this debate, I would like to  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1003 
 

respond somewhat to some of the comments from the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. He asked that we get behind him 
on this Bill. I would like to tell you, Mr. Speaker, we're so far 
out in front of them on this Bill that they'll never catch us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The second thing that the member asked was 
that if they did what the NDP are saying, it wouldn't be good; if 
they did what they were saying, that there would be a future, 
there would be some kind of future for the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there is no future for 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. And we've heard that 
over the last 16 days that our members were out listening and 
talking to people about what is happening in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And very loudly, Mr. Speaker, we heard people 
saying, one, they've gone too far; secondly, there won't be 
anything left. 
 
The people, by a vast majority, Mr. Speaker, are asking us to 
stop the government on their obsession with privatization in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now the member opposite, I saw you allowed 
him a good degree of latitude, Mr. Speaker, in debating this 
Bill, as you did members on our side of the House, and I 
appreciate that. Because the potash Bill we're debating here this 
evening ties into a much broader issue, a fundamental issue for 
the province of Saskatchewan; and people, how they've seen 
their affairs develop in the province; and in particular at this 
time, the whole area of privatization, because since we came 
into this legislature, Mr. Speaker, the government has spent far 
too much time on privatization issues. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, almost like an obsession with 
privatization. And the important issues for debt restructuring, 
for farmers, for small business, jobs for people, working 
people's concerns in this province, the unemployed, those that 
have had to go to welfare — Mr. Speaker, every individual 
across this province is concerned. The vast majority of those 
people are opposed to what's going on. 
 
And it's not a political issue any longer, Mr. Speaker. It's an 
issue that crosses all political lines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The petition that we had going around this 
province, that we still have going around this province, Mr. 
Speaker, people don't say, I'm a New Democrat, I want to sign 
that petition. People are saying, I voted for them in the last 
election, I want to sign that petition because they've gone too 
far, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd was 
saying how closely he listened to his constituents. I have an 
article referring to the Deputy Premier in a Meridian Booster 
newspaper here, the newspaper from  

Lloydminster. I have another article referring to the hon. 
member. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to go through this article. It's 
from the Lloydminster Meridian Booster, page 4A, on April 5. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that you've made rulings in the past 
that we can't use members' names even in quotations from 
articles. So if it's . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member is partially correct. 
Yes, that had been the rule, but some time ago in this House the 
rule was discussed anew and it was decided at that time that if 
members don't abuse the rule they can use the names of hon. 
members within quotations. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You've certainly made my task a little easier here this evening 
because I have several quotes from papers I want to use. I was 
going to use “beep” for members opposite and “yours truly” for 
myself as I was quoting these articles, but now I know that I can 
use the names. 
 
As I say, this first article is from Wednesday, April 5, 1989, 
Lloydminster Meridian Booster, and it's written by Dave 
McCullough. It's an editorial in the paper. I bring this up 
because the member who has just spoken, the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, was saying that he's in touch with his 
constituents. When I went there and the Deputy Premier went 
there . . . that he pointed out I wasn't listening to people, I 
wasn't looking at the issues. Now I want to quote from this 
article. 
 
The headline, Mr. Speaker, is: “Hopfner ignoring Border City.” 
Now I hope the hon. member listens closely to this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read it again. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Read it again? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read it again. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well some members want to hear this again: 
“Hopfner ignoring Border City.” That's the headline, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Let's put aside all our preconceived notions about Michael 
Hopfner. We'll forget about his performance in the 
Saskatchewan legislature — which is easily done, since it's 
nothing if (it's) not forgettable. 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Why is the Minister of 
Social Services on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to raise a 
point of order with respect to the speech of the hon. member for 
The Battlefords. 
 
The point of order is as follows, that the debate here is not 
based on personal attacks on members of this House. And we 
might allow him to use the name of members in a quote, but his 
personal attack on the member for Lloydminster is totally off 
the topic and is not relevant to the debate here, adds nothing to 
the debate, and lowers  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1004 
 

the credibility on the stature of this house, and I ask you to rule 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I was hoping, Mr. Speaker, to speak to the 
point of order. The member opposite, Mr. Speaker, indicates 
that this is a personal attack. If this truly was a personal attack, 
Mr. Speaker, what would happen is the member from 
Lloydminster could easily have sued the paper involved. In the 
House like this, all he's got is a quotation and he's using it to 
make his argument in rebuttal in this particular debate, Mr. 
Speaker. And surely a person is allowed to quote from a paper 
which is a public document and is liable to all kinds of legal 
action should words in it be libellous. 
 
The Speaker: — I'd like to . . . I've listened to the point of 
order raised by the member for Melville and to the remarks to 
the point from the member for Prince Albert, and I'd like to 
draw your attention to two rules in Beauchesne's. One is rule 
316, which indicates that: 
 

Besides the prohibitions contained in S.O. (standing order) 
35, it has been sanctioned by usage that a Member, while 
speaking, must not . . . make a personal charge against a 
Member. 
 

Now I would like to say that the member isn't making a 
personal charge but is certainly introducing personalities into 
his speech, direct personalities of a member opposite. Now let 
me also quote to you from rule 325. 
 

When the Speaker takes notice of any expression as 
personal and disorderly, and tending to introduce heat and 
confusion, and calls upon the offending Member to explain 
. . . 
 

Now originally one of the main reasons why the use of 
members' names wasn't allowed is that we don't introduce 
personalities into our debates and, in this way, provide heat and 
confusion which may come as a result. 
 
Now the member from Battleford . . . of course, I'm not sure 
exactly what's in his article; however, I would say that if it 
wasn't directly related to the Bill under discussion — directly 
related — I would certainly have to rule it out of order. At the 
same time, earlier I indicated that the rule will remain in place 
where members' names can be used if it isn't abused. And, quite 
frankly, if a member just starts using member's names over and 
over and over . . . This was one of the original reasons why we 
disallowed it, and I'll have to disallow it again. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker. I have 
no intention of laying a personal attack on any member 
opposite. What inspired this . . . It was a bit of a rebuttal, Mr. 
Speaker, and I don't question your ruling at all. I did distinctly 
hear the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, during his 
intervention into this debate, refer to me and the chamber of 
commerce in North Battleford, and tied that into his argument. 
And I'm just pointing out that when he says he's listening better 
to his constituents than we are, I want to just quote from a news 
article. And I'm sure that the member from Melville had no 
intention of interrupting my speech either. So I'll just start the 
quote over. 
 

The title, Mr. Speaker, is: “Hopfner Ignoring Border City”. 
 

Let's put aside all other preconceived notions about 
Michael Hopfner. We'll forget about his performance in 
the Saskatchewan legislature, which is easily done, since 
it's nothing if it's not forgettable. 
 
We'll give him another chance to prove his worth, judging 
him on his success and three important challenges. 
Remove gas tax inequities. Hopfner, who is either ignorant 
of what's going on or powerless to stop it, sat idly by in the 
legislature Friday while Finance minister Gary Lane 
imposed a harshly unfair new gasoline surtax. The surtax 
has some valid objectives, encouraging the use of unleaded 
gasoline, for example . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order I raise is 
that so far, whether or not the speech of the member opposite is 
a personal attack, it certainly has not yet, in any way, been 
related to the Bill before the House here, the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan or anything to do with potash, as a matter of 
fact. 
 
And the member opposite, if he has anything relevant, we 
would be pleased to hear him. However, Mr. Speaker, I raise 
the point of order that he is off the topic and trying to indulge in 
a personal attack. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I'm just going to make the . . I think that 
the point that's obvious . . . One, is that the member from 
Melville, who is now laughing and smirking, I think is 
attempting to do nothing but interrupt the member from North 
Battleford. I'd suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a little . . . some 
control over members opposite to raise without coming 
anywhere near anything which is recognizable as a point of 
order ought to be sat down. 
 
Secondly, I say with respect to the member from North 
Battleford, and I said this earlier in the House, the point of this 
is that the members opposite have neglected their duties, their 
constituents, and the needs of the province with a blind 
ideological privatization rush. And that's all he's . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think I've heard enough. I 
think I've heard enough. And I've asked the hon. member earlier 
that it should be directly related. I don't know how long his 
article is; it could be 10 or 15 minutes or whatever. However, so 
long I certainly haven't heard anything that directly relates it. 
And I'm afraid that on that basis I will have to rule that the point 
of order is well taken. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly show you before 
the end of my intervention on this debate how this ties in. I 
commit myself to you on that. 
 
And basically just an overview of it, is that that member was 
saying that their caucus and he are listening to people in the 
province of Saskatchewan on the issue of privatization, and 
more particular, the privatization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1005 
 

And I am painfully well aware, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
debate on second reading of Bill 20, An Act respecting the 
Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
Even the name on the Bill is deceiving, Mr. Speaker, without 
going into extensive background. 
 
And I'm not going to sit down within a short period of time, Mr. 
Speaker. I have many, many things to say on this Bill. And I do 
commit to you, Mr. Speaker, that this will tie in, and it basically 
ties in the fact that they say they're listening; we say they're not 
listening, Mr. Speaker, resoundingly not listening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So, Mr. Speaker, I'll summarize part of this 
and I will then conclude, since you don't want to hear all of it, 
and obviously it causes far too much pain for the members 
opposite to listen to. 
 
But they said in this article, and I'll quote. I'll start again at one 
point. 
 

We'll give him another chance to prove his worth, judging 
. . . his success on three important challenges:  
 
(1) Remove gas tax inequities  
 
(2) Act on the wish list 
 

I'd really like to go into explaining that and quoting from that 
too, but I'm summarizing it.  
 

(3) Shake up Stone Age thinking. 
 

Okay. And now, Mr. Speaker, instead of going through this, and 
you know editorials usually aren't 10 or 15 minutes, but I will 
read the final few paragraphs of this article. I go back, I quote 
again: 
 

Perhaps the biggest challenge of all for our MLA is to 
convince (him) certain Regina bureaucrats that 
Lloydminster is indeed a part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of them haven't clued into the fact, as was apparent 
when the Electoral Boundaries Commission drew up a new 
map that left the Border City entirely in Alberta. 
 

(2015) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Well, I'm afraid the hon. 
member has more or less gone through the article and it's like 
saying, let me read the book because at the end it's going to be 
relevant. I'd just like the hon. member to simply make his point, 
make his point. So far, his article has not been relevant. I'd like 
to . . . He may tie what he wants to say in a summary form to 
his remarks, to Bill 20, but I'm just once more reminding the 
hon. member that I think that what he's saying, he should tie it 
directly to Bill 20 and there'll be no problem. But the argument 
that somewhere at the end it will be relevant, well I'm sure the 
hon. member appreciates that that isn't that strong an argument. 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly am 
hampered in what I want to say by your ruling. But in all 
respect for you and your Chair, Mr. Speaker, I'd have to honour 
that ruling here this evening. 
 
Now in regard to potash, that member and members opposite 
don't know any more about the reaction to the potash 
privatization Bill than they do to the electoral boundaries Act 
that left out the city of Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, they've also 
said in Lloydminster about this particular member of the 
legislature: 
 

The most recent evidence came on the weekend, when 
someone let slip that the Saskatchewan government doesn't 
approve of construction of an elk processing plant here. 
(Well they don't approve of the potash corporation either, 
Mr. Speaker.) The official reason is that we don't have 
enough water, even though our water supply is among the 
best in the province. 
 

They don't know that, Mr. Speaker. Just like they don't know 
people are against privatization in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The real reason is that some economic 
benefits might trickle outside the boundaries of Saskatchewan; 
an example of provincial thinking in the very worst sense of the 
word, just like they have terrible thinking on the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — In a certain article, Mr. Speaker, it concludes 
by saying: 
 

There you have it: three good challenges to test the mettle 
of the man who has represented Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
without distinction for the past six years. 
 

End of article, Mr. Speaker. Now I still think it was well worth 
the debate, Mr. Speaker, in what's been going on, to have had 
that quoted onto the record in this provincial legislature so that 
people can see not only in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan, in the 
reading area of the Lloydminster Meridian Booster; so that 
people all across Saskatchewan can know what members 
opposite are doing, because they certainly don't broadcast it 
with a great degree of accuracy that is expressed in some of the 
provincial print media around the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the member opposite, in his intervention, referred to an 
article in the Lloydminster Meridian Booster. Now he 
specifically referred to this article, Mr. Speaker. I distinctly 
remember it, and that's why I went and got it. The article comes 
from Wednesday, April 26, 1989, Lloydminster Meridian 
Booster. And on the front page, Mr. Speaker, it says, "Bells toll 
in the legislature. Berntson, Anguish clash over SaskEnergy." 
 
And it goes on . . . I suppose I can't quote from this article,  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1006 
 

Mr. Speaker, but I'd like to try it because how it ties into this 
Bill on the reorganization of the potash corporation, which is 
privatization. I think you would grant me that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This article ties into privatization as well, Mr. Speaker. It's on 
SaskEnergy, and I think people in the province and members of 
this Assembly would be well aware that the privatization string 
runs through both of these issues. And I want to make a 
comparison between this in the Lloydminster Meridian Booster 
and this Bill 20, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The article 
goes on: 
 

The bells are ringing in Regina this week, but the battle 
lines have been drawn in Lloydminster. 
 
At issue: the proposed sale of SaskEnergy. 
 
Doug Anguish, NDP MLA for North Battleford, told 
Border City reporters Tuesday the privatization of 
SaskEnergy is a betrayal of the (Saskatchewan people). 
 
No sooner had Anguish left town than Deputy Premier 
Eric Berntson arrived, decrying the Opposition tactics. 
 
The NDP walked out of the House Friday morning when a 
bill was presented for first reading proposing the sale of 
SaskEnergy, the natural-gas division of what was formerly 
SaskPower. 
 
The bells calling for a vote clanged all day Friday, resumed 
Monday and will continue to ring until one of three NDP 
conditions is met: 
 
The government withdraws the bill; 
 
An election is called; or 
 
The people of Saskatchewan tell the NDP to call off their 
protest. 
 

Now that's the final line that the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd 
referred to, Mr. Speaker, in his intervention on this Bill this 
very evening. People did tell us to come back to the legislature 
to present the petitions, to give impact, to pass interim supply, 
because this government needs to know what's happening in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say, and there's one key 
point right at the end of the article, Mr. Speaker. I'll quote 
again: 
 

Anguish says he doubts Saskatchewan voters will give the 
NDP the last message. “Saskatchewan people feel betrayed 
by the government's plan,” says Anguish. “They recall the 
premier and the deputy premier promising time and time 
again that the government would never privatize public 
utilities, such as the power corporation.” 
 
Berntson denies he or the premier made such promises. 
 
 

While Anguish claims Berntson denied in the legislature 
that the government was planning to privatize Sask Power 
last May, Berntson says he merely said privatization was 
not the reason for the split of the electrical and natural gas 
divisions. 
 
Berntson says privatization hadn't been considered at the 
time of the split, was not the reason for the split and was 
only seen as an opportunity later. 
 
Anguish notes that in January of 1988, Premier Grant 
Devine said utilities such as SaskPower and Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications would not be for sale. 
 
Berntson admits Devine referred to SaskPower, but he says 
the premier was referring to the electrical utility, although 
the natural-gas division was still under SaskPower at the 
time (oops). 
 
The province can't afford to lose the estimated $200 
million SaskEnergy generates every year, says Anguish. 
“Most provinces rely on resource revenues,” he says, and 
the perception of new wealth will not turn into a reality in 
the long term. 
 
But Berntson counters that the revenues are closer to $325 
million and likens the opportunity to that of the early 
Alberta Gas Trunk, which became the diverse Nova 
Corporation. 
 
“I wonder how many dollars in taxes Nova is paying to the 
government of Alberta?” asked Berntson. 
 
The government was elected on a platform of a 
diversification and public participation, says Berntson, and 
the sale of SaskEnergy will help fulfil that promise. 
 
He says that while the amount generated and the cost of 
shares can't be speculated on, at least $10 million per year 
for four years will be invested in diversification projects. 
 
Berntson also counters NDP charges that the government 
is selling the public utility to a few wealthy 
out-of-province investors. 
 
Initial share offerings will be limited to Saskatchewan 
residents, head office will remain in Saskatchewan and 
two-thirds of the directors must be Saskatchewan residents. 
 

End of the article, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that there is 
nothing in the Bill that we saw here today in this legislature that 
limits it to Saskatchewan participation. Some investor from 
Toronto can acquire 8 per cent. It's even worse in the potash 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. What we're pointing out here is deception of 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, so why should 
Saskatchewan people believe anything about the sale of the 
potash corporation  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1007 
 

when there is so many contrary facts about other privatization 
members in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now, Mr. Speaker, on the whole issue of 
being caught in contrary facts or whatever you want to call it, I 
would look at this. Following the last provincial election, the 
Premier of this province guaranteed that Saskatchewan's public 
utilities would be exempted from his privatization. The Premier 
was asked what corporations could be privatized. And I quote, 
Mr. Speaker, from the Regina Leader-Post on January 25, 1988. 
And I quote: 
 

All Crown corporations with the exception of such utility 
Crowns as SaskPower and Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications could be for sale if the price is right 
and the interests of Saskatchewan people are protected, 
Devine said. 
 

Mr. Speaker, very clearly the Premier committed to us, utilities 
would not be sold. Why should we believe anything that is told 
to us now by members opposite in this debate about the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan? You can't believe it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation has denied in this very 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, about the plans for 
privatization of SaskPower. He was directly asked if the 
government was planning to privatize the natural gas portion of 
SaskPower. I repeat. He was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I understand that the hon. 
member wishes to make a point, but quite frankly, listening to 
his remarks, it doesn't really sound much like he's discussing 
Bill No. 20. And while he's certainly permitted to make remarks 
and bring in material that's relevant, I think that he should get 
more on the topic. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you may have hours more 
that are very, very relevant to the topic. And I know I 
sometimes have trouble getting a little focused, because if you 
get too diverse and away from the Bill, Mr. Speaker, you're not 
on the topic. And I noticed when my leader was up speaking at 
the initial stage of this debate, he was too specific because he 
referred to clauses in the Bill. So I respect all your rulings, Mr. 
Speaker, so if I get out of order, you just call me to order and I'll 
listen to your ruling and I'll get back up and I'll try and do my 
best to stay relevant in terms of the rules of this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member from 
Regina Rosemont seems to be directing some remarks to the 
Chair. If he has any remarks to make, I advise him to stand. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I'm happy you finally called 
somebody else to order. I thought you were calling me to order 
again, and I didn't know for sure what I had said that time. 
 

When major changes, Mr. Speaker, happen in a province such 
as Saskatchewan, people in the province have to have 
confidence in their leaders to know that what's being said to 
them is accurate; that there is a degree of honesty and integrity 
and some degree of moral fibre so that the people at large who 
are interested can have some assurance that what they're being 
told is factual and correct. 
 
And I'm trying to make points, Mr. Speaker, so that the 
members, when they address this Bill, don't give rhetoric on the 
other side and don't give misleading information; that they will 
give facts that are relevant and disclose the true situation to 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to, in light of that, finish off a quote, Mr. Speaker. At one 
time in this legislature — in fact the question was asked, Mr. 
Speaker, on May 9, 1988. The Deputy Premier of this province 
was asked if the government was planning to privatize the 
natural gas portion of SaskPower. And I quote: 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, to that rather lengthy 
straightforward question, the answer is no. 
 

Now is this what we can expect, Mr. Speaker, from the debate 
and the comments from members on the government side 
concerning Bill 20, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? I hope not, for the good 
of the province, Mr. Speaker. I hope not, for the good of people 
in this province. They have to be able to have full information. 
They have to understand and at least see their members that are 
represented have some integrity and are portraying the situation 
honestly and as accurately as they can possibly do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think this should be labelled as the betrayal in the 
province of Saskatchewan — the whole privatization, in 
particular the potash corporation, in particular SaskEnergy, 
SaskPower. It's a betrayal of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I did want to, first off, go through a report 
card from the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. This 
comes from The Meridian Booster and it's titled, “MLA evades 
responsibility,” just like he's evading responsibility today by 
saying the things that he said in this legislature. 
 
(2030) 
 
I could not believe what he was saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan through this respected Assembly. And that's the 
same same “MLA evades responsibility.” A quote from one 
short section: 
 

The following is a short list of major local events and 
Hopfner's record of attendance at those events. January 
’87, Marcel Masse Border City visit, absent; June ’87, 
Michael Wilson visit, absent; July ’87, Canada Day 
celebrations,  

  



 
May 8, 1989 

1008 
 

absent; August . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member is 
unfortunately introducing material about the actions of another 
hon. member in the House. And alleged or otherwise, it's not for 
me to judge that, but I don't think that that is the spirit of this 
Assembly. And I believe that, you know, if hon. members begin 
to do that, quite frankly there'll be no end to this. So I'm just 
bringing this to the attention of the hon. members. 
 
I ask the hon. member from The Battlefords to take that into 
consideration in his remarks. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Did I hear the member from Regina South 
using unparliamentary language, Mr. Speaker? I would really 
appreciate, Mr. Speaker . . . I honour your ruling. I'm not going 
to quote anything more about Michael Hopfner because I've 
tried my best to make that impact, and I just won't quote any 
more of that. But what I'd ask you to do, Mr. Speaker, is would 
you take a look at the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster's 
speech tomorrow and have a look at what he said in his 
address? And do you think, or do you recall, Mr. Speaker, him 
referring to this member who happens to be on another side of 
the Assembly? 
 
I just ask you, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster's intervention tomorrow, and I'd ask 
you, with all due respect, to make a ruling on his speech. I 
didn't notice him being interrupted tonight, and I'd appreciate 
. . . Maybe I hear wrong. Maybe I say one thing, and I don't 
hear it quite accurately . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. I think the 
hon. member's belaboured the point well enough, and I think 
the best thing to do is that he would simply get on with the rest 
of his speech. 
 
However, I'd like to take this opportunity . . . and here's an 
excellent example — speaking in all sincerity — of what 
happens when hon. members make personal attacks on each 
other, regardless of which member this is. It leads to this kind 
of thing: that one hon. member does it; the other hon. member 
does it; the other hon. member does. 
 
And I'm just bringing this to your attention that in the future — 
and all members, I'm certainly not singling out anybody — I'm 
just making a general statement that all members should refrain 
from making personal attacks against each other. I mean that's a 
basic rule of this House, and the House will certainly function 
more smoothly if hon. members will remember that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. My legs are 
getting tired from getting up and down, not from the amount of 
standing I'm having to do here this evening. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Bill 20 — I'll try and confine my remarks to 
that as best I can now — it's An Act respecting the 
Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the word reorganization is very, very deceiving. In fact, 
members opposite try and call it public  

participation. They created a department called Public 
Participation. Well is it public participation? Is it 
reorganization? No, it's privatization. 
 
Now some things in Saskatchewan, TeleBonds and some of the 
bond issues have been important, and people can understand in 
the province of Saskatchewan investing like that in their own 
corporations within the province of Saskatchewan. It's better to 
borrow money from Saskatchewan people than it is to borrow 
money from international financiers or people on Bay Street. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again: what people in the province 
say is that they've gone too far. There won't be anything left. 
Public participation is good, Mr. Speaker, but an obsession with 
privatization is not good, Mr. Speaker, because they've gone too 
far. They don't know when to stop. 
 
As other members have referred to in this debate, maybe it's 
from old wounds they suffered in debates before coming into 
government. The Globe and Mail refers to it as the revenge of 
the nerds. Is it nerdonomics that propels these people, Mr. 
Speaker? What is it that would make an apparently sane 
government go to the insanity of selling off all the assets of the 
province and at the same time retaining the liabilities; so people 
pay the liability, sell off the assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, never before in the history of the province have 
we seen anything like this. I think not even the Keep Our 
Doctors crisis and the medicare crisis of the ’60s and issues 
before that do not impact as heavily on Saskatchewan people as 
the potash corporation sell-off, the SaskEnergy sell-off, all the 
sell-offs that are happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I heard a story the other day, Mr. Speaker, that I'm sure you'd 
appreciate. You come from a rural area of Saskatchewan; many 
of the members opposite do. But it's the two fellows who were 
out on a hiking camp for the weekend, and they were both 
hiking through the hills, and it was grizzly bear country. But the 
first night they camped they never saw any grizzly bear; they're 
doing quite well. Next day they got up at the break of dawn, 
started hiking again, and all of sudden on the trail they come 
upon a grizzly bear — ferocious bear, Mr. Speaker. And the 
bear rears up on his hind legs and is obviously ready to attack 
the two buddies that are out on the camping trip. And all of a 
sudden, the one fellow gets down and he opens his packsack 
and he gets out a pair of running shoes. He takes off his hiking 
boots and puts on the pair of running shoes. And the other 
friend says to him, he says, those running shoes won't do you 
any good, you can't outrun the grizzly bear. And the guy looks 
back and says, I don't have to outrun the grizzly bear, I only 
have to outrun you. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that speaks highly, I think, of what this 
government does in terms of privatization. They don't want to 
have to outrun the grizzly bear; they just want to outrun the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, and they'd better start 
running soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1009 
 

Mr. Anguish: — I think, Mr. Speaker, we have to put this 
debate into a bit of perspective. Mr. Speaker, going back, you'll 
remember well that on April 21 the government introduced a 
Bill in this legislature to privatize the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. And the bells started ringing and members on this 
side of the House walked out, and today is the first day that we 
have come back into the legislature. 
 
And there's two basic reasons, I feel, Mr. Speaker, that we are 
back in this Assembly: the one issue, the overwhelmingly 
important issue that we're back in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, 
is the vote on interim supply. The government said to us on 
many occasions that they're running out of money, they're 
broke, there's no budget passed. And when I posed this to 
people in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, they said, well why 
don't you let them run special warrants like they did a few years 
ago; they didn't call the legislature in till June sometime. They 
didn't even present a budget before the end of the fiscal year. 
They likely broke the law, Mr. Speaker. So the people are 
saying now to me in my constituency, because the legislative 
process gets to be very complex. 
 
You're saying, well why doesn't the government run on special 
warrants? Well, Mr. Speaker, they can't run on special warrants 
because the legislature was in fact in session, and when the 
legislature's in session, anyone who follows the legislature or 
parliamentary practices or knows the operations of government 
knows that you can't have special warrants. You need interim 
supply when the government is in session and the budget has 
not actually passed. 
 
So we came back, one, to provide interim supply because we're 
not into hurting people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, not like this government that would threaten people by 
saying we're going to run out of money before the middle of the 
month; we've got to pay our bills; we've got no money; please 
come back into the legislature. They came in every day and sat 
down, marched down quite promptly, get the media attention, 
sat down on the seats and said, we're ready to do business for 
the province of Saskatchewan — where's the opposition? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did they hide today? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well where were they today? Mr. Speaker, 
we sent a letter to you, Mr. Speaker, at 11 o'clock this morning, 
with a copy to the Deputy Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe the hon. member is 
wandering far from the topic, and I'm sure he's quite capable of 
speaking on information that's quite relevant. And I once more, 
I once more must remind him. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Potash, potash, potash, and here we are 
debating the potash Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, instead of debating this 
privatization Bill on potash, we should be voting on interim 
supply in this Legislative Assembly and not  

hurting people in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — . . . instead of debating this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
And we'll go into lots of detail on this Bill because the more 
people know about it the more they'll be worked up, just as 
they're worked up about SaskEnergy and the sell-off of the 
Saskatchewan Potash and the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there's a second reason why we're back in here, Mr. 
Speaker, and the second reason is is that we have tens of 
thousands of names on legislative petitions signed by people in 
the province of Saskatchewan opposing privatization, just as 
privatization of the potash corporation does not set well with 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One, we're back to provide interim supply. Two, we're back to 
table petitions. We are not here to condone the sell-off of 
Saskatchewan assets. We never will be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, this is the second reading of this 
Bill. People need to know that this Bill and other Bills like the 
privatization Bill on SaskPower have to go through more 
stages. Mr. Speaker, people need to know, on Bills like this, 
that there is a first reading — first reading is passed on this Bill. 
First reading is passed on the Bill to sell SaskPower 
Corporation. We're now in second reading on the potash Bill. 
After the second reading comes the committee stage, Mr. 
Speaker. And on the committee stage, I think you'd instruct us 
that we go through the Bill clause by clause, one at a time. And 
I hope that the government provides very expert witnesses and 
testimony during that time on these Bills that are fundamental 
to the province of Saskatchewan. After the committee stage, 
Mr. Speaker, we go to third reading. And after third reading 
these Bills require Royal Assent by the signature of the 
Lieutenant Governor on the authority of Her Royal Highness 
the Queen. 
 
So many more stages for these Bills to go through, Mr. Speaker, 
and people in the province of Saskatchewan should know that. 
People need to know that because they say: how can we stop 
the insanity of this government on privatization? We want them 
to know, Mr. Speaker, that the fight has only just begun on 
privatization in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason I would stray 
from this Bill a bit is it's hard for the public to understand, in 
Saskatchewan, how this day in the legislature is April 21, 1989. 
Most people would think that this was another day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — May 7. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is it May 7 today? Most people . . . well, we'd 
better check here. Mr. Speaker, it's May 8 today. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

1010 
 

The orders every day in our books, on our desk, in the 
Assembly and in our offices here in this building, we get a copy 
of the Routine Proceedings and Orders of the Day. This is 
dated Friday, April 21, 1989, Mr. Speaker. But today, for 
anybody else in the real world, it would be May 8, 1989, Mr. 
Speaker. So I would hope you'd allow me to vary somewhat, 
because how would you expect the average constituent out there 
to figure out how it's April 21 in here and it's May 8 out there? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, during this entire privatization, there were a 
series of pieces of correspondence that went back and forth 
between our House Leader, the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, and the government House Leader, the member 
from Souris-Cannington, who also happens to be the Deputy 
Premier. And the first letter, Mr. Speaker, was written on April 
26. This is five days after we left this Assembly. The letter was 
a compromise trying to break the stalemate. Now the letter is 
written from our House Leader, the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, to the Deputy Premier, and I quote: 
 

Dear Mr. Berntson: There has been some indication that 
people are concerned that the current impasse in the 
Legislative Assembly will carry over to the programs 
funded by the government. 
 

And therefore that's what I'm trying to explain here this 
evening, Mr. Speaker. I continue to quote: 
 

To this end, I would like to reiterate the position that our 
caucus has taken. At any time your government is prepared 
to give us a written undertaking that you will stand your 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation bills, we would be 
pleased to return to the House to conduct any other 
business, including, but not restricted to, an interim supply 
bill, if needed. We believe it is time to get on with 
legislation to protect farmers, small business operators and 
working people, and to address this province's massive 
unemployment and growing crisis in population drain. 
 
At the same time, we would point out that an interim 
supply bill was passed April 12, giving your government 
the financial wherewithal to continue to operate until at 
least mid-May. 
 
I would like also to point out that your own Minister of 
Finance, Gary Lane, told the press yesterday that the 
government has two to three weeks before financing will 
become a problem. 
 
As such, we would consider it a gross misrepresentation of 
the facts if your government were to take the position that 
the Opposition is preventing you from maintaining your 
financial commitments at this time. 
 
To do so would be nothing less than a dishonest attempt to 
blackmail the people of Saskatchewan into accepting your 
plan to privatize Sask Power. 
 
I reiterate that at any time your caucus is prepared to get 
back to the real work of governing this  

province, rather than political and ideological posturing, 
we are more than willing to co-operate. Sincerely Yours, 
Dwain Lingenfelter, Opposition House Leader. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that letter was responded to on May 2, some 
six days later by the Deputy Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. He writes on May 2, 1988: 
 

Dear Mr. Lingenfelter: In my capacity as Government 
House Leader, I am writing to you in a spirit of 
conciliation and co-operation in the hopes of getting the 
legislature back in session. We are all elected by the people 
of this province who naturally expect us to perform our 
necessary roles in the legislature. These roles of 
government and opposition cannot function if the 
legislature does not sit. Democracy itself, is threatened, if 
this impasse continues. It is in that spirit and the hopes of 
perserving our democratic institutions that I write to you. 
 
While the government believes it has not only the 
responsibility, but the duty to initiate legislation and have 
it debated in the legislature, nevertheless we are prepared 
in these circumstances to offer a compromise. A way out 
of this impasse must be found. The cost of operating the 
legislature with no work being done is burdensome on the 
people who elected us all. It is eleven days since the bells 
began to ring. We will start running into difficulty with 
supply and appropriation. Some departments will run out 
of money earlier than others. It will not be long before 
social service clients, schools, hospitals local governments 
and others will be in some degree of difficulty. 
 
While we firmly believe that the debate on public 
participation in SaskEnergy should take place in the 
legislature and while it is virtually unprecedented that the 
duly elected government of the day is prevented from 
having first reading of any bill, so that it is available not 
only to members of the Legislative Assembly but, the 
public as well, it would appear that your party sees the 
process differently. 
 
In order to break the impasse, the government is prepared 
to offer a proposal, whereby the general public would have 
input into the legislative process. It would work as follows: 
 

1. At 2 p.m., May 3, 1989, we return to the legislature 
and vote on first reading of the four SaskEnergy bills; 
 
a) The (Sask) Energy Corporation Act 
b) The Distribution of Gas Rate Regulation Act . . . 
c) The Public Utility Companies Income Tax Rebates 
Act 
d) The Power Corporation Amendment Act —1989 
 
2. This government will establish a panel of prominent 
Saskatchewan people. (The) panel  



 
May 8, 1989 

1011 
 

will hold public hearings on the public participation of 
SaskEnergy throughout the province and report back to 
the legislature by June 5, 1989. 

 
It is to be hoped that you will find this proposal sufficient 
to enable you to return to the legislature. I am sure you 
recognize that this proposal in no way, diminishes the 
government's dedication to diversification of our economy 
in all appropriate means, including public participation in 
the crown sector. Sincerely, Eric Berntson, Deputy Premier 
and Government House Leader. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the potash Bill, the potash Bill, which I 
seem to have misplaced here somewhere, Mr. Speaker, but 
that's all right for the time being . . . the potash Bill should be 
discussed. It shouldn't be in the narrow, narrow scope, Mr. 
Speaker, the narrow, narrow scope of SaskEnergy. We should 
be discussing many, many things. If this government wants to 
promote a panel going around the province, why can't Bill 20, 
which is doing the same thing as the SaskPower Bill, all be 
heard? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of things are indicated in here. One 
is that the government is seriously concerned on May 2 that 
some departments will soon be running out of money, won't be 
able to pay social service clients, schools, hospitals, local 
governments, and others will be in some degree of difficulty. 
 
So we had a meeting, Mr. Speaker, and we discussed what 
should we do about this. Many people in Saskatchewan didn't 
want us back in here, Mr. Speaker. Many people in 
Saskatchewan wanted us to take this government to the wall. 
And the public support, mark my words, is there to do it, Mr. 
Speaker, on things like the potash Bill, on things like the 
SaskEnergy Bill, but we come back in to approve interim 
supply. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we made a response to the letter of May 2 
on May 2 from our House Leader to the Deputy Premier. The 
Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, was told this . . . 
 

Lack of Quorum in the Legislative Assembly 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don't believe we have a quorum in the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Sergeant-at-Arms secure the 
doors? Would the Clerk count the members. 
 
I would like to instruct the Clerk to rise and therefore ask . . . 
rather, I would wish to instruct the Clerk to take the vote and 
therefore ask all members to rise. 
 
As I believe I just said, would all members rise. 
 
McLeod   Swenson 
Hodgins   Martens 
Gerich    Britton 
Klein    Lingenfelter 
Toth    Anguish 

Johnson 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, including yourself, there are 
12 members present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Clerk has informed me that there are 12 
members present. The required number for a quorum is 15. 
 
This House now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9 p.m. 
 
 


